




















































Hansard: March 13, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 14A  TUESDAY, MARCH 13, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 477 

 March 13, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, I have the honour of introducing two very 

special gentlemen today. They are making an impact in our 

province and in Regina. Joining us today from Street Culture 

project is CEO [chief executive officer] Kim Sutherland and 

board member Dustin Browne. 

 

Street Culture Kidz is a non-profit, charitable organization that 

mentors and supports our young people. They‟re using social 

entrepreneurism and positive adult role models to make a 

difference. 

 

This morning I had a chance to go down to Street Culture Kidz 

and take part in the grand opening of the emergency youth 

shelter, the first one in the province. I always enjoy going out 

and meeting with the young people and with a group of people 

who are so dedicated and so passionate at helping our young 

people. I want to thank you for all the work you‟re doing. And 

on behalf of the province and of the legislature, welcome to 

your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I‟d like to join with the minister in 

welcoming Dustin and Kim to their Legislative Assembly. I just 

want to thank them for all the work that they do in ensuring that 

young people have the supports they need to live the best 

possible lives. So thank you for all the work that you do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is with great pleasure that I introduce to this 

Assembly representatives from the North Central Family Centre 

as they celebrate their 10th anniversary this year. So in no 

particular order: Sandy Wankel, the founder and executive 

director; Ivan Amichand; Jennifer Ewenin; Shyanne Obey, Mel 

Burton, Ron Lawson, and Ben Hernando. 

 

North Central Family Centre is a registered non-profit 

organization which delivers a wide range of programs and 

activities to inner-city children, youth, families, and seniors, 

with a goal of improving their quality of life. 

 

And while I‟m standing, Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to let 

everyone know in the Assembly that it is Sandy‟s birthday 

today. Happy birthday, Sandy. Happy birthday, Sandy. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the member from Regina Coronation Park in 

welcoming, particularly, our guests from North Central Family 

Centre. I‟m surprised you don‟t have a birthday cake up there 

with you with 10 candles glowing bright, but certainly we‟re 

neighbours over on 5th Avenue and North Central as many 

folks will know, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s good to see some great 

neighbours from North Central here that do a lot of good work 

all the year through. And the fact that you even brought the king 

of Queen Street, Ron Lawson, along with you, that‟s a great 

thing to see as well. 

 

But congratulations, happy birthday, and here‟s to many more 

years of good work for the people of North Central and Regina. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, Mr. Speaker, to all members of the Assembly, 

I‟d like to introduce a group of young leaders from the 

University of Saskatchewan who are assembled in your gallery 

this afternoon. I‟d like to begin with the executive of a group 

called Women in the Legislature. And I‟ll start with Heather 

Franklin, the executive coordinator and fourth year political 

science student. Then we‟ll go to Shira Fenyes, the executive 

coordinator and again a fourth year political science student; 

Marie Dumont, executive board member, a fourth year 

international studies student; Paula Steckler, director of 

logistics and public affairs, which I know have been taxed a 

little bit just making the journey here today, so I appreciate all 

the work that‟s gone into that; Bryn Rees, the director of 

transportation, and again Bryn, we know how busy you‟ve been 

to make this possible; Sara Waldbillig, the director of 

operations and a third year political science student. 

 

And there are other colleagues that I will introduce: Erica Lee, 

Danielle Lingelbach, Jenna Clark, Kendal Durocher, Tara 

Weisgerber, Kahmaria Pingue, Jayne Walters, Samantha 

Gauvin, Shannon McAvoy, Amanda Bestvater, Brogan 

Waldner, Lisa Skomoroski, Alanna Carlson, and Brynn Harris. 

 

And we‟re delighted to be able to welcome these leaders from 

the University of Saskatchewan into their legislature. And I 

sense, Mr. Speaker, not only are they engaged and enthusiastic 

about the work that‟s under way, but I sense in the not too 

distant future, many of them may be joining us down here on 

this floor here because they are so capable and competent in the 

work that they do, not just in their studies but right across our 

broad community. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these fine young leaders to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join the 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

minister in welcoming the absolutely amazing group of young 

women from Women in the Legislature here today. 

 

Some of us — my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana, my 

colleague from Saskatoon Fairview, and my colleague from 

Kelvington-Wadena — had the opportunity to participate in a 

panel discussion today about women and politics and our 

experience here in this place. So I hope that you got as much 

out of it as we did. It‟s great to have . . . that it was a dialogue 

back and forth. And, like the minister said, I do look forward to 

seeing some of you, many of you, on the floor of this legislature 

at some point in the future. 

 

So with that, I‟d ask all our colleagues, I ask all my colleagues 

to join us in welcoming this group of amazing young women to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

introduce to you and through you, to the members of the 

Assembly, three gentlemen in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. I‟d 

ask them to wave when I introduce them. Ron Risling is the 

administrator of the RM [rural municipality] of Saltcoats — 

Ron and I worked together when I was reeve out there — and 

Terry Hall and Rob Kirkham who are also councillors in the 

RM of Saltcoats. And I would ask everyone to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the legislature, I‟d like to introduce a class of 

students who are seated in your gallery. These are 12 grade 11 

students who are part of the Regina Public School Division 

Trek School. This school is located at Sheldon Williams when 

they happen to be in town, but this course allows people to 

study biology, geography, social studies, phys ed, and 

communications media in a disciplinary fashion, and they spend 

at least 25 nights camping throughout the province as part of the 

course. 

 

So I welcome all of these students along with their teachers, 

Karen McIver and Tiffany Lix. I ask all members to welcome 

them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟d 

like to join with the Minister of Agriculture in welcoming the 

gentlemen from Saltcoats, specifically Ron Risling. I‟ve known 

Ron for many years. We grew up together. Well, I grew up; the 

verdict‟s still out on Ron. But, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been best 

friends for forever, went into the same line of work before I 

went into politics. It‟s great to see them in the Assembly, and I 

look forward to chatting with them later. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 

I‟d like to invite and take an opportunity to welcome three 

guests that are here from PAGC [Prince Albert Grand Council]: 

Vice-chief Brian Hardlotte, give us a wave. Thank you, Brian. 

Robin McLeod is the executive assistant, and Richard Kent 

who‟s the commissioner of emergency and protective services 

with PAGC. 

 

It is an opportunity to welcome leaders that come here and 

people who help the First Nations community. And it is an 

honour to have them coming from the Cumberland constituency 

and the job that they do. They have a lot of work to do. They 

are very professional. They make sure they speak for the people 

that they represent. And I just want to say to them, it is an 

honour to welcome you to your legislative . . . And again, many 

more meetings, successful meetings that you have. And again I 

ask all member to join them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to join with the member 

opposite and welcome the group from the Prince Albert Grand 

Council to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

And may I, Mr. Speaker, just say how proud we are to work 

with First Nations leaders across this province in making sure 

that they participate in the very bright future that Saskatchewan 

has. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join in on the introduction and welcome our special 

guests from the northern part of Saskatchewan. And I want to 

point out, of course I want to recognize Mr. Kent. And more so 

I want to say a special hello to Robin and to Brian. 

 

Robin used to be quite a volleyball player, as well as Vice-chief 

Brian Hardlotte. They were both very good volleyball players. 

And you should know that Brian‟s family, his brother Gordon, 

Leonard, and that they‟re all great volleyball players. And for 

the record, Stanley Mission was an impressive team. The only 

problem they had was they had this town called Ile-a-la-Crosse 

that had the Ile-a-la-Crosse Halfsons, and then later the 

Ile-a-la-Crosse Huskies. And they just couldn‟t get past that 

team, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say I‟m very proud to have 

played against them, and to point out that it‟s always nice to see 

them in a different life. But in an earlier life, playing volleyball 

against Stanley Mission was always exciting. And I welcome 

these two great friends and great families from the Stanley 

Mission area, and tēniki. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy‟s law. We know in the early 

morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot 

twice and died from his injuries. He was working at a gas 

station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from intruders. But 

we know British Columbia and other provinces have brought in 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

several safety precautions through law, including a requirement 

that workers cannot be alone during late-night, early morning 

hours. And if they are required to work, there must be 

protective barriers such as locked doors and protective glass. 

 

I‟d like to read the prayer. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy‟s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Canora, Sturgis, Norquay, Kamsack, and Saskatoon. I do so 

present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it 

relates to education in our province. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan‟s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices and is 

developed through consultation with the education sector 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Weyburn and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhoods of Dundonald and Hampton Village. And the 

petition is about the need for a school in the neighbourhood of 

Hampton Village: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern for our 

traditional trappers. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many trappers and good people of northern 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Women in the Legislature 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to take this opportunity to highlight a very important 

initiative which I had the pleasure of being a participant in, the 

Women in the Legislature program. 

 

Women in the Legislature is a student-led, non-partisan, 

interdisciplinary organization that strives to bring awareness 

regarding the under-representation of women in politics and to 

provide women with real life experience and the motivation to 

get informed and involved. The Women in the Legislature 

program strives to inspire in women an interest in governance 

and encourages them to become active in political life. 

 

Today‟s event, being held here in the Legislative Building, 

consists of multiple panel discussions and networking 

opportunities for 20 female undergraduates, students from the 

University of Saskatchewan. Throughout the day, these students 

will partake in these interactive programs with women of 

political leadership, allowing them an opportunity to talk with 

female MLAs [Members of the Legislative Assembly] and civil 

servants and to learn about the Saskatchewan political system 

through discussion and direct observation. 

 

This program also provides an excellent opportunity for women 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

in politics and in administration to share their personal 

experiences and to give the students an opportunity to better 

understand the roles of female politicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this House congratulate 

the student organizers of this fantastic initiative and thank the 

participants for acting on their interest in the political system. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the aftermath of 

every election in our time, two observations are made without 

fail: neither women nor young people are taking part in our 

political process to the extent they should be. Last week, 

International Women‟s Day gave us further cause to consider 

the vast, untapped resource this province has in its young 

women, and challenged us all to work to ensure they know they 

have a place in our legislature. 

 

Today I‟m so pleased to say that the students of our province 

are responding to that call. Born from a conversation over a cup 

of coffee, the group Women in the Legislature has emerged as a 

grassroots effort to engage young women in politics. WiL 

[Women in the Legislature] is a non-partisan organization from 

the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] whose mission is to 

open the eyes of young women to the opportunities in elected 

life. Using positive messaging, the group‟s aim is to inspire 

their peers on campus to consider a future as an elected official. 

 

At their inaugural event, a panel discussion at Louis‟ pub, the 

attendance was so positive that students were cramming the 

floors just to take part. I had another great event here, or a great 

day today. 

 

University students at the launch of their careers are in a 

uniquely flexible position to approach a life in public service. 

Although many years may pass before a decision is made to run 

for office, their involvement today plants a seed for tomorrow. 

The WiL group gives us hope that more young women will see 

elected life as a viable option and will engage with the system 

they too often don‟t consider for a large number of reasons. 

 

As MLAs, it is our responsibility to respond to these young 

women and ensure they know this legislature is a place for 

them. I ask all members to join me in applauding the efforts of 

this group and saying to the young women of Saskatchewan, we 

want you here and we need you here. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Heritage Month in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Heritage Month 

has great significance for the city of Moose Jaw with its 

heritage theme throughout the downtown area. In February, the 

Moose Jaw heritage committee paid a special tribute to the 

Moose Jaw Library in recognition of 100 years of service. Back 

in 1912, city council made a request to the Carnegie Foundation 

for $50,000 to build a new library but were turned down, stating 

that the city was too small for such an elaborate sum. 

Understanding the benefits of the public library providing 

access to information, culture, and educational materials, city 

council of the day, with great foresight, made a decision to 

construct a new library at double the cost — $110,000. 

 

The Moose Jaw library is uniquely designed in 15th century 

Italian Renaissance architecture featuring a marble rotunda, 

stained glass dome, and a glass floor. The library contains more 

marble than any other Saskatchewan building, except for the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Building here in the capital city of 

course. 

 

In 1967 the structure was expanded to include the National 

Exhibition centre, the forerunner of the Moose Jaw museum 

and art gallery. Today the library is a designated heritage 

building. It has been referred to as the jewel of the park in the 

centre of Crescent Park in downtown Moose Jaw. Its distinctive 

design and pleasing blends of old and new agricultural features 

emphasize practical and efficient use. 

 

Congratulations to the Moose Jaw heritage committee for their 

presentation and preservation of this unique heritage structure, 

the Moose Jaw Public Library. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

5 Days for the Homeless 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to recognize the tremendous work of students from the 

University of Regina who kicked off their 5 Days for the 

Homeless campaign on Monday. The University of Regina 

students joined the 5 Days for the Homeless campaign in 2009, 

and over the last two years they have raised over $37,000 and 

collected a significant amount of non-monetary donations such 

as clothing and food for Carmichael Outreach. 

 

The students are raising awareness about the point six per cent 

vacancy rate in Regina for rental housing and the housing crisis 

in general, Mr. Speaker. Their goal is to raise awareness and 

funds for the issue of homelessness generally in Regina and 

across Canada. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, the students have selected Carmichael 

Outreach as the fundraiser beneficiary. Carmichael Outreach is 

a volunteer-driven, non-profit organization that provides 

everything from clothing, food, and household goods to 

harm-reduction services, health education, and counselling 

referrals. No fees are charged, and their door is open to anyone 

needing assistance. They offer various services from needle 

exchange, immunization, and food recovery programs to 

providing resources for children, and an on-site nurse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the five-day campaign, students from 

across the country will be making personal sacrifices in order to 

make their community a better place and to raise awareness. 

Students will forego their comforts and live outside on campus 

for five full days. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing this great cause. 

And we wish the students warm weather and the best of luck as 

they advocate for those who, far too often, have no voice. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Saskatchewan Agriculture 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to rise 

today and speak about a new milestone in Saskatchewan 

agriculture. 

 

We have a strong history of agriculture in our province, from 

our First Nations and pioneering families to our modern farmers 

and ranchers today. Agriculture remains the backbone of our 

province and a valuable part of our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today is another proud day for Saskatchewan 

agriculture. For the first time, Saskatchewan has exceeded $10 

billion in agricultural food exports and has now surpassed 

Ontario as the top agri-food exporting province in Canada. 

Since 2007, agri-food exports have increased from 6 billion to 

10 billion and our diversified markets send Saskatchewan 

agriculture products not just to the US [United States] but to 

nations around the globe. Our agri-food export leader is canola 

seed, which has increased by 250 per cent since 2007. Other top 

exports include canola oil and wheat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers consistently 

produce safe, reliable agriculture products to feed the world‟s 

growing population. Their hard work, dedication, and efforts 

have built this province and the Saskatchewan advantage we all 

enjoy today. I would like to congratulate all producers in our 

province on this accomplishment and thank them for all their 

contributions to our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

2012 Saskatchewan Healthcare Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to commend those recognized on March the 10th at the 

Saskatchewan Healthcare Excellence Awards held in Regina. 

The Saskatchewan Healthcare Excellence Awards have been 

held annually for the last 12 years and serve as a fundraiser to 

support programs and services of AIDS Programs South 

Saskatchewan. This organization has been in existence for 26 

years helping HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency 

virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome] and hepatitis C 

patients with educational and preventative life skills 

programming. 

 

Sixteen finalists attended the awards ceremony and nine 

winners were announced. The winners: Dr. Chang, plastic 

surgery; Dr. Moustapha, cardiology; and Betty McKenna, elder 

in residence from Regina; Sherri Doel, AIDS Saskatoon; 

Sharon Monseler, registered nurse in the Saskatchewan epilepsy 

program from Saskatoon; Yorkton‟s Rural West primary care 

team; Rosetown‟s Debbie McCulloch, pharmacist; and Prince 

Albert‟s Grant Gustafson of the SHARE [self help and 

recreational education] program. These health care providers 

recognized have demonstrated commitment, passion, and 

dedication to their work and to the patients of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to, especially like to recognize Dr. 

Roberta McKay, Regina Douglas Park constituent. Dr. McKay 

grew up on the 23 block of Atkinson Street in Regina Douglas 

Park, and today her practice is located on College Avenue in the 

historic Bronfman house, again in Douglas Park. She has never 

really left. Dr. McKay believes in the need to recognize the 

great work of those who deliver health care in our province and 

became the founding sponsor of the Saskatchewan Healthcare 

Excellence Awards. 

 

I would like to ask all members to join me in recognizing all 

health care professionals and, in particular, those who were 

recognized at the SHEA [Saskatchewan Healthcare Excellence 

Awards] awards on Saturday. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Saskatchewan Cross Country Skiing Association Annual 

Provincial Competition 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on March 

10th and 11th, the Saskatchewan Cross Country Skiing 

Association held their annual provincial competition. This 

year‟s event was hosted by the Sturgeon River Nordic Club at 

the home of Bill and Joan Jefferies. 

 

Officials Dan Brisbin and Kathryn Theede from Crown Country 

Saskatchewan were in attendance, as was James Cunningham, 

the high performance system coordinator with Cross Country 

Canada. Along with competition awards there was additional 

provincial recognition to Jeff Whiting for coaching dedication. 

 

Competing this weekend was Colette Bourgonje, a six-time 

winter Paralympian, who has three silver and three bronze 

medals. At the 2010 Vancouver Paralympics, she was the 

recipient of the Whang Young Dai Achievement Award. This 

solid gold medal recognizes individuals who conquer adversity 

through pursuit. 

 

Most recently, Colette won a gold medal at the 2011 

Para-Nordic World Championships in Russia. This past 

weekend, Colette was also recognized as a finalist for the 

Saskatchewan Sport Female Athlete of the Year. 

 

This past weekend‟s event was fortunate to have fabulous 

weather and snow conditions. There was over 140 participants 

for the two-day competitive event, ranging in age from 7 years 

old to over 60 years of age, as well as three para-nordic 

competitors. The attendance by participants, coaches, and 

volunteers at this year‟s provincial competition bodes well for 

the future of cross-country skiing in this province. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Possible Takeover of Grain Marketing Company 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked a serious 

question about strategic assets that are in the national interest to 

protect, and the Premier was flippant in his answer. If the 

Premier had done his homework over the last 15 months, he 

would have had a better answer. 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

My question to the Premier: common sense tells us if the potash 

used to grow food is a strategic asset, how can the food we 

grow not be a strategic asset as well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all we‟re talking 

about, potentially talking about a grain handling company. But 

even with that set aside, Mr. Speaker, in the case of potash, 53 

per cent of the world‟s potash exists in this province. And while 

we are prolific agricultural producers, it‟s also produced across 

the country. And again I repeat, this is the rumours around a 

grain handling company. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s fair to say that, with respect to this 

potential takeover, there are competitive strategic interests that 

this province, and I think the Dominion of Canada, will be 

wanting to watch carefully if indeed, if indeed one of the 

proponents of the takeover group, if there ever is one, is a major 

grain handler with a presence in our country today. It‟ll go to 

the issue of competition over which the federal government has 

jurisdiction in very specific rules. And it‟ll go to the interests of 

prairie farmers, including those in the province who always 

want competition in terms of those who are able to purchase 

their grain; by the way, competition that will now be available 

to them as a result of changes to the Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this will factor into our own analysis, if there ever 

is a takeover. It‟ll be as deliberate as the potash analysis was, 

Mr. Speaker, and we will come to a conclusion in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, a headline in yesterday‟s Globe 

and Mail read, “Ottawa indicates it‟s open to foreign bid for 

Viterra.” My question to the Premier: since Ottawa is open to 

foreign bids for Viterra, has he now talked to the Prime 

Minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The federal government was open to 

foreign bids for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And 

when that bid was made, it initiated the Investment Canada 

review process — a review process, I would say, Mr. Speaker, 

that was led by this province actually, in the work that we set 

out to do with the teams we‟ve put in place and the information 

we sourced from outside of government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the province of Saskatchewan came 

forward with, I think, a very considered position — one that 

was made after a lot of deliberation, one that was made after 

there was actually a takeover proposal on the table to analyze 

— that informed the national discussion. Mr. Speaker, this 

province led on that issue in terms of protecting the interests 

and a champion in the case of potash. Mr. Speaker, we would 

look to take that same role in analyzing any potential takeover 

with respect to Viterra. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned 

yesterday, there was a fair amount of waffling that went on 

before the decision of the Premier. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the interest in Viterra is a direct result of the 

destruction of the Canadian Wheat Board. The Premier 

supported the axing of the Wheat Board. Viterra CEO Mayo 

Schmidt, says that the additional market share coming from the 

dismantling of the Canadian Wheat Board will add an 

additional $40 to $50 million per year to Viterra‟s operating 

earnings by the year 2014. My question to the Premier is this: 

can he tell us what his advisors told him would happen to 

companies like Viterra before he decided to support the 

destruction of the Wheat Board? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, for all their support of the 

Wheat Board, they sure don‟t have a lot of faith in the Wheat 

Board. The Wheat Board‟s not destroyed. The Wheat Board can 

now use what it claims to be a very large base of prairie farmers 

to build itself into a private, competitive marketing company. 

They can now get into non-board grains. They can sell canola. 

They can sell flax. They can sell mustard seed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They‟ll have competition, Mr. Speaker, and do you know who 

supports that? Farmers that this government talks to, farmers 

that this government represents, Mr. Speaker, understand the 

importance of choice. Mr. Speaker, in this industry. I think it‟s 

reasonable for farmers who own the land and spend hundreds of 

thousands of dollars on the inputs to have a choice in how they 

market their grain, Mr. Speaker. We will support that 10 times 

out of 10. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a serious matter to farmers. 

It‟s a serious matter to the future of our province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we are in a situation where the Premier and his 

colleagues have allowed their ideology to override common 

sense. The federal Minister of Industry is saying that they are 

open to a foreign bid for Viterra. A British newspaper is 

reporting that Glencore made a $5.4 billion bid for Viterra. 

Viterra has confirmed that it‟s received expressions of interest 

from third parties. The sale of Viterra is a hot issue at the 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention today. There is every indication that a bid has come 

forward. 

 

My question to the Premier: why is he dragging his feet? Why 

is he not assessing the effects of the sale of Viterra to a foreign 

company, and what those effects will be on Saskatchewan? 

What‟s he waiting for? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re waiting for an actual 

takeover bid. That‟s what we‟re waiting for. That was exactly 

what we waited for in the case of PotashCorp and BHP. Mr. 

Speaker, we hear that member and now another member from 

his feet talking about we‟re waiting too long, there was waffling 

in the case of the potash takeover. 

 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

Mr. Speaker, as soon as we received word on that, I sought 

some advice from former premiers in this province, from 

former premiers from across the country. Their advice was 

pretty clear. Their advice was be deliberate. Assemble a team 

within your government, seek outside information so that you 

could make the best possible case on behalf of the interests of 

the people of Saskatchewan. Don‟t rush, they said. Get it right. 

Mr. Speaker, those premiers included Premier Peter Lougheed. 

They included, Mr. Speaker, former Premier Roy Romanow. 

Mr. Speaker, I hope members opposite will forgive me if I defer 

to their advice over theirs. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Human Rights Commission 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year there were 

sweeping changes to the Saskatchewan human rights 

legislation. A key piece was the dismantling of the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal. One of the selling points 

the government used to get rid of the tribunal was that everyone 

deserved their day in court, that complainants deserved to have 

their complaint heard before a judge. 

 

Trouble is, the complainant has to get through the gatekeeper, 

in this case the Chief Commissioner, before the commission 

will advance their case to the court. And these court cases are 

expensive. We‟ve learned that the commission‟s two in-house 

counsel are retiring at the end of this month, leaving no 

knowledgeable experts in the area of human rights law within 

the commission. In the interim, the commissioner has engaged 

outside lawyers who have represented pro-employer 

respondents in hearings. 

 

My question to the minister: how many cases has the Chief 

Commissioner moved forward to the courts since the legislation 

was changed, and how are the skyrocketing costs of litigation 

going to be managed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under the 

direction of Chief Commissioner Arnot, we have moved our 

commission to probably the head of the pack in our country. 

Mr. Speaker, there are four pillars that Chief Arnot brought 

forward. Those include referral to the Court of Queen‟s Bench; 

systemic advocacy; public education; mediation; and as the 

member opposite refers to, a gatekeeping role to ensure that 

complaints that don‟t have merit aren‟t pursued or that there‟s 

other resolutions there. I know that at least one or two have 

been referred to the Court of Queen‟s Bench and will be heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be some significant cost savings on this 

because these matters would be heard by the Court of Queen‟s 

Bench which is doing this at no cost to the province of 

Saskatchewan, and for that matter, Mr. Speaker, no cost to the 

taxpayer at any level because it‟s being absorbed within their 

existing resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be . . . I understand there‟s been some 

retirements and some changes at the Human Rights 

Commission, and I understand that they are in the process of 

staffing up. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are told that only 

one case has advanced to the courts to date. And human rights 

bodies have been established throughout the Commonwealth to 

help vulnerable people whose rights are being violated. These 

people need the support of human rights experts to help them 

re-establish their rights. The role of the Human Rights 

Commission in-house counsel is to take cases forward to 

prosecution and advise investigation staff on case law. 

 

The Human Rights Commission‟s current management lawyer 

has acted for many large employers and reportedly wrote the 

essential services legislation which the Court of Queen‟s Bench 

struck down as violating human rights. This same lawyer 

assisted the Chief Commissioner in a labour rights board 

application to move positions out-of-scope in December. He 

also assisted the Chief Commissioner in the termination of six 

employees in January without cause. 

 

The minister knows that even the perception of conflict of 

interest regarding impartial legal advice can discourage people 

whose rights are being violated to think they have a chance of 

winning their case. My question to the minister: what kind of 

confidence can the vulnerable complainants have in getting 

impartial treatment from the Chief Commissioner when 

management lawyers are giving him legal advice? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last week we saw the 

Leader of the Opposition throw the member for Athabasca 

under the bus on the issue of redistribution of seats. This week 

we‟re seeing the member from Saskatoon Nutana throwing the 

Leader of the Opposition under the bus. He used to be a partner 

in MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman, the largest law firm in the 

province, certainly one of the most prestigious law firms in 

Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, if that isn‟t a good law firm to take 

advice and instruction from, I don‟t know why the members 

opposite would take any issue with that. They‟ve got a leader 

that was a former partner there. Mr. Speaker, if it was good 

enough for the Leader of the Opposition, I think it should be 

good enough for the Human Rights Commission. 

 

They are taking a competent, well-reasoned approach to this, 

Mr. Speaker. We take no issue with them. We respect their 

independence. They are doing a good job representing the 

citizens that require their support and assistance, and we will 

support them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on March 1st, 2012 the Canadian 

Union of Public Employees called for an independent review of 

the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission following its 

reckless decision to terminate six front-line staff and restrict 

services at the two offices. A freedom of information inquiry 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

has revealed that the commission has spent over $100,000 on 

public relations in the last few months, much of which has been 

spent on designing a logo for the commission. Only one case 

has been recommended to the courts since the dismantling of 

the Human Rights Commission. 

 

Will the minister request the Provincial Auditor and the 

Provincial Ombudsman to immediately investigate the financial 

management of the commission and the disgraceful termination 

of front-line staff who provided those vulnerable members of 

our society access to their human rights? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Chief Commissioner 

made staffing changes as a result of the changes in the mandate, 

the change of direction for the Human Rights Commission. We 

support that. We‟ve received notes. We respect their 

independence and their autonomy. They used competent, 

professional outside counsel. I understand that there are no 

outstanding claims for those employees. The employees have 

all settled and the matters have been fully resolved. Some of 

them had the opportunity to bump. Some of them took a 

package. We take no exception with that whatsoever. The firm 

of MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman, as I mentioned earlier, was 

used. They‟re a competent, professional firm. We fully support 

that, Mr. Speaker. The needs of the province are being well 

served by this commission. 

 

We know that every year their books are analyzed by the 

Provincial Auditor. We know that they used outside 

communications consultants to develop things regarding the 

civics program and communicating the changes that were there. 

We presume that they will continue on using professional, 

competent help as required. And we‟re fully supportive of the 

very good work that they are doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for First Nations Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there‟s a growing 

education funding gap between on-reserve First Nations 

students and non-First Nations students. On-reserve students 

receive an unacceptable fraction of education funding per 

student compared to students in the provincial system — 

thousands of dollars less. Shamefully fewer than 50 per cent of 

First Nations students graduate from high school, compared to 

80 per cent for non-First Nations students. Well-respected 

U of S economist Eric Howe reports that Saskatchewan could 

reap $90 billion in benefits through savings in health, justice, 

and social services and an $80 billion gain in economic growth 

by closing the Aboriginal education outcome gap. 

 

To date, all the government has done is make plans for a task 

force, and that has been yet to be struck. My question to the 

minister: what is the government‟s plan to address the 

unacceptable and ever-growing education funding gap between 

on-reserve First Nations and provincial students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on this 

issue of what the funding is from the federal government on 

reserve schools, the member opposite and I are in complete 

agreement. They grossly underfund the reserve schools, and 

unfortunately that is to the detriment of our First Nations 

people, young people in our province. And it is to the detriment 

to the future of our province, for them to have the opportunity 

to engage in our growing economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are engaged with the federal government, 

encouraging them to increase funding, and we‟re very 

encouraged by the latest movement in the federal government 

of a unanimously supported motion to increase funding to 

reserve schools. 

 

Meanwhile we are doing what we can here, and we know that 

there‟s more that can be done within the province. We have 

struck the task force. We‟ll be announcing that soon, who the 

panel members will be on that task force, as well as we have a 

number of programs that are available to encourage school 

divisions to have individual plans for their particular First 

Nations students. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The education 

funding gap between on-reserve First Nations students and 

provincial students simply must change. It‟s unacceptable. We 

share some agreement across the floor here today. 

 

On February 27th the members of the House of Commons 

voted unanimously to support Shannen‟s dream, a motion to 

ensure that First Nations children have an equal right to 

high-quality education. A federal budget is coming down 

shortly, and we need to speak with one voice calling upon the 

federal government to follow through and provide the financial 

resources needed to close the funding gap. 

 

At the end of question period, I will be introducing a motion 

calling on the federal government to provide the resources 

needed. The minister mentioned something about this in her 

statement here today, but my question to the minister: will this 

government support that motion? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Myself, 

along with the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment 

and Immigration have been very much engaged, not only with 

the federal government but also with the other ministers across 

the entire country on this very issue. We will continue those 

conversations and those efforts in working with the federal 

government to get this very serious issue addressed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was, would 

the government support the motion? The government has the 

motion before them right now. But the Premier, we know, was 

in Ottawa last week. And we suspect he had the opportunity, or 

would hope he had the opportunity, to meet with the Prime 

Minister. And that was at the same week that the Prime 

Minister and other members of the House of Commons voted 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

unanimously to support Shannen‟s dream. 

 

My question to the Premier: did First Nations education funding 

come up during that meeting? And as a result, what can 

Saskatchewan people expect to see in the federal budget? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for the question. I did have a chance to meet with the 

Prime Minister about a number of issues as we were returning 

from the economic development and job fair mission in London 

and then Dublin. Mr. Speaker, indeed Aboriginal employment 

and First Nations education did come up in the course of that 

conversation. It was raised by myself. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re also concerned 

about cuts in the provincial education system. The Sask Party 

has cut more than 350 educational assistants. They‟re closing 

public schools and failing to support community schools and 

their programs. 

 

Because of an unfair funding system, many First Nations 

schools can‟t afford to provide a fair and equitable education. 

They struggle to retain talented teachers, and they are often 

using outdated technology and resources. The impact, Mr. 

Speaker, is felt by students, society, and our economy. And 

we‟re told to brace for more cuts in this provincial budget. 

 

I would like to see a unanimous voice going forward here 

today, calling with one voice to the federal government. Instead 

it seems that we don‟t have that support. By not supporting our 

motion, the government is out of step with MPs [Member of 

Parliament] of all political stripes and offside with the research. 

To the minister: what is this government doing from a 

provincial perspective to show leadership on this most 

important file? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again, 

the member opposite and I can agree on this as a most 

important file. What we cannot agree on is him repeatingly 

saying that we have cut funding to education when in fact, in 

our first term of government, we increased the funding to 

school divisions for operating by over 18 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

We have invested more in four years in infrastructure, in school 

infrastructure, than that government did almost in their entire 

time of being government. Mr. Speaker, we have put 

unprecedented amounts of capital money into improving and 

building schools within our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, specific to First Nations, again I will mention that 

we have struck a task force that is going to study this issue so 

that we can do better in closing the gap not only in education 

but in employment. 

 

We have created . . . We have increased the pre-K 

[pre-kindergarten] programs, because we see how important 

those very first years are, by over 75 per cent to what they were 

when the NDP [New Democratic Party] were government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Federal Crime Legislation 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well it‟s a sad answer from that side, Mr. 

Speaker. But we‟ll try again for a different answer. My question 

is to the Minister of Corrections because of course, you know, 

actions on the one hand have impacts on the other. I wonder if 

the Minister of Corrections agrees with the following 

statements: 

 

If the municipality passes a bylaw, who bears the cost of 

the enforcement of it? That‟s something that a 

municipality should consider. That‟s something the 

province and the federal governments consider whenever 

they enact a law. 

 

Does the Minister of Corrections agree with that statement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure what the 

member opposite is really asking a question about. If he‟s 

asking questions about policing costs, I can sure discuss that 

with him. If he‟s asking questions about disaster assistance, I 

can sure answer that question and discuss that with what we‟ve 

done in the past. I‟m not sure exactly what his question relates 

to, Mr. Speaker, so I‟d ask him to rephrase his question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well it‟s a pretty common sense statement, 

Mr. Speaker, the idea that if you‟re going to pass a Bill, you 

should know what the cost is and have a plan to bear that cost. 

That statement was from the Minister of Justice in a panel that 

the Minister of Corrections and Minister of Justice participated 

in on February 1st with the folks from the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association. It was in response to a question 

about a municipal bylaw, but the principle stands: if you‟re 

going to pass legislation, you should know what it costs. 

 

Last night the House of Commons passed C-10, the 

Conservative crime Bill. How much is that Bill going to cost 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re pleased that Bill C-10 has come into, has been passed. 

We are among the vast majority of provinces that are supportive 

of this piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation 

is impossible to try and accurately cost out with any degree of 

accuracy. 

 

There are a number of provisions in the Bill that we don‟t know 

how the courts are going to interpret, how the courts are going 

to apply. We will work with the federal government. We will 

monitor it very closely, and we will make an assessment as it 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

goes along. But the analysis that some of the other provinces 

are doing are a large amount of guesswork, and our experts 

within our province say that it is impossible at this point in time 

to make any kind of realistic assessment. 

 

We know full well, Mr. Speaker, that there‟s a good likelihood 

that this will increase the amount of incarceration that‟s 

necessary in our province, but the people that we are seeking to 

incarcerate under this Bill are people that are preying on 

children, bringing drugs into our schools — things that we need 

to address, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s plain that the minister doesn‟t 

agree with his own words, you know, seated there with the 

Minister of Corrections. The Minister of Justice went on to say, 

“So when you pass them, know that there‟s an expense and get 

a plan in place.” So I guess if it was good enough for that 

minister to lecture municipal officials about the cost of 

legislation and the consequences, why isn‟t it good enough for 

that government across the way? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, our government is astute 

enough to realize that some things cannot be costed out 

accurately. There are things that will make a change. Mr. 

Speaker, I can advise the member opposite that we have 

increased the capacity in our corrections facilities for an 

additional 90 offenders in the male facilities, 36 in the female 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we support the changes that are necessary in this 

Bill. They‟re doing things such as ending house arrest, 

eliminating pardons for serious crimes, and most importantly, 

dealing with the serious offences that directly affect children 

and affect the people that prey on children and bring drugs into 

our schools, Mr. Speaker. Those are people where we have to 

focus on. Public protection and public safety and, Mr. Speaker, 

that is something that our government intends to do. And we 

will work through the necessary changes that are required in our 

correctional facility. We will look to the federal government for 

an investment and where to partner as necessary. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What is your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the member 

from Regina Rosemont during question period was alluding to a 

motion to be moved under section 59, I presume, by the 

Opposition House Leader. That motion was brought to my 

attention about 2 minutes before question period, relating to 

Shannen‟s dream, which was referenced during question period. 

 

I would encourage the member from Rosemont, he still has 

approximately 6 minutes to actually put that forward for 

discussion on Thursday, which we would be very happy to 

discuss that motion on Thursday and would encourage him to 

avail himself of that opportunity. 

 

The Speaker: — In listening to the Government House 

Leader‟s point of order, that is not a point of order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Yes, I called that. Your colleagues were being 

too noisy. I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

New Emergency Youth Shelter 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I am very pleased 

to rise in the House today to talk about the grand opening of 

Saskatchewan‟s first emergency youth shelter in Regina this 

morning. This facility, known as Downtown Browne‟s Emergency 

Youth Shelter, is operated by Street Culture Project Inc. and 

provides 15 residential beds for 16- to 18-year-old homeless youth 

for up to 30 days when no placement is available and all other 

family and non-family options have been exhausted. Through this 

shelter, they are providing so much more than a safe place to stay. 

They are providing hope to young people who desperately need it. 

This shelter will also help Social Services re-engage with youth 

that were previously in care to provide them with basic needs. 

 

Shelters like Downtown Browne‟s are vital to maintaining healthy 

and growing communities like ours. They are a safe haven for 

youth during some of their darkest hours. But even more than they 

that, they provide a place to start fresh, a place where youth are 

supported and engaged in programs that increase personal 

development and maximize self-sufficiency. As a government, we 

take our lead from organizations like Street Culture Kidz. 

 

We understand that it‟s essential to invest in the necessary 

supports that keep our most vulnerable citizens from falling 

through the cracks. In the last four years, we have increased our 

child and family service budget by nearly $107 million. This level 

of investment is a reflection of our priorities. The children and 

youth who are served by this funding are the ones who need our 

help the most. Our government has prioritized this issue, not just 

with extra funding, but by trying to look at the challenges for 

children and youth in new and different ways. 

 

In December of 2010, a seven-member cabinet committee on child 

and youth — the first cabinet committee of its kind in the history 

of this province — was appointed. Last year the first 

government-wide child and youth agenda budget was pulled 

together, putting $34 million in additional funding from across 

government to focus on key factors that impact the well-being of 

our children and youth of all ages. The investments focused on 

things like education, unemployment gaps in the First Nations 

communities, better supports to keep troubled families together, 

and new funding for FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] and 

autism. 

 

I could go on about this, Mr. Speaker, but the key factor is we are 

doing things differently. Rather than looking through the narrow 

keyhole of what many individual ministries do, we‟re looking 

across government to what are children‟s needs. That‟s why we 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

tend to look outside the box on the investments and impact on 

children and youth. We know that to make investments in things 

like housing ensure that families have a home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, investments will not fix these challenges 

overnight. It‟s going to take time. But I hope in a generation 

from now our investments in prevention and better supports for 

families will one day make the facility we announced today 

obsolete. Today we can take comfort in the fact we are headed 

in the right direction. We know that child poverty is down, food 

bank usage is down, more people are working, more people 

have full-time jobs. In other words, more families are stable. 

 

But we know our work . . . There‟s more to do. We know we 

need to continue investing in facilities like this one that keep 

children, the people off the streets and keep troubled youth from 

falling through the cracks. That‟s why our government was 

proud to partner with Street Culture in this important work by 

providing annualized funding of $989,000 for Downtown 

Browne‟s Emergency Youth Shelter. Our ministry partners with 

Street Culture by providing $385,000 in annual funding for 

D.O.C.S. Place and W.E.N.D.Y.S Home, two safe homes for 

youth, females, between 16 and 18. 

 

The initiatives speak to the willingness of Street Culture to step 

up to the plate and deliver for the young people in this province 

who need our help the most. Our government‟s investment in 

this project isn‟t about the bricks and mortar of the building, but 

the people who made it possible. We‟re investing in leadership, 

and we‟re investing in partnerships. 

 

I want to conclude by extending my sincerest thanks to Street 

Culture and its board of directors for all their hard work and 

their dedication into the opening of this youth shelter. They are 

making a big difference in the lives of Saskatchewan‟s youth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the 

minister for sending her remarks over earlier. That‟s always 

very good to . . . and very appreciated. 

 

I want to commend actually Street Culture and all the work that 

they do on the front lines of this housing crisis. And I know in 

Saskatoon Riversdale, not just this past election but the 

previous by-election, a shelter for youth was and is and 

continues to be a huge issue. So I‟m glad to hear that the 

government is moving forward on the Downtown Browne 

Shelter here in Regina. 

 

But it is one shelter, Mr. Speaker, and I commend them on 

doing this, but this is a small, small, small step, Mr. Speaker. 

There is still so much more work to be done on this front that 

this government could be doing. 

 

We‟ll have a budget here, Mr. Speaker, next week. And I trust 

that when the minister says they‟re going to continue to invest 

in housing that this will be something this government 

considers, is the fact that vulnerable individuals, housing for 

vulnerable individuals is a particular issue here in this province. 

There‟s a housing crisis that many people are experiencing, but 

vulnerable individuals, particularly youth and all kinds of other 

people, are at risk. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And I would also encourage the minister to think about and 

look at the Housing First approach as an overall approach. I 

know that they‟ve talked. I‟ve seen letters where the minister 

has responded saying, oh we take that approach here. Well 

Housing First, Mr. Speaker, is an overall approach to ensuring 

that people have a roof over their heads so they can address 

some of the issues in their life, and the reason they can address 

them is because they have a safe roof over their head. 

 

So I am glad that Downtown Browne‟s shelter has opened, and 

I commend Street Culture for all the work that they do on the 

front lines, and the government for opening this first shelter. 

But there is a serious amount of work to do, and I hope and I 

trust that there will be something in next week‟s budget for 

vulnerable citizens and housing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

SaskPower to Fund University Research Chairs 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise in the House today, Mr. Speaker, to offer the 

citizens of Saskatchewan an important update on a new 

initiative being undertaken by SaskPower with our partners at 

the University of Regina and University of Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s an initiative, Mr. Speaker, which highlights two vital 

aspects of the work that‟s under way: first and foremost, the 

ongoing efforts of SaskPower to sustain its world leadership 

role in key areas of electrical generation, especially when it 

comes to clean and green technologies; and secondly, 

SaskPower‟s plans to reinforce the sound foundation which is in 

place, and has been for decades, regarding its support for the 

province‟s growing economy and our growing communities for 

years to come. 

 

I was pleased today to be in the Qu‟Appelle Gallery of the 

Legislative Assembly — joined by Chancellor Ready of the 

University of Regina as well as Vice-president Fitzpatrick from 

the University of Regina and other University of Regina 

officials and Dean Ernie Barber from the University of 

Saskatchewan as well as SaskPower officials — earlier today to 

announce this major investment that will help to ensure 

SaskPower can fulfill its mandate of providing safe, reliable, 

affordable, and sustainable electricity for the province of 

Saskatchewan for decades to come. 

 

This morning we announced that SaskPower will provide a total 

of $7 million to establish faculty Chair positions, that‟s research 

Chair positions, at the University of Regina and the University 

of Saskatchewan to help meet our province‟s growing need for 

power with a skilled workforce and increasingly innovative and 

clean technologies. Each institution will receive $3.5 million for 

this initiative. 

 

At the University of Regina, the money will go directly to 

encouraging and supporting researchers and our students 

involved in researching and developing new carbon capture and 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

storage technologies — technologies that are recognized around 

the world, Mr. Speaker, as being increasingly important for 

helping to sustain the use of coal while at the same time 

eliminating the worst environmental aspects of coal and its 

usage. SaskPower will need the knowledge and expertise of 

these students as it proceeds with the development of the $1.2 

billion Boundary dam integrated carbon capture and storage 

demonstration project in Estevan, also known as Boundary 

dam 3. 

 

At the University of Saskatchewan, funding will go towards 

power systems component with the university‟s electrical 

engineering program. This will help to enhance curricular 

development and related research, and it will help to ensure that 

there‟s greater alignment between the University of 

Saskatchewan programming within engineering and 

SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the course of the next 15 to 20 years, 

SaskPower must rebuild, replace, or acquire more than 3700 

megawatts of generating capacity, approximately the current 

size of our system. It must also work to renew to a considerable 

extent our transmission and distribution system. The research 

Chairs announced today will ensure that today‟s students will 

have the skills and knowledge required to be the leaders of 

tomorrow, who will help to ensure that SaskPower‟s moving 

forward and as a result, Saskatchewan is moving forward. 

 

As I said this morning, this investment is part of the 

government‟s deep commitment to post-secondary education in 

Saskatchewan. Since 2007, under the leadership of our Premier, 

we‟ve increased support for our post-secondary institutions by 

40 per cent with a total of more than $2.8 billion — an all-time 

record, Mr. Speaker. But we know there‟s more to do. That‟s 

why I want to say how much we appreciate and continue to 

encourage other donors and other partners to come forward and 

complement the funding that is coming forward from the 

provincial government. 

 

As for SaskPower, over the coming weeks and months 

SaskPower is exploring similar post-secondary partnerships 

with institutions right across the province, with a particular 

focus on First Nations and Métis programming. Mr. Speaker, 

today‟s announcement is significant news for our province‟s 

already strong economy and in fact it is the very strength of the 

economy that‟s one of the factors driving the need to help 

ensure that we have the labour force available and the 

technological know-how in place to ensure that we continue to 

move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s population is growing. It‟s an 

all-time record. Businesses are investing. Industry is expanding. 

And we know at the heart of the Saskatchewan advantage rests 

the people of this province, most especially our young people. 

Mr. Speaker, the investments and announcements that were 

made today reflect and reinforce this government‟s commitment 

and SaskPower‟s commitment to our young people to ensure 

that safe, reliable, and affordable electricity is available, not just 

simply for today, but for decades to come. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to thank the 

minister for sharing his remarks in advance of the House today. 

Clearly research is vital to Saskatchewan. And it‟s also clear, 

Mr. Speaker, that we have big challenges in Saskatchewan in 

how we produce electricity, with demand increasing and 

challenges with the existing infrastructure and much of it 

needing refurbishing or replacing, and also with the very real 

challenge and issue of climate change, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that there is much work to do and with the convergence of these 

factors, the role of research is essential and is, of course, a 

positive thing. 

 

It‟s also very exciting, Mr. Speaker, the research that occurs at 

the U of S and U of R [University of Regina]. We‟re very 

fortunate in Saskatchewan to have the types of scholars and 

researchers that we do. And I think, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 

to see that SaskPower is supporting research on the campuses of 

the U of S and the U of R. And it is a good example I think, Mr. 

Speaker, of how the Crown sector can promote and assist our 

fine universities in the work that they do. 

 

Of course, as New Democrats we believe and we‟re keen to see 

an increase in renewable power in the province. So it‟s my hope 

that a sizable portion of this funding will be devoted to research 

focusing on options that allow the harnessing of these 

possibilities. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my 

remarks. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of my 

colleagues in the legislature to present two additional motions 

of condolence. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave to present 

condolence motions. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Kenneth Roy MacLeod 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for that. I thank 

colleagues for leave of the Assembly as well. Yesterday, of 

course, we took the opportunity to pay tribute to former 

members of this Assembly, and I certainly appreciated the 

interventions on both sides of the House as members reflected 

in a personal way and in terms of their political perspective on 

members who we have lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move today: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Kenneth Roy MacLeod, who passed away 30 March 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

2011 at the age of 83, was a member of this Legislative 

Assembly from 1971 until 1975, representing the 

constituency of Regina Albert Park for the Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. MacLeod was born on 10 September 1927 in 

Wadena. He graduated from Tisdale High School and 

later received a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1952 and then 

a law degree in 1954 from the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

For several years he was a partner in the Regina law firm 

of Balfour, MacLeod, McDonald, Moss, Laschuk, and 

Kyle. Mr. MacLeod was appointed to the Queen‟s Bench 

in 1975, a position he held for 27 years until his 

retirement from the bench in 2002. 

 

Mr. MacLeod was actively involved in the Kiwanis Club, 

Amalgamated Charities Inc., and the United Church. For 

his contributions to Little League baseball in our capital 

city, the main baseball diamond at Kiwanis Park was 

named in his honour. 

 

Ken is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 56 years, 

Amber, and their two children, Maureen and Brian, their 

spouses, and grandchildren. Ken is predeceased by his 

son John in 2005. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to the 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. The Premier has moved a motion 

of condolence for Kenneth Roy MacLeod. Can we take the 

motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to rise 

and make some comments about Mr. Justice Ken MacLeod as I 

knew him. He was a new, relatively new judge at the court in 

Regina when I started practising law in Regina. And for any of 

the lawyers in the room, you know that when you‟re in your 

first two or three years of your practice, you always keep a 

pretty good idea on which judge is on the chambers docket 

because you like to have one that understands you and maybe 

gives you the benefit of the doubt on some of your rather rookie 

arguments. 

 

Well Mr. Justice Ken MacLeod was that kind of judge who was 

fair in all circumstances. And he made sure that if you were 

arguing against Morris Shumiatcher, that you‟d get just as many 

words as he did or, if you were dealing with Tony Merchant, 

that you‟d end up with a balanced situation. 

 

So I want to start with that little comment about Mr. Justice 

MacLeod because he was that perfect gentleman on the bench 

who would listen carefully and make fair judgments. Mr. 

Speaker, I think that that‟s why Ken MacLeod was elected as 

well, is that he loved to work with people, be with people, and 

he listened to them carefully and he was able to serve as a 

member of this legislature using the same kinds of skills that he 

used for his 27 years as a judge. 

 

After Mr. Justice MacLeod went into supernumerary status, we 

call it, or the semi-retired role, I had more chance to visit with 

him at different events, along with his wife, Amber. And it was 

at that point that you came to understand how important he was 

for his family and for his extended family, but more importantly 

for the baseball community of Saskatchewan. There is no 

question that his ability to organize and work with people meant 

that for baseball players in Regina they had every opportunity 

that was possible. And it‟s quite interesting how somebody who 

has this kind of a role as a politician or as a judge can end up 

contributing so much to the community in the community sports 

world, and he did that. 

 

I know that he was always keenly interested in politics as well, 

and so if I talked to him at the symphony or at Globe Theatre, 

both he and his wife had some very specific questions about 

things that had happened over the last number of weeks and 

some very specific advice. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that I 

always listened carefully because I knew his experience, but I 

also knew that he listened to people and he was somebody who 

had that particular skill. 

 

One of the other areas that we shared a lot of fun was that he 

was clearly Scottish background, but his wife was Norwegian. 

So we would often compare notes, and she would come to me 

for advice about the latest arguments in any battle. And so I 

know I say to Amber and the family, we are all going to miss 

Ken and that we really appreciate the contributions that he made 

to our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I only knew 

Ken MacLeod from my period of time in practice. So when I 

realized I was going to speak to this today, I contacted Mr. 

Justice Stuart Cameron of the Court of Appeal and asked him 

whether I could quote him and whether he would provide me 

some insight into Kenneth MacLeod, both as a lawyer and as a 

politician. And he gave me some information, and I certainly 

agree with the opinions that he expressed, and it was somewhat 

entertaining and interesting. 

 

He told me that Ken MacLeod was exceptionally bright and he 

was top or near the top of his class through law school. He 

roomed with Cal Tallis who went on to become Mr. Justice 

Tallis of the Court of Appeal. He graduated from law school, as 

the Premier mentioned, in 1954 and practised for two years in 

Saskatoon with Disberry, Bence and Walker and then moved to 

Regina for the firm that ultimately became Balfour Moss, and 

went to the Court of Queen‟s Bench in 1975. 

 

[14:45] 

 

I inquired about his political career and Justice Cameron 

indicated that the things that stand out most in people‟s mind 

regarding Kenneth MacLeod were the two significant 

nominations that he fought. He sought nomination both as a 

federal candidate and as a provincial candidate. In 1968 he 

sought a federal Liberal nomination. He ran against several 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

other people including Ross Sneath and Bob Peterson, who later 

went on to become a senator. That nomination had over 1,000 

people at it, was thoroughly contested, and he was the 

successful candidate. 

 

During the course of that federal campaign, the young Pierre 

Trudeau came to Saskatchewan and it was an open meeting 

with a large number of candidates as well as large numbers of 

the public. At that time there was Trudeaumania sweeping 

across the country and at that time Pierre Trudeau seemed to 

walk on water. And nobody would want to challenge him, with 

the exception of Kenneth MacLeod, who told Pierre Trudeau 

quite pointedly, if you‟re not willing to go out in the country 

and get a particular substance on your boots, you will not be 

winning any seats in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The audience was somewhat aghast but those were rather 

prophetic words because Kenneth MacLeod did not win a seat 

and in fact they did not win any seats in rural Saskatchewan 

with the exception of Otto Lang, who won in the Humboldt 

constituency. Interestingly, I worked for Otto Lang in my 

younger Liberal days when I was far left-leaning as opposed to 

how I am now. Mr. Speaker, he also went on and in the 1971 

election ran in another hugely contested nomination to become 

one of Ross Thatcher‟s candidates, defeated Ken Sunquist and 

Jack Klein on the first ballot — there was over 1,000 people 

there — and was, of course, successful. 

 

He had enormous energy and was an outstanding, gregarious 

person. Justice Cameron refers to him as the single most 

energetic person he has ever met. He was innovative politically 

and creative in court. And he was not fussy for procedural 

details and chose to go directly to substance, was not afraid to 

make law, and had an ability to make law, did not regard 

himself as one who is particularly bound by precedent, which 

caused the Court of Appeal some additional work. But quite 

often when he challenged the Court of Appeal, it turned out that 

the arguments that he put forward in his judgments were 

accepted by the Court of Appeal. And he was not afraid to make 

law. 

 

I knew Justice MacLeod in his capacity as a Court of Queen‟s 

Bench, and as mentioned by the member opposite, he certainly 

had a reputation for being interesting and entertaining to appear 

in front of him. During my time in practice, I appeared and did 

two trials in front of him and two or three chambers 

applications. As I was successful in both trials and at least one 

of the chambers applications, naturally my opinion is that he 

was a brilliant jurist and one of the best judges that the province 

has ever had. 

 

I‟m told as well he was a great conversationalist, and at social 

functions I was at, he certainly was. He would talk to anybody, 

whether it was a paper boy or a person working with him, 

another judge. He was an outstanding and outgoing person. 

 

In Regina, as mentioned earlier, he was an avid baseball fan, a 

great supporter of amateur baseball. The baseball diamonds at 

the corner of Elphinstone and Regina bear his name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Justice MacLeod was an individual who served 

our province as an MLA, a justice of the Court of Queen‟s 

Bench, and a supporter of many community organizations: 

Queen City Kiwanis, Regina Sports Hall of Fame, Little League 

baseball, just to mention a few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the MacLeod family and their friends and 

supporters, we offer them our prayers and sympathies and we 

thank them for the contribution made by Kenneth MacLeod to 

our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Allan Stevens 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 

now: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Allan Stevens, who passed away on July 15, 2011, at the 

age of 91, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 

from 1960 until 1964, representing the constituency of 

Rosetown for the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation, CCF. 

 

Mr. Stevens was born on 30 August 1919 in Saskatoon. 

Allan was raised in the Harris district and attended Silver 

Cloud School. He worked on the family farm and later 

joined the Canadian Army. He served in Holland and 

Belgium and Germany from 1941 to 1946. 

 

Upon returning to Canada, Mr. Stevens was actively 

involved in his community. He served on the Harris 

Village Council, the Legion, the Lions, the United 

Church, the rink board, the local school board, the 

Rosetown School Unit board. 

 

He is survived and sadly missed by his five children, 

Brian, Gary, Beverly, Sandra, and Donna, and their 

respective family members. Allan is predeceased by his 

wife, Emily, of 58 years. 

 

In recording its own deep loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all too quickly we‟re losing this generation of 

Saskatchewan heroes — the generation that fought World War 

II; the generation so well represented on the Prairies of this 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

country, who were so quick to serve the cause of Canada and 

the cause of freedom and who, on their return, weren‟t finished 

giving. On their return, Mr. Speaker, we will know the history 

of so many veterans of that war and others, but significantly of 

World War II. They came back to this province and they 

continued to contribute. They continued to build small towns 

and communities across this province. 

 

In the case of Mr. Stevens, that was quite a list. He‟s returned 

from World War II where he served in Holland and Belgium 

and Germany for five years until 1946. He comes back to his 

community. And I don‟t think anyone would have begrudged a 

bit of a break or a rest, but he chose rather to serve in other 

ways — on the village council, in the Legion, in the Lions, and 

in church and rink board. I won‟t read the whole list. 

 

And then in 1960 I imagine somebody, probably a leader of a 

party — probably one of the most famous leaders of any 

provincial party in the country — contacted him to encourage 

him to run for office. Imagine that time in this particular 

Legislative Assembly from 1960 to 1964 and the debate that . . . 

Well we all know the debate that was occurring at the time, and 

what has happened as a result of that debate in our province and 

across our country. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Stevens played obviously 

a key role in that, though he only served one term here. Here 

was somebody who was so very actively involved in the life of 

this province and of his community in that Rosetown area. 

 

And I think some members will want to address themselves to 

his memory, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon. I certainly want to 

make way for that. And I‟m honoured to be able to move this 

motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has moved a motion of 

condolence for Mr. Allan Stevens. Will the Assembly take the 

motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I agree with the 

Premier‟s remarks about Mr. Stevens in that he‟s of that 

generation who was born just after the First World War, served 

in the Second World War, and then came back to build our 

province. 

 

And it‟s quite telling to see that this man, with his children, 

ended up serving on the school board and then was asked to 

serve in the legislature so that he was elected in 1960. And 

clearly 1960 was an interesting election in Saskatchewan. 

Tommy Douglas had been first elected in 1944 and so it 

effectively was 16 years of government. And then he won that 

next term, and then was elected national leader and went on to 

serve in national politics. But he had recruited people like Mr. 

Stevens to work with him on some of the very important, both 

educational issues and the medical issues. And when you look 

at Mr. Stevens‟s obituary, you note that one of his proudest 

moments was to be in this Chamber when that particular 

legislation was passed. 

 

I personally did not know Mr. Stevens, but I know others from 

that era and that place because my family roots are not that far 

from Rosetown. And so I can imagine the others, on other 

school boards in the next districts, and how intensely the 

discussion went on as the representatives of those local people 

came here to Regina to work on the particular legislation. 

 

You know, to get only a chance to serve four years in this place 

is an incredible honour, no matter what, because we all know 

when we look at the total number of people who have actually 

ever sat in the Chamber, it‟s not very many people in the history 

of our province. And so when we recognize the person who 

serves one term like Mr. Stevens, we‟re saying once again, 

thank you very much for work that‟s well done, that‟s served 

the province well. And we do especially thank you for the work 

that you did as part of the team that created a medicare system 

for Canada. 

 

So to Mr. Stevens‟s family and all of his descendants, we offer 

our condolences and our honour for the work that you‟ve done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟d 

like to join with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 

saying a few remarks about Mr. Stevens. While I didn‟t know 

Mr. Stevens personally, I do know some of his family including 

his son Gary, and I also know a number of people in and around 

the Harris area who were friends with Mr. Stevens. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, over the weekend I had an opportunity to speak with 

one gentleman who‟s a very close friend of mine from Harris 

and knew Mr. Stevens well and spoke very highly of him. He 

filled me in on a number of things, some of which have been 

touched on by the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

He was a World War II veteran; for that we owe him and his 

colleagues a great debt of gratitude. He also served in a number 

of ways for his community. He served on town council. He was 

a school board member. So, Mr. Speaker, he not only served his 

community and province as MLA, but in those other areas as 

well. 

 

The other thing that kind of stood out in my mind when I was 

speaking to my friend about him was the fact that Mr. Stevens 

was very, very active in sports. When his children were young, 

he coached a number of their sports teams. And in later years, 

he followed his grandchildren‟s sports and educational pursuits 

with great interest. So by all standards, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

this was a gentleman who cared very deeply for his family and 

also his community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to acknowledge all the contributions 

that Mr. Stevens made to his country, to his province, and to his 

community, and I would like to offer my sincere condolences to 

his family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to join 

in this afternoon and speak to the condolence motion for Mr. 

Allan Stevens. The days that we do these condolence motions, 

Mr. Speaker, I think are very important because it‟s a chance to 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

review the lives of individuals who have given so much to our 

province and to this Assembly. And it is also a reality check for 

those of us that are currently sitting in the Assembly to do a bit 

of introspection and perhaps self-examination to see how the 

things that we‟re doing, the beliefs that we‟re holding, how we 

are doing our best to carry on the work that some of our 

predecessors from this Assembly have done. 

 

And that is most certainly the case when looking at the life 

lived by Mr. Allan Stevens, the example that he had in his 

community and the role that he played in his family. 

 

I did not have the chance to meet Mr. Allan Stevens personally, 

Mr. Speaker, but I felt compelled to say a few remarks because 

as the Premier said, I think, at the time of these condolence 

motions, sometimes it‟s to convey personal stories about the 

member. Sometimes it‟s to say personally what that individual 

has meant to any of the members who are speaking, but it‟s also 

a time to say thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to say thank you on a 

generational basis. And I‟m from a younger generation, but as 

someone who has grown up in this province and loves this 

province, I‟ve benefited from the work that people like Mr. 

Stevens has done. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Stevens also served in 1960, and so he would have been a 

rookie MLA with my grandfather Hans. So I don‟t know any 

stories, but they would have sat around the caucus table 

together and I assume shared stories and shared many of the 

same views and concerns, both representing areas in 

Saskatchewan with some common issues. 

 

When we look at Mr. Stevens‟s record of military service, of 

service in the community through the school board, it‟s clear 

that this was a man who was busy and very involved in the 

things that mattered to him and his local area and the broader 

constituency. I had a chance to go through his maiden speech, 

Mr. Speaker. And it was a fairly lengthy maiden speech, and it 

showed that this was an individual who really cared about 

issues. He talked about highways. He talked about agriculture. 

He talked about education. It was a well-researched speech as 

well. He cited sources from Europe. A variety of topics were 

covered, and it was well-researched and well-said. And to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that shows that Mr. Stevens was someone who 

took his work seriously and put his constituents first. 

 

Also remarkable, Mr. Speaker, is to hear of his marriage, a 

union with Emily that lasted 58 years. And that perhaps 

overshadows any other work that he‟s done because we know 

how important and how special a marriage of 58 years is, and I 

know that it must be something that the children hold very near 

and dear to them. 

 

So I simply want to say on behalf of myself, and I imagine all 

members of the Assembly, a sincere thank you to the Stevens 

family for the role that they have played because we all know 

that politics is a family endeavour, and I‟m sure that there were 

many sacrifices over the years. So I want to say thank you to 

the Stevens family and extend my most sincere condolences to 

them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Linton Alexander MacDonald 

 

The Speaker: — Members, I wish to advise the Assembly of 

the passing of a former sergeant-at-arms of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Linton Alexander MacDonald, who passed away on 

January 19, 2011, was sergeant-at-arms for the province of 

Saskatchewan from 1981 until 1985. 

 

Prior to becoming the sergeant-at-arms, Mr. MacDonald was a 

teacher from 1936 until 1943, and then he became a member of 

the Canadian Army. Upon his return to Canada, he worked as 

the secretary for the RM of Saltcoats and then became the 

provincial secretary of the Royal Canadian Legion. 

 

Mr. MacDonald is survived and sadly missed by his two sons 

and daughter-in-law — Bob, Ray, and Betty — as well as 

numerous grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 

 

Willard Lutz 

 

The Speaker: — Further I wish to advise the Assembly of the 

passing of a former provincial auditor of this Assembly, Mr. 

Willard Lutz, who passed away on January 17th, 2012. 

 

He was appointed the provincial auditor for Saskatchewan in 

1972 and held that position for 17 years. Prior to becoming the 

provincial auditor, Mr. Lutz served in the Second World War 

aboard the HMCS [His Majesty‟s Canadian Ship] Kokanee. In 

1958 he completed the requirements for admission to the 

Institute of Chartered Accountants and joined the Department 

of Health as an auditor. He joined the staff at the provincial 

auditor‟s office in 1968 and quickly moved into the acting 

provincial auditor position in 1971. One year later, he was 

appointed the provincial auditor. 

 

Mr. Lutz is survived and sadly missed by his son Douglas and 

family, and son Bruce. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave to move a motion of transmittal regarding the condolence 

motions. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked 

leave to move a motion of transmittal. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes together with the 

Hansard transcript and the resolutions adopted be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-visual record of the oral tributes together with the 

Hansard transcript and resolutions adopted be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders 

of the day, I request leave to move a motion under rule 59. 

 

The Speaker: — The member will briefly outline the text of his 

motion. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Funding of First Nations Schools 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I stated in 

question period, the gap in funding between First Nations and 

the provincial education systems is unacceptable and unfair. 

Therefore I seek agreement on my motion as follows: 

 

That this Assembly congratulate the House of Commons 

of Canada given the impending federal budget for its 

unanimous agreement to adopt the Shannen‟s Dream 

motion, a proposal which calls for closing the gap in 

funding between First Nations and non-First Nations 

school systems; 

 

Express its support for this proposal which includes the 

goals of declaring that all First Nations children have an 

equal right to high quality culturally-relevant education; 

committing to provide the necessary financial and policy 

supports for First Nations education systems; providing 

funding that will put reserve schools on par with 

non-reserve provincial schools; developing transparent 

methodologies for school construction, operation, 

maintenance, and replacement; working collaboratively 

with First Nations leaders to establish equitable norms 

and formulas for determining class sizes; and for the 

funding of education resources, staff salaries, special 

education services, and indigenous language instruction; 

and implementing policies to make the First Nations 

education system at minimum of equal quality to 

provincial school systems. 

 

With that motion, Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave. 

 

The Speaker: — The member . . . You have heard the request 

for leave to move a motion without notice, under rule 59. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Not agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. Next business. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 10 — The 

Parks Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? It has been moved by the 

Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 1, the Queen‟s Bench . . . Oh, 

this is item No. 10 is it? No, wrong one . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Okay. It has been moved by the hon. minister 

of parks, correction . . . I mean parks . . . TCPS, that The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2011 be adopted. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Right now, Mr. Speaker? To which . . . 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 10, The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2011 be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Bill be referred to Intergovernmental Affairs. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 11 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 11 — The Court 

Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de 

justice be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to have 

the opportunity this afternoon to enter into the debate on this 

piece of legislation on court officials. It‟s been a, Mr. Speaker, a 

busy afternoon. 

 

And as we move into adjourned debates after the condolence 

motions that we have gone through, as I said earlier in my 

remarks, I think it‟s an opportunity to sincerely offer a bit of 

introspection and thought about the work that we do here in the 

Assembly and how it ties into our larger objectives that we want 

to and wish to accomplish as a province. And while the types of 

legislation may differ, Mr. Speaker, in their content and in 

perhaps their significance to some extent, the onus on 

legislators to carefully look at legislation, to put forward 

constructive legislation, to put forward changes that are indeed 

in the best interests of all Saskatchewan people is a priority that 

we all need to share and put forward on a regular basis. 

 

The Bill, Mr. Speaker, that we‟re looking at this afternoon is 

Bill No. 11, The Court Officials Act. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a 

fairly short piece of . . . Well the Bill itself is decently long, but 

the remarks made by the minister on the second reading speech 

are not that extensive. 

 

This piece of . . . Maybe I‟ll start by saying, Mr. Speaker, with 

any piece of legislation over time, it‟s appropriate to look at the 

piece of legislation to make sure that the details of it and the 

content that it addresses is appropriate and is up to date and is 

modern. And there is, Mr. Speaker, from time to time, 

necessary changes that need to occur with any piece of 

legislation. And sometimes this is of a housekeeping nature in 

order to ensure that the piece of legislation is consistent with 

other pieces of legislation. And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, the 

changes that are suggested in an amendment to an Act are a 

reflection of something that‟s changed on the ground or a need 

that has emerged. 

 

And in this situation, Mr. Speaker, as the minister identifies, the 

legislation is in response to some changes that have been 

identified as being appropriate for the Provincial Court system. 

Most specifically, Mr. Speaker, as the minister states in his 

second reading speech, this Bill seeks to establish two new 

court officials: the registrar of the Provincial Court and court 

transcribers. The current legislation, Mr. Speaker, as the 

minister identifies in his second reading speech which was 

delivered on December 13th, 2011, does not currently have a 

provision for these positions and therefore it is appropriate, in 

the minister‟s view, that legislation be brought forward in order 

to accommodate these new officials who would serve a role. 

Mr. Speaker, I am not fully . . . I do not have great knowledge 

of how the actual operations within the Provincial Court work, 

but what I can trust are the individuals who are present in the 

system, providing feedback through the appropriate channels in 

the ministry, are in a position to identify and state what are the 

appropriate changes that need to take place. And as with any 

type of system in government, whatever the ministry may be, I 

think it ought to be our goal as legislators to ensure that the 

system is as up-to-date and is as responsive and is as effective 

as it possibly can be. 

 

And it‟s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the feedback that has been 

provided about the needed addition of these two individuals, it‟s 

my hope that that would be true. And I have no reason to think 

otherwise based on the feedback that the minister . . . or the 

input that the minister has stated about the feedback he‟s 

received about the provision of these two individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier on in my remarks, I commented about how 

situations can change and how operations can change and how 

things can be modernized and improved. And I note in the 

minister‟s second reading speech he made this remark, and it 

said: 

 

In 1984 most court proceedings were recorded by court 

reporters using shorthand. Today evidence in court is 

recorded electronically and then transcribed by private 

transcription agencies. This change is reflected in the new 

legislation by eliminating the role of court reporter and by 

creating a new court official called the court transcriber 

who is responsible for transcribing evidence recorded in 

court. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s evidence of how, with the electronic age 

and how things have moved with technology, how it‟s 

appropriate for the court to adapt and be as responsive as 

possible. And this is consistent, Mr. Speaker, with some of the 

other pieces of legislation we‟ve looked at in this spring sitting 

to date. I can think of, Mr. Speaker, the changes to the land 

titles system and the suggestion that a library or registry be 

created electronically to help streamline the process. And, Mr. 

Speaker, just as we would not expect individuals now to sit and 

write shorthand to record the proceedings that occur in court, 

we understand fully that it is appropriate to have technological 

changes. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And when we think of transcription, we think of the great work 

that the staff in the Legislative Assembly do, our folks who do 

such a fine job in Hansard with a short turnaround and 

providing the written record for many, many years so that there 

is a permanent official record for this Assembly. And just as it 

is important for the Legislative Assembly, for the court system 

of course, Mr. Speaker, it is just as important in order to ensure 

that the proper work be done and that justice be served in our 

province. 

 

Just to cite also from what the minister stated in his second 

reading speech. He also identified that there are changes that 

take place in order that the system be as effective as possible, 

and this is what the minister stated in his second reading 

speech. It says: 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

The current legislation also sets out the hours that various 

court offices are open to the public. The provision has 

been updated to allow the hours of opening for the court 

and registry offices to be established by minister‟s order 

rather than by legislation. This change will provide 

flexibility in setting the hours of operation to meet the 

needs of the court and its users. This Bill also contains 

consequential amendments that update the names of court 

officials and the references to this Act in various bilingual 

statutes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as part of a democratic system, when we look at 

the judiciary and the role of the court system in our Canadian 

democracy, a key component in order to ensure that the system 

is as democratic and is as open as possible is the provision that 

allows individuals to go to the court in order to witness 

proceedings and also, Mr. Speaker, to receive the appropriate 

information that they may be interested about, whatever that 

issue may be. And I think, Mr. Speaker, from what I understand 

in the minister‟s remarks is that the guidelines or the rules of 

the decisions around the hours of operation that would allow for 

individuals to access the type of information that they need, for 

whatever purpose that they may want to receive that 

information, that the decision around the hours would not be 

through legislation, Mr. Speaker, but would be through 

regulation allowing a greater flexibility for the minister to 

ensure that the court system is as responsive to Saskatchewan 

people as it clearly needs to be and ought to be. 

 

My hope, Mr. Speaker, as with any occasion or opportunity, 

when additional authority or power is given to the minister and 

is taken from a role of legislation and simply given to a minister 

and allows for the minister to make his or her decision as they 

see that it ought to be and what is appropriate, it‟s my hope and 

my sincere desire, Mr. Speaker, that the decisions and the 

changes that may occur would in fact be in the best interest of 

Saskatchewan people. So I would hope that when we look at 

possible changes, when we look at possible adjustments to 

when individuals can access the courts, receive the information 

that they need, I hope that the minister would be going down a 

path of greater openness, greater transparency, greater 

accessibility for all Saskatchewan people. Because as I said, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a fundamental tenet of our democratic 

system — that citizens in the province, just as they are able to 

come to this Assembly and observe the proceedings, they also 

have the availability and the accessibility to our court system in 

order to receive the information that they need. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that general approach and the 

statement I made, that it is my hope that the minister would be 

going down a path of more openness as opposed to narrowing 

the parameters and narrowing the possibilities for people to 

receive information. I say that because when I think of the 

things that Saskatchewan and Canada stands for and the things 

that we try to promote and advocate nationally, but in the global 

context as well, it certainly matters how transparent and how 

open our court system is. 

 

And so I think if there was a decision, if it was in the minister‟s 

opinion that there should be a narrowing of the availability and 

the accessibility, I think that would be a step in the wrong 

direction. I think that would be a step that would be contrary to 

many of the things that we promote in this Assembly, the things 

that other legislatures throughout Canada promote, things that 

our federal parliament promotes, and then also the things that 

we promote on an international stage in a variety of contexts 

and through a variety of organizations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would hope, it‟s my sincere hope that the 

minister‟s default position would be for greater transparency 

and would be for allowing the court system to operate as openly 

and as effectively as possible, and that individuals who are 

wishing to receive information could in fact receive the 

information that they want or attend and witness proceedings as 

they see that they need to. Because obviously with the role that 

the minister has in our provincial system, that ties directly to the 

oath that he has taken, the role, the duties that he has assumed 

as minister. And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that his natural 

inclination would be to go down that path. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the availability as it‟s 

stated, I‟ll just read that paragraph again so listeners at home are 

reminded of the issue here. It says: 

 

The provision has been updated to allow the hours of 

opening for the court and registry offices to be established 

by minister‟s order rather than by legislation. This change 

will provide flexibility in setting the hours of operation to 

meet the needs of the court and its users. 

 

So what‟s being used here as the basis, the rationale for the 

change, is increased flexibility. What isn‟t explicitly said, Mr. 

Speaker, is that whether that will mean, whether that flexibility 

will mean more openness or less. And I think that is a crucial 

point. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that eventually, after members 

on this side of the House have had ample opportunity to speak 

to this issue and consult with people and hear from individuals 

on this piece of legislation, when this issue is sent to committee 

and we have a chance to discuss it in committee, I hope that the 

minister would be willing to clearly state for the record whether 

it is his intention to reduce the accessibility and the availability 

or to enhance and increase the accessibility and availability of 

attending court, of receiving necessary information through the 

registry. 

 

Now I think most people at home would say, well of course the 

minister would want to allow for increased access to this type of 

information and increased access to this type of witnessing of 

proceedings. Of course he would want to do that. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think, as I said before, I hope that is his default 

position of wanting to increase and improve. 

 

But as we have discussed in the first week and a bit of this 

spring session, we‟ve heard some real mixed signals from 

members opposite. And we‟ve heard some warnings from 

members opposite about cuts. We‟ve heard warnings, Mr. 

Speaker, about reductions that Saskatchewan people should be 

expecting. We‟ve heard, Mr. Speaker, warnings about changes. 

They‟re fairly veiled at this point. The members opposite are 

putting out the feelers but saying that Saskatchewan people 

should expect reductions and cuts to services. On the flip side, 

Mr. Speaker, we have an endless stream of nothing but rosy and 

nothing but positive news releases coming out of Executive 

Council and the various ministries. So there‟s this mixed 

messaging going on with the Saskatchewan people at this time. 

 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

So when we look at a piece of legislation where we see changes 

to how individuals can access the court system, and when the 

minister says it‟s for more flexibility but doesn‟t state whether 

or not that flexibility is intended to increase access to the court 

system, I have concerns. Because, as we hear from members 

opposite, they‟re talking about cuts. They‟re talking about a 

reduction in services. They‟re talking about changes that will 

have a detrimental effect on Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t know what these cuts will look 

like, and members opposite are very fond of saying, X number 

of sleeps more. Don‟t get too excited. It‟ll all be fine, don‟t you 

worry. That‟s what members opposite, government members 

like to say. But when they‟re talking about cuts, when they‟re 

asking for flexibility, my question, Mr. Speaker, is, is this 

increased flexibility? Is it being introduced now in order to 

facilitate the cuts that are coming in this area? 

 

Now we don‟t know where the cuts will be because members 

opposite have simply said, expect cuts. Expect reduction in 

services. Expect changes that will have a negative effect on 

your life. But there‟s no detail. So it puts the Saskatchewan 

people in a very difficult situation. On the one hand, the 

minister is saying, please trust me; I want to allow for greater 

accessibility to the court system, and this is the reason why we 

want to take the hours and the openness from legislation into 

regulation, and allow me to simply sign off on it and approve 

what I think is appropriate. So the minister is asking for this 

additional role, this additional authority, but at the same time 

the minister and members of the front bench are reluctant to say 

where the cuts are going to occur. 

 

So if, when the budget comes down, we see cuts in the area of 

the Ministry of Justice and we see cuts in the area of the court 

system and we see cuts in the area of staffing levels for the 

individuals that will operate our court system, and then at the 

same time we have the minister asking for more flexibility to 

change the hours of when people can go to the building, to the 

courthouse, we see a change . . . we have a request for a change 

in the hours that people can go to the registry and access 

information in order to allow democracy to carry on, and for 

individuals to pursue the information that they want from their 

perspective, and what they think is appropriate for democracy, 

we have a real problem here, I think, based on the minister‟s 

messaging. And I think this ambiguity and this confusion the 

members opposite have created with Saskatchewan people 

needs to be cleared up. 

 

Now members opposite will say, well just a few more sleeps. 

Don‟t you worry; the budget will be coming down. But 

members opposite have been going around talking about two 

different stories. They‟ve been talking about how Saskatchewan 

people should expect extensive cuts, extensive changes to the 

delivery of services; but then they‟ve also been saying, well 

everything‟s great and wonderful, but still expect the cuts. We 

don‟t know how deep these cuts are going to be, Mr. Speaker, 

but without the detail we can only assume that a number of 

ministries across the board are going to be affected in very real 

ways. 

 

And I would assume, Mr. Speaker, that would include the 

Ministry of Justice and would include operations in the 

courthouse, especially, Mr. Speaker, when we see a reduction in 

the number of civil servants. We see a reduction in the number 

of civil servants that individuals on the opposite side want in 

order to carry out the good work that many ministries and 

agencies of government perform for Saskatchewan people. But 

at the same time we have the minister asking for changes here 

for more flexibility, but not saying whether or not that 

flexibility is intended to improve access or to worsen access. I 

think that is a concern and that‟s a problem. 

 

I wish, Mr. Speaker, the minister had been more clear in his 

second reading speech, suggesting why he needs this additional 

authority. If he had been more clear — if he had said, well 

actually it‟s our intention to reduce the number of individuals 

working in the court system, and it‟s our intention to reduce the 

level of funding to the court system, and it‟s our intention to 

restrict the hours and the accessibility of the court system, and 

this is why I need the flexibility to do it — well I may not agree 

with the decision, Mr. Speaker, but at least the minister would 

be upfront in stating his rationale as to why he‟s going down a 

certain path. That hasn‟t been the case. What we have seen, Mr. 

Speaker, is simply, I think, ambiguous language that doesn‟t 

clearly enough state why these sorts of changes and this sort of 

additional authority and responsibility ought to be awarded to 

the minister. And I think that is a concern. And it comes across 

the board. 

 

It‟s interesting that this issue, this issue of reducing the civil 

service, is an interesting concept to think of at the same time as 

this piece of legislation introduces two new roles. So we know 

if the minister is planning on introducing new roles within the 

provincial system, and if members opposite are determined to 

slash the civil service by X amount over the four years, these 

two new positions are going to have to come from somewhere. 

It‟s going to have to balance out according to members‟ 

opposite math. Now I know the minister today in question 

period says they actually don‟t cost out many of the decisions 

that they make, and that was a comment that the minister made 

with respect to federal legislation that was passed. And the 

minister said, well we actually can‟t cost it out and we don‟t 

always cost out the decisions that we make. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that actually was of no surprise to the people in Saskatchewan. 

But I‟m worried that the appropriate costing and the appropriate 

analysis has not occurred with this decision. That is my 

concern. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And it‟s also interesting, Mr. Speaker, that at a time when 

members opposite are talking about the deep cuts that 

Saskatchewan people should expect in a short period of time, 

that they‟re also wanting to increase the number of MLAs in the 

province. And now, Mr. Speaker, MLAs play a very important 

role. But I think the onus is on members opposite to explain 

why these additional members are needed. And to date, I do not 

think the explanation has been appropriate, reflective of reality, 

and really been upfront and straight with Saskatchewan people. 

 

And so when we see decisions around spending, when we see 

decisions around staffing, when we see decisions around 

wanting more authority and more power to restrict and change 

hours of availability for the court system, Mr. Speaker, I have 

some concerns based on the actions and the track record that 

we‟ve seen from members opposite so far, especially in this 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

brief spring session, brief as it has been. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve made a few remarks on Bill No. 11. And I 

think it‟s an example of a situation where there may be a piece 

of legislation and where the minister‟s remarks may be fairly 

brief, but, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot of content in there, a lot of 

questions that are brought up by the minister in his remarks. 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, given the mixed messaging we‟ve 

had from government members about how Saskatchewan 

people ought to expect deep cuts, how the number of civil 

servants needs to be drastically reduced, when the minister 

comes to this Assembly and says, we want to remove things 

from legislation and put it into regulation and just trust me, I 

have your best interests in mind, well, Mr. Speaker, I know that 

is the oath and the commitment that he took. But you see these 

too many examples that cause me to want a bit more detail, that 

cause me to want the minister to be more explicit about the 

changes that he wants to make and to be more clear on why we 

should simply trust him to make the proper changes for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these remarks about the needed transparency 

of members opposite, they apply to this piece of legislation, Bill 

No. 11, The Court Officials Act. But they apply just as much to 

many other pieces of legislation as we go through and we have 

situations where ministers are simply asking the Saskatchewan 

people to trust us. Don‟t worry about transparency; don‟t worry 

about the clarity and the succinctness of legislation; just trust 

me to do the right thing. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not prepared to 

simply do that. I want more information. I want better answers 

and a more clear statement. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks on Bill 

No. 11, and I would move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 11, The Court 

Officials Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 12 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 12 — The Court 

Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure today to rise to speak to this Bill, Bill 12, The Court 

Officials Consequential Amendments Act. Again given the 

comments of my colleague previously, there is not a lot from 

the minister in terms of commentary when he introduced the 

Bill. But this is one of those types of Bills where we see 

amendments to other Acts that are necessary to bring into effect 

the Bill that my colleague previously spoke to. In particular 

there is a number of English-language statutes that refer to the 

court officials or to The Court Officials Act. 

 

And there is one amendment in particular that the minister 

pointed out, was that The Coroners Act, 1999 was being 

amended to update the section dealing with the recording of 

evidence at coroner‟s inquests. And so as he pointed out, 

coroner‟s inquests are different than court proceedings because 

the evidence given is recorded by a court reporter using 

somewhat outdated techniques of shorthand or a recording 

device. So this new provision will create the role of the official 

reporter sworn in by the coroner before recording the evidence 

at the inquest, and then they will also prepare a transcript of the 

proceedings if requested to do so. 

 

One of the things I think that we want to look at more is the 

impact of the requirement to request transcripts in these types of 

hearings or inquests because it‟s often grieving family members 

who are most interested in the transcript. And in order to get it 

now, they have to actually request it, and we‟re not sure about 

the cost that will be associated with that because sometimes 

these transcripts can be quite substantial. So it may add . . . and 

further victimize people who are grieving as a result of the 

incidents leading to the coroner‟s inquest. 

 

That in and of itself is something that we need to look at 

closely. We also want to make sure that we understand the 

impact on all the other Bills that are consequentially amended 

by this particular Act and by the impact of The Court Officials 

Act, Bill 11. 

 

There‟s quite a long description of who the official reporter will 

be. And first of all, they would need to take an oath. That‟s the 

first requirement. And then before they are allowed to record 

any evidence, they take the oath and make a declaration before 

the coroner that they will accurately report the evidence. And 

they may record it by shorthand or by a recording device, and 

sign the transcript of the evidence once it‟s prepared. So this 

sets out how the recording of the evidence is to be done. 

 

And the key clause is 53(5), where it says: “The evidence taken 

by an official reporter need not be transcribed unless a 

transcription is ordered by” the minister or the counsel, the 

chief coroner, or any person who requests it. And indeed in 

5(d)(ii), the requirement there is for any one person who 

requests it, that they pay an amount that the transcriber may 

charge. And again we don‟t know what kind of amounts those 

will be. So that may be of concern to people who are grieving 

and very interested in the transcripts of the inquest, the 

coroner‟s inquest. 

 

Other Bills that are amended are Bills like The Court Security 

Act and The Creditors’ Relief Act, as well as The Executions 

Actand The Pre-judgment Interest Act where they will strike out 

The Court Officials Act, 1984 and switch it to the new Bill, The 

Court Officials Act, 2011. And also there‟s a striking out the 

inspector of legal offices and substituting a new amendment, 

inspector of court offices. All in all, those seem to be fairly 

straightforward changes, and changes that are required as the 

result of the introduction of Bill 11. 

 

I guess the only other comment I might have at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, is thinking of the role of the coroner and coroner‟s 

inquests. It reminds me of a young lady named Shannen 

Koostachin from Attawapiskat Indian Reserve who actually 

died in an untimely automobile accident. And I‟m thinking 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

about the coroner‟s inquest at that time. 

 

Shannen was living in Attawapiskat and was promised a new 

school. And because Minister Strahl wasn‟t able to provide the 

school despite having promised one, she had to go to school 

away from home, and she had to go to school a couple of hours 

or several hours south of her hometown, and was doing very 

well there and in fact had received recognition from the United 

Nations and several national awards for her participation in 

demanding appropriate and proper buildings for schools for 

children on Attawapiskat Indian Reserve. Unfortunately the 

government was not able to deliver — and indeed we‟ve seen 

much of that in the news lately — and Shannen died tragically 

in a car accident far away from home. And I‟m thinking about 

the coroner‟s inquest at that time and the impact on the families 

and whether or not they had to pay for the transcripts for that 

inquest, if indeed there was one. 

 

At any rate, it‟s somewhat disappointing that we aren‟t able to 

support the motion that was raised earlier to encourage the 

federal government to deal with these types of horrible 

situations on Indian reserves that have accumulated over the 

years. They‟re not easy problems to solve, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but I think it‟s one that this House should encourage. And 

indeed when motions are brought forward to support that kind 

of unanimous consent in the House of Commons, it would be 

. . . It‟s really sad to me as a new legislator that we can‟t 

support it here at this level. In fact I‟m very disappointed in 

that. 

 

At any rate, in terms of the changes to The Coroner’s Act at this 

point or needed for the implementation of Bill 11, The Court 

Officials Act, 2012 — 2011, I guess. I don‟t know why . . . Oh 

yes, it was introduced in December 2011. I would say at this 

point, we‟re going to take a close look at it. There are other of 

my colleagues that want to speak to this. And at this point, I 

would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 12, The Court Officials 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 13 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 13 — The 

Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les 

questions constitutionnelles be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to speak 

on Bill No. 13, An Act respecting References, Constitutional 

Questions and Challenges to Regulations and making a 

consequential amendment to The Court Of Appeal Act, 2000. 

And this is a bilingual Bill, so we have both English and French 

versions of this particular piece of legislation. 

The minister‟s given a brief overview of the Bill when it was 

introduced on December 13th, 2011. And a number of the 

issues that are set out in here relate to the procedures that are 

required to refer a constitutional question to the court, including 

service provisions and other things like that, which are . . . 

Basically the rules are being brought up to how other court 

applications are dealt with. It also clarifies those situations as to 

when the litigant in a proceeding, where a constitutional 

question may arise as to when they may advise the Attorney 

General of Saskatchewan and, in some situations, the Attorney 

General of Canada. And basically these are a new version of a 

system that we‟ve had. 

 

Clearly there have been some problems in litigation over the 

last number of years, and this legislation is here because it‟s 

trying to collect, connect, or correct a number, a number of 

problems. And there aren‟t that many constitutional reference 

cases, so we could probably go through each one of them and 

figure out where the issue is that the government has had with a 

particular reference. But practically some of those kinds of 

questions we‟ll have to end up looking at in committee. 

 

But sort of the heart of the legislation is part II, the reference 

provision. And this is a situation where there‟s a reference to 

the Court of Appeal for an opinion. And there are obviously 

constitutional lawyers and others who would‟ve spent a lot 

more time looking at these types of legislation over the years. 

But I think we need to look very carefully at what this part II 

reference section says, and especially a reference to the Court of 

Appeal, section 2(1). It starts off: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council [effectively the 

Premier] may refer any matter to the Court of Appeal for 

hearing and consideration, and the Court of Appeal shall 

hear and consider the matter. 

 

So it‟s giving the power to the executive branch to send 

something to the Court of Appeal. And it doesn‟t give the Court 

of Appeal any discretion. It says shall; it doesn‟t say may. So 

there‟s a fairly clear directive to the court to hear and consider 

the matter. Now it doesn‟t say how they should consider the 

matter or what their decision should be, but it does pretty 

definitely say you have to do something with it. 

 

[15:45] 

 

If you go then to the next page or to section 2(2), it goes to 

another kind of curious clause in a way. It says: 

 

If the Lieutenant Governor in Council [if the Premier and 

cabinet] includes in the terms of reference that the opinion 

and reasons of the Court of Appeal shall be deemed a 

judgment, the opinions and reasons of the Court of 

Appeal shall be deemed a judgment. 

 

That‟s kind of like Dr. Seuss or something. I mean it‟s pretty 

obvious that, you know, it just sort of says what it says. But 

then you say, well why does it say what it says here? The 

reason, as far as I can tell, and this where I have some questions 

and I think we‟ll have more questions when we get into 

committee on this Bill, is that it doesn‟t necessarily say that 

subsection (1) of this same section 2 is a situation where there 

can be opinions that are not appealable. So effectively what 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

happens is the cabinet, the Premier and the cabinet, get to 

decide whether a decision of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal 

is appealable to the Supreme Court of Canada before it‟s 

actually sent and before there‟s a decision that‟s made by the 

court. 

 

So under section 2(1), those are matters that would be sent to 

the Court of Appeal, and it‟s not a judgment and so therefore 

it‟s not appealable under this legislation. At least it doesn‟t say 

those words, not appealable, because they don‟t appeal very 

much actually. They‟re not . . . I think somebody would notice, 

but that‟s what they‟re doing here. But subsection (2) says 

okay, if we want the Court of Appeal‟s opinion but we also 

want the option to go to the Supreme Court to look at a 

particular issue, then we‟ll tell you that before you even make 

your judgment the first time around. 

 

So in risk management there are certain things that one does as 

a person, as a company, as a government. You kind of figure 

out what the track is and where something might go. If you 

have a particular question where you wouldn‟t mind an answer 

that‟s outside your own organization, but you don‟t want it 

maybe to go much farther than that, well you use subsection (1) 

and get an opinion effectively. So if you go to subsection (2) 

and have it deemed to be a judgment, then that allows it to be 

appealed. 

 

So I‟m not quite sure of the history of this particular clause or 

what the government is intending here, but it is assumed, I 

think, that anything that‟s done pursuant to subsection (2), 

whether it‟s an opinion or ultimately a judgment which is 

appealable, that these things are done openly and everybody 

knows that this is what‟s happening. But I didn‟t see any 

specific reference in this legislation that this all needs to be 

done in an open fashion so that the public can see what is 

happening. And that may be assumed or there may be a 

reference in some other place that I don‟t have in front of me 

today. 

 

But I think it‟s a question that we need to ask because if in fact 

what we‟re doing here is creating a new method of getting 

private opinions on constitutional issues for the Premier and the 

cabinet without telling anybody that they‟re doing that, then we 

don‟t want that. And I would be asking the minister very 

specifically that question when we get to committee, and in 

some ways, it may be that it‟s something that should be 

amended to be clarified. We also don‟t want situations where 

the government, the Premier, and the cabinet are hedging their 

bets. They‟ll say, well we‟ll go for an opinion, but we don‟t 

want it to go to any judges other than the judges in our court. 

That also seems a little bit strange. 

 

Now it‟s possible that these are budget Bills, and court hearings 

and all of the things that surround the constitutional reference 

can really get quite expensive if you don‟t have lots of 

parameters on them as far as costs. And there appear to be a 

couple of other clauses in this Bill that go to costs. And we‟ve 

seen that in some of the other legislation that we‟ve been 

looking at in this session, that there are ways of controlling the 

costs that end up maybe being the reason the Bill is here. Now 

obviously the minister won‟t say that directly, so we have to 

imply from what he has said. One of the procedural positive 

things, I suppose, but also a cost-cutting measure is to allow for 

an appeal court judge to hear procedural matters and dispose of 

them in a fairly straightforward manner during the hearing. 

That‟s the kind of maybe procedural point that all lawyers can 

be happy with and pleased with. 

 

But some of these other questions that are part of this legislation 

raise some interesting issues. And I know that I look forward to 

having a chance to talk to the minister and the various lawyers 

within the Department of Justice who have been drafting this 

legislation so that we can understand fully what the intention is 

of the department and of the minister, and also maybe to correct 

some of these things that are not as clear as they should be. Or 

maybe they‟re not as clear for a very specific reason; I will hold 

my judgment on that until I have had a chance to ask people 

about this in committee. 

 

But with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that we send this 

Bill on to committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? The question before the Assembly is the motion by 

the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 13, The Constitutional 

Questions Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 13, The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 14 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 14 — The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

rise to speak on Bill No. 14, An Act to amend The Securities 

Act, 1988. This particular legislation appears to respond to 

requests from a number of different groups to correct or perhaps 

modernize the securities legislation to do a few things. And the 

minister has referenced these, but that was back in December, 

so maybe I will remind us what we‟re talking about here. 

 

Basically the first one relates to financial advisors, and it allows 

them to do their business through a professional corporation. So 

that‟s similar to doctors and lawyers and other professionals. So 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

it allows for the advantages and I suppose the disadvantages of 

incorporation of a professional practice. There‟s always lots of 

discussion about that. 

 

There‟s also some changes that allow for better organization of 

the whole financial services sector organizations. And we‟re 

not, I don‟t think, necessarily opposed to that because normally 

these kinds of amendments come forward at the request of the 

organizations. 

 

Now clearly all securities legislation worldwide, but especially 

in North America, was challenged by the year 2008. And the 

rules that were meant to protect both the advisors, but more 

importantly the customers, ended up being challenged right to 

the limit. And I think that what we will find as we go through 

some of this legislation in committee is that the 

recommendations that are coming here come from within the 

financial services industry, but they‟re the kinds of provisions 

that are coming on a national basis through discussions with 

various provincial organizations and basically conversation 

between provinces and territories and the federal government. 

So what we will be asking is further clarification about that as 

we move forward with this particular legislation. 

 

Now there are some parts of the amendments, and I assume 

these are some of the ones that come nationally, that relate to 

credit rating organizations and their ability to assess different 

financial instruments for security purposes. And anyone who 

has examined what happened in the world financial markets in 

2008 can go back to see that some of the adjustments or 

flexibility that was given to credit rating agencies was what 

caused huge problems in the mortgage markets in the United 

States as they consolidated residential mortgages and some 

small-business mortgages and then sold them as securities 

around the world. 

 

So I think that some of these provisions that we‟re seeing in this 

legislation relate to those types of requests, and what we‟ll want 

to ask when we get into committee is how much, or where we 

sit on the scale of further regulations. What kinds of codes of 

conduct, what kinds of rules are we adopting or sharing — if we 

do it on a national basis — that will protect individuals? 

 

In Canada we were lucky enough to have a very good report 

prepared on the banking industry by my former law partner, Mr. 

Harold MacKay. And he did that at the request of the federal 

Finance minister, Paul Martin, and he spent probably a couple 

of years listening carefully to the financial services industry 

which included obviously all of the banking institutions, but all 

of the other ones that were similar to banks and the credit 

unions and other institutions. 

 

After lots of deliberation and much advice from many different 

parts, he came down with a big report which I will just 

summarize by saying is it was a report that said we need to be 

very careful in allowing for the various different types of 

financial institutions to share assets throughout the whole 

system. 

 

What our Canadian bankers or Canadian financial institutions 

were interested in doing in those years was to become more 

competitive, more like their American, Japanese, British, but 

most specifically for us as Canadians, more American in their 

style of banking. But the advice given by Mr. MacKay and 

accepted by Mr. Martin and by the federal government was that 

there could be some changes made, but that the fundamental 

structure of the Canadian banking system should stay the way it 

was. And all Canadians, all people in Saskatchewan, we can all 

thank Mr. MacKay and Mr. Martin, I guess Mr. Chrétien, for 

sticking tight on that because we were able to weather the 

financial difficulties of 2008 and other subsequent shocks to the 

system much better than most of the countries of the world. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if it‟s confirmed in the committee when we 

look at this legislation that the changes that are being proposed 

here also move in that tempered, balanced, common sense, 

Saskatchewan way, then I think the minister could probably 

have support from us as we proceed with this legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we send The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2011 to committee so that we can ask some 

more specific questions. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 14, The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 35 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 35 — The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée 

législative et le Conseil exécutif be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Pleased to enter in as it relates to debate for Bill No. 35, The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 

2011. And this Bill is a consequence of fixed election date 

legislation, a date that was chosen by the Sask Party 

government, and I guess the occurrence or the potential for it to 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

occur at the same time as a federal election in 2015. So this is a 

direct consequence to then move the date to, potentially, to 

spring of 2016. I believe the first, it was the first Monday in 

April of 2016 would be when our election in Saskatchewan 

would be held, the next general election in Saskatchewan would 

be held if the Prime Minister and the federal government 

choose to proceed with an election in 2015. 

 

Now I don‟t know whether or not the Premier has had 

conversations with the Prime Minister on this file or not and if 

he has some understanding of whether there‟s any likelihood of 

the federal government moving their election date or not. But 

certainly this Bill is a consequence of that, unintended 

consequence if you will, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the two dates 

coinciding, certainly which would raise some problems for 

voters. And certainly a fix or a resolve is required. 

 

When we are looking at a piece of legislation, however, that 

relates to elections in this province and our electoral process, 

certainly we want to be cautious as we review any changes 

made by this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the 

record of that government as it relates to democratic functions 

within Saskatchewan has been poor, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

whether it‟s the interference with the independent chief 

electoral hiring process, Mr. Speaker, where this government 

stalemated a process and in fact reduced the, likely, the 

effectiveness, efficiency of that office and the important 

function it fulfills to Saskatchewan people, where it politically 

intervened in what‟s supposed to be an independent process to 

uphold democratic process in Saskatchewan. That‟s certainly 

something that‟s been disappointing by this government, 

something we should keep in mind when now this 

government‟s making changes to electoral process. 

 

I suspect we should also keep in mind the fact that this is the 

same government that put forward voter ID [identification] 

provisions and requirements that were intended to serve one 

purpose, and sadly that was to reduce the participation of young 

people in this province, First Nations and Métis people in this 

province, like the seniors in this province, in the electoral 

democratic process that we should uphold with great pride, Mr. 

Speaker. I know certainly at that point in time, disappointed 

with the anti-democratic approach by this government, I know 

we were certainly solidly on the record and I was solidly on the 

record with great concern around that sort of activity that‟s 

intended to thwart the democratic process and not enhance it. 

 

And it‟s again to this point that we‟re disappointed by this 

government on so many fronts that when they choose to bring 

forward legislation — and I speak particularly to the voter ID 

provisions, certainly to the intervention in the chief electoral 

process — we have a government that chooses to thwart the 

involvement of all Saskatchewan people in that process instead 

of working to improve voter outcomes, improve the 

participation of young people, Mr. Speaker, who frankly I think 

have a lot to offer to that process, to improve the involvement 

and engagement of First Nations and Métis people in this 

province which, Mr. Speaker, I‟d argue have a lot at stake and 

have a lot to offer to that process. And certainly when we look 

at seniors, many seniors that were disenfranchised by this 

government and their actions, their deliberate actions, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m disappointed by this government on that front. 

 

And I hear some heckling from ministers opposite on this front, 

but many of those seniors, Mr. Speaker, have in fact fought, Mr. 

Speaker, and served their country and their nation to uphold 

democratic practice and function around the world, Mr. 

Speaker, my grandfather being one of them, and a veteran 

who‟s provided service to in fact enshrine and promote 

democratic practice. It‟s disappointing to see a government be 

so deliberate in their approach to in fact reduce that democratic 

function here and process here in Saskatchewan, a place that 

has often been a leader in the world, a leader as it relates to 

these sorts of jurisdiction. 

 

You know, and it‟s interesting. We‟re getting some heckling 

from members opposite, and we know, we likely suspect, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that that has a lot to do with the stress of the 

cabinet shuffle that‟s coming up, Mr. Speaker, in this 

Assembly. And there‟s a lot of members opposite that are 

thinking am I in, am I out, Mr. Speaker. Is my paycheque going 

to be bigger or is it going to be smaller? Am I going to be 

demoted and embarrassed or am I going to be provided new 

opportunities, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So this is an interesting piece that we see from members 

opposite. And you know, I look and I suspect, you know, and I 

see members, I would suspect certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that Moose Jaw will have a seat at the cabinet. I would hope 

and expect that the fine city of Moose Jaw would be represented 

at that cabinet table. I would fully expect that Prince Albert will 

have a role and a place at that cabinet table, Mr. Speaker. I 

know new members from Regina. There‟s all sorts of 

individuals who would likely be placed into cabinet. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. The 

member for Rosemont, I believe, is supposed to be speaking to 

Bill 35 which is The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act. I‟m not entirely sure he was on point, 

Mr. Speaker, which as he well knows as a veteran of the House 

is one of the prerequisites of speaking to a Bill, that you 

actually speak to a Bill. I know he‟s very concerned about the 

leadership campaign though, Mr. Speaker, of which he‟s 

currently engaged and I believe this may have . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I realize that it‟s getting a bit later in 

the afternoon, members. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I realize it‟s 

getting a bit later in the afternoon and there is a bit of leeway in 

member statements on both sides of the House. I would remind 

all members of the place where we have the privilege of 

working in and that we respect the long-standing traditions of 

the House. I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

it‟s my pleasure to continue in debate of Bill No. 35, The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 

2011. 

 

Executive Council amendment Act, 2011. So we‟re talking 

about Executive Council on this front, but also about changes to 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

the electoral process, Mr. Speaker. And as we‟re looking at the 

changes brought forward by this government, we certainly have 

to be cautious as we review them, Mr. Speaker. Because as I‟ve 

said, when this government has intervened with legislation in 

the past as it relates to our democratic process, the results have 

been disappointing and not in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. And we have too many examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

on that front, whether it was the interference in the independent 

Chief Electoral Officer‟s hiring, Mr. Speaker, or whether it was 

putting voting rules in that prevented so many from — 

particularly young people, First Nations and Métis people, and 

seniors, Mr. Speaker — from participating in the last election, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these are the kind of actions of a government that are very 

deliberate in their electoral goals, but less interested in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people and a Saskatchewan that 

functions best when all people are involved in that process — 

young people, First Nations and Métis, seniors, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And certainly that‟s where we think where 

Saskatchewan should be focusing their energies. How do we 

have broader engagement, more engagement of all 

Saskatchewan people? So we are a tad suspicious of this 

government when they bring forward electoral change or 

changes to the democratic process. 

 

We see recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, further changes to that in 

fact, through the redistribution process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Without any sort of a rationale, this government‟s forging ahead 

— breaking with basically the rest of Canada, the vast majority 

of Canada, certainly Western Canada — in not counting, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, if you can imagine, young people in that 

redistribution process, not counting young people in that 

redistribution process. 

 

So when we go to look at Bill No. 35, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

when voters go to the polls next election, that will be 

determined by this legislation and in correspondence with the 

federal government as to when the date of that legislation is. 

What the sad reality is is that we‟re going to be dealing with 

constituencies that this government is forging ahead in a 

process that is going to discount the voice and importance of 

young people, and that it could be said by many to be nothing 

more than a gerrymandering process of the electoral boundaries, 

Mr. Speaker. So we have concerns on that front. 

 

On another front, Mr. Speaker, when we go to that next 

election, not certain of what that date will be, again we need to 

be focusing our efforts to reverse the damaging changes to 

eliminate so many from voting and from exercising their 

franchise, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that‟s something that‟s 

important to this province, something that‟s important to 

Saskatchewan New Democrats, something we‟re going to be 

pushing for — that we‟re at our best when all Saskatchewan 

people are engaged. We‟re at our best when we can encourage a 

broader engagement of First Nations and Métis people in that 

electoral process who have specific needs, or of young people, 

Mr. Speaker, or of seniors. So many different gains and 

improvements we should be making, and instead we see a 

government that forges ahead with reckless legislation or 

deliberate legislation that doesn‟t serve the democratic interests 

of Saskatchewan people and doesn‟t serve the interests of 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I guess the other aspect that we‟re going to be dealing with 

because of this government is they‟re forging ahead to create 

three new constituencies. They want to fund three new MLA 

positions. And when you add up the cost of these offices and 

the staff and the communications allowances and all the 

different costs that go with that, this comes at a cost of over 

$700,000, I understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this 

government is pushing ahead with an increase in the number of 

MLAs or politicians, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that they‟re reducing — if you can imagine — services 

and programs in our classrooms, through our health services, 

and for Saskatchewan people across this province. 

 

So they‟re saying to Saskatchewan people, well brace 

yourselves for cuts to long-standing and important programs 

and services; but oh, by the way, we‟re going to push forward 

our electoral best interests by creating new seats for MLAs at a 

significant cost to Saskatchewan people — something that‟s a 

significant concern and again putting this back into the, I guess, 

anti-democratic context that we can view this government when 

we look at electoral changes in the past of this government. 

 

So we‟re hopeful that the, you know, that this government can 

reverse some of those, that direction that they‟ve taken. And 

certainly we hope that the Premier is able to have some 

conversation with the Prime Minister to establish when this 

federal election and when the provincial election are going to 

occur. Certainly there‟s more pressing matters, Mr. Speaker, for 

this Premier to be advancing with the Prime Minister, examples 

that were raised here today in the Assembly as it relates to the 

simply unacceptable and unfair funding of First Nations 

education in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something that 

comes with a direct consequence to our economy, to our social 

well-being, and to the individual lives of so many in this 

province. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Given the opportunity here today in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, the government was provided the chance to work 

together across the aisle to provide one voice on this most 

important issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that government 

chose to reject that opportunity even though, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I might say that in the federal House of Commons, 

federal House of Commons, all parties and all members were 

able to support a motion and work unanimously towards goals 

that are so important to all Canadians and, might I say, 

incredibly important to Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So again we‟re continuing to get heckled by members opposite 

who are certainly stressed and concerned about the cabinet 

shuffle that‟s coming up. They‟re thinking, am I in; am I out; 

you know, all those kinds of stresses that members opposite 

have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we are going to stay focused on the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people. We‟ll continue to analyze Bill No. 35, 

Mr. Speaker, what seems to be a pretty straightforward change 

in consequence of the Act put forward by the government. But 

we certainly view that also through the lens of so many 

decisions and actions of this government that have not been in 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people, that haven‟t been in 

the best interests of our democratic process, and we expect 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

better on all those fronts. Certainly we‟ll be raising questions 

and doing consultation with respect to this piece of legislation 

and many others, Mr. Speaker, but at this point in time with 

respect to Bill No. 35, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 2011, I move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 35, The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m happy to rise today 

to speak to Bill 36, the last Bill that‟s been introduced in this 

somewhat uninteresting legislative agenda, but at any rate, this 

Bill, this one is actually quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m 

happy to have a chance to make my comments to it today. 

 

The Act is called the Act to amend The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, and given the weight of the Bill, on paper it‟s 

only one page, but I think there‟s volumes to speak about this 

particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, and certainly me and my 

colleagues are going to do our best to raise those issues both 

here in the House and of course with the public. 

 

So the first thing I want to talk to is the comments of the 

minister when he introduced the Bill back in December last 

year . . . or no, it was March 5th when it was finally introduced 

here. And I just want to find the minister‟s comments . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well I think they were good. Okay, 

well not being able to find them, the first section . . . All right. 

Thank you to my colleague. The first thing he raised was the 

view of the government that the process must reflect the 

increase in population since the boundaries were last drawn. It‟s 

certainly agreed that we have had a population increase since 

the last census. And he‟s confident that it should happen before 

the commission is struck in order that the commission can do its 

work properly. So he announced that it was time to come to 

recognize a population change and the need for increased 

representation by increasing the number of constituencies in the 

province from 58 to 61. 

 

It seems to be an arbitrary number, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not really 

clear why the need is now. Certainly this province has had more 

MLAs in the past, and the government saw fit that it was time 

to reduce them. And the increased population is really kind of a 

relative question, Mr. Speaker. Indeed editorial comments from 

The StarPhoenix last week indicated that there‟s all kinds of 

markers that we could talk about when it comes to the proper, 

what is proper in terms of the number of people in each riding. 

Every jurisdiction‟s different. Every province is different, and 

the needs of each province are different. So there‟s no magic 

way or mathematical way perhaps to find the exact right 

number for the number of constituencies that any legislature 

needs. 

 

But what was pointed out by the editorial in The StarPhoenix on 

Friday was that Saskatchewan has an average 17,807 voters per 

riding. So let‟s say 17,000 voters per riding. Now let‟s look at 

Manitoba. How many people live in each riding in Manitoba? 

Twenty-one thousand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that‟s 4,000 

people more in their riding. And then if you go to Alberta, our 

neighbour to the west, we have 44,000 voters per riding in 

Alberta. 

 

And so again, where‟s the right number here? Where‟s the right 

math? It‟s not clear where the minister is pulling these numbers 

from in order to determine that we need three more MLAs in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Let‟s carry on. Let‟s look at British Columbia. In British 

Columbia there‟s 52,000 members per riding in the province of 

British Columbia. So 52,000 compared to 17,000. And we need 

more MLAs? Let‟s look at Ontario while we‟re at it. Ontario 

has 120,000 voters per riding on average compared to 

Saskatchewan‟s 18,000. So they have 10 times more voters per 

riding. And yet this minister sees fit to announce that we need 

more seats because our population‟s going up. 

 

I‟m not sure where he‟s getting that calculation from and why 

he thinks it‟s important, how that fits into the rest of Canada. 

And I think we would certainly want to see something from this 

minister on why, why we need to have a considerable public 

expenditure when indeed there appears to be no need when we 

look at Alberta, Manitoba, British Columbia, and Ontario. So 

four other provinces have significantly higher averages per 

riding. And yet this minister, in times of prosperity, austerity 

. . . I guess this would be the austerity, prosperity one where he 

thinks that we need to increase the number of MLAs. 

 

Another point that was pointed out by the editorial, and that I‟m 

in absolute agreement with, is the cost. So we are told that the 

average cost of an MLA is about $225,000 per year. So that‟s 

expensive. You add three; that‟s a quarter of a million dollars. 

And we‟re being told there‟s budget cuts coming, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We‟re being told that the civil service is way too big. 

How‟s that going to fly with the public when we know that 

important civil service jobs . . . And I come from the civil 

service. I spent seventeen and a half years with the federal 

public service. And every time a cut went, it meant people were 

going without and services were being lost. Somehow the idea 

that you can just banish people from the public service and the 

work will continue simply doesn‟t work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The cuts in public service hurt. They hurt the people that lose 

the jobs certainly, hard-working civil servants who are in public 

service just like everyone here is. And it also hurts the people 

that are affected by the cuts, and those are the people who 

receive the services. It‟s difficult. Every time a cut is made in 

public service, it affects the workplace. It affects the morale of 

the people working there. I‟ve been through a number of cuts 

and freezes and downsizing in the public service. It‟s a really 

difficult time for employees. Morale goes down. It affects 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

production, and there‟s a lot of fear going around the 

workplace. And finally with cuts like that, often there‟s 

suspensions in management. Because there‟s people that are 

being let go, management people are being appointed as acting 

management. And it really destroys the ability of the public 

service to work effectively. 

 

So cuts in public service and adding three MLAs, with all the 

attendant costs that go with it, just is not making sense to me. 

It‟s like speaking out of both sides of the mouth. I don‟t 

understand how this is going to happen and why it‟s necessary. 

 

And I guess the other thing, Mr. Speaker, that has occurred to 

us, and other of my colleagues have spoken to this, is if this was 

such a pressing need — and certainly the minister knew about 

the increase in population well before the writ was dropped — 

why wasn‟t this issue raised with the people of Saskatchewan at 

the time of the election? Why wasn‟t this part of the Sask 

Party‟s campaign or platform? Because this is a pretty 

significant change to the shape of the government, and it‟s a 

cost that is going to affect the taxpayers — $750,000 a year — 

and yet it didn‟t make it into the platform. So either there‟s no 

organization on the part of the platform people, or the minister 

decided it wasn‟t important enough to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan about. 

 

However, it was introduced shortly after the election in 

December. So it‟s really unfortunate that the minister and the 

Sask Party decided not to talk to the people of Saskatchewan 

about this at the time of the election. I think the public and 

anybody who is studying this is going to have to draw their own 

conclusions about why that was done. 

 

The minister had pointed out the difficulties of travel for MLAs, 

and I think again, one of the journalists pointed out today that 

it‟s kind of, he said, a silly question. And it‟s, when‟s the last 

time you‟ve had to travel to your MLA‟s office to deal with an 

issue? And indeed I think if any of the MLAs here present look 

at their records and what their constituency assistants are 

dealing with, I would imagine, and I know it‟s certainly my 

case — and my office is easy to get to — my constituents pick 

up the phone or they email me or they fax me or they Twitter 

me or they go on Facebook. There‟s all kinds of ways for 

constituents to be in good contact with their MLAs and it 

doesn‟t require travelling to the MLA‟s office. And it certainly 

is very easy in downtown Saskatoon for constituents to come to 

my office. Even when it‟s easy they don‟t come; they phone. 

 

And that‟s the point of the article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 

people have ways to connect these days that don‟t require 

travelling long distances. And I appreciate the fact that rural 

MLAs have to travel. That‟s important. And there‟s 

communities that are far spread out and that‟s important too. 

 

And the problem being with that, Mr. Speaker, is even based on 

the math again, we‟ve heard news from the Premier, or word 

from the Premier, that it might actually be only one additional 

rural constituency and it may be two urban constituencies. We 

don‟t even know what the plan is yet because the minister . . . 

Or we‟ve heard that‟s what the Premier‟s thinking but there‟s 

no word from the members opposite as to how these three seats 

are going to be configured. But certainly if there‟s two in the 

urban ridings and one in the rural ridings, then it wouldn‟t make 

any sense at all to have . . . or it wouldn‟t make any difference 

to rural MLAs if there was only one additional rural riding. And 

certainly based on population, if that‟s the concern as the 

minister has stated, there will likely be rural . . . urban ridings, 

and it won‟t help with the concerns that the minister‟s raising 

about distances. Rural ridings will likely get bigger, if we‟re 

looking at population as the determination for the commission 

when they actually are formed. 

 

So there are some inconsistencies here that just don‟t seem to 

have been clearly thought out, and we‟re certainly looking for 

some clear answers from the other side of the Assembly for 

why this what appears to be illogical decision, unannounced 

decision, and no consultation type of decision before . . . and 

actually binding the Boundary Commission as well in terms of 

telling them that there‟s three new ridings when they really 

aren‟t necessary. 

 

One of the things that the journalist said is — this is Murray 

Mandryk — said, “Even in the inconceivable event that you 

would need access to your local MLA — is there any reason to 

think they are much busier now than they used to be . . .” 

 

He goes on to say, “Well, if they are busier, it‟s not likely 

busier working at government business.” And he points out that 

government sits much less than it used to, and so arguably 

there‟s less committee work. And I think certainly from the 

paltry legislative agenda that‟s been put forward this particular 

session, there isn‟t a lot of legislative work going on either. So 

it‟s curious to . . . Mr. Mandryk and I would agree. Why is this 

even necessary if the number of days are less, the legislative . . . 

There‟s Fridays off. And we understand that some MLAs can 

even conduct another career while being an MLA. So again 

what is the concern in terms of the amount of committee work 

that‟s . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. I know my hearing 

isn‟t quite what it used to be, but I am having difficulty hearing 

the member, and I would ask all members‟ co-operation in 

allowing the member to make her comments. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. I was having trouble hearing 

myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The addition of the three constituencies is of concern, but 

nowhere is it as of much concern to me as the additional part of 

this Bill. And that‟s the second piece of this one-pager, where in 

section 6 of The Constituency Boundaries Act they are 

proposing to amend . . . repeal it, sorry. Subsection 13(2) is 

going to be repealed. And there‟s a new formula. The following 

is substituted: “The constituency population quotient is to be 

calculated in accordance with the following formula.” CPQ 

equals TP minus NP [northern population] over 59. CPQ is the 

total constituency population quotient. TP is the total population 

and then the northern population. So that‟s of concern because 

again it‟s creating these additional three seats where it‟s 

probably not necessary. 

 

[16:30] 

 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

But the clause I really did want to speak to is clause 2(k). And 

that says: 

 

Clause 2(k) is amended by adding “that is 18 years of age 

or older” after “total population of Saskatchewan”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a 16-year-old son and an 18-year-old son, 

and my 18-year-old voted for the first time this year. He was 

quite excited about being involved in the electoral process and 

it really meant something to him to be able to get up and cast a 

ballot — I guess maybe more special because he cast it for his 

mom. But it was an important day for him. I know it was an 

important day for me to see my children becoming adults and 

engaging in the democratic process. That‟s something when I 

grew up that was important in our household, and it‟s a message 

I think that I‟ve carried with me my whole life — that the right 

to vote is one of the most important things that we‟ll ever do in 

terms of the freedom of our country and the way our democratic 

society has evolved. 

 

Now in The StarPhoenix, one of the things they pointed out 

about this provision in the Bill to amend the population 

calculation by deleting children, by not allowing anybody under 

18 years of age who can‟t vote, to count, it really raises a lot of 

serious, serious questions about what this government‟s 

motivation is and why they felt it necessary to introduce this 

particular amendment at this time, without discussing it with the 

people of Saskatchewan during the election period and letting 

them know what their motives were. And we don‟t know what 

the motives are. We do have what the minister had to say about 

it, and he‟s saying, “It is a fundamental principle in our 

democracy that each vote should be of roughly the same value 

throughout the province.” So if children are excluded, it would 

mean they don‟t have value, is the way you can interpret that. 

 

We know they can‟t vote, but if you look at what the editorial 

from The StarPhoenix says . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Of 

course we know they can‟t vote, Mr. Speaker. That‟s obvious. 

You have to be 18 years old to vote. But what The StarPhoenix 

said, it says “Premier Brad Wall‟s plan to base future ridings on 

the number of voters rather than total population also warrants 

some serious thought. With . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

StarPhoenix says: 

 

Premier Brad Wall‟s plan to base future ridings on 

number of voters rather than total population also 

warrants some serious thought. With four years to go to 

the next election, it makes little sense to count only those 

who already are 18 when those who are close to age 14 

will be eligible to vote when the writ is dropped. 

 

So he is excluding at least four years of voters in the next 

election by not counting them now. And there‟s no rationale 

given for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There‟s no indication why 

he is saying that it‟s only 18 years of age or older. At a very 

minimum, if that is the logic he‟s using, it should be 14 years of 

age. And then we have to adjust that every time there‟s a new 

election. So it just doesn‟t seem to be well thought out. 

 

And my son came home from school, my 16-year-old, a while 

back and he was talking, the kids at school were talking about 

the fact that they‟re losing a week of holidays next year in 

February if the new school education amendment Act goes 

through. And what he told me is he said, mom, Brad Wall hates 

kids. Now, you know, I think that‟s pretty harsh . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You can‟t mention the member‟s name. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Did I say a name? I‟m sorry, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I‟m just learning all the rules here so my colleagues 

are helping me out here. I apologize for that. The Premier, I 

guess, is what it should have . . . I have to paraphrase and I 

guess I can‟t direct quote in that context. 

 

The minister went on to say when he was discussing the reasons 

for introducing this particular amendment to The Elections Act, 

or constituency boundaries amendment Act, he said, in 

Saskatchewan: 

 

While the two northern constituencies have special rules 

for obvious reasons, in Saskatchewan we have one of the 

lowest permitted size variances of plus or minus 5 per 

cent between constituencies. It is our view that to ensure 

votes of equal value . . . 

 

Now he‟s using the word equal, and the minister knows about 

equality and what equal means and that rights are often . . . 

Equality means different things to different people. For 

populations where there are a large number of children, and as 

my other colleagues have pointed out, quite often very high 

proportional ratios of Aboriginal children, that this is not 

equality, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the minister knows that. 

That this, in fact, is excluding people from being counted when 

it talks about the life of that particular constituency. And it just 

seems really disappointing that this government thinks it‟s 

appropriate to exclude children from that quotient. 

 

Children are part of the community. And it leads me to think, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if somebody under 18 showed up at 

my office, I‟m not sure whether, you know, do I represent them 

any more or not? Because I‟m being told they don‟t count when 

it comes to establishing the size of the constituency. So do they 

count when they show up here in the legislature? Do they count 

when government is making policy about children? We are 

representative of the people and if my children aren‟t those 

people, then there‟s something wrong with this message. And I 

really hope that we continue to see at least the fifth estate taking 

account of this and taking note that this is something that just 

doesn‟t make sense. It was not talked about in the election at 

all. It didn‟t show up in any of the platform documents. It seems 

to be sneaking it in at number 36 in the legislative agenda, you 

know. At least it‟s something that we can pay a lot of attention 

to in the agenda, but other than that . . . 

 

The minister went on to say that, “By using the most recent 

census data to determine who is of voting age . . . [And again 

the concern there is, is that‟s excluding some of our most 

precious people, children under 18] rather than using the voters 

list, we‟re using the best available data.” And he went to say 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

that “The Bill would clarify that if a commission is already 

established at the time the Bill comes into force.” 

 

Again the timing I think is important, but it shows that this is 

something that‟s quite likely muddying the waters in terms of 

how the new Boundaries Commission‟s going to approach its 

work. And certainly with the new census data coming in and 

that work having to begin soon, the deadlines are established in 

the legislation. So we know that it‟s coming. And for the 

minister to introduce this kind of change at this point in time 

while they‟re struggling with the census data, I can see from his 

perspective why it would be a useful time to do it, but to really 

take the steps he‟s done to exclude children and voters, 

non-voters or at least non-voters under 18. He‟s willing to allow 

voters, non-voters, be counted in the population counts if 

they‟re over 18, but children aren‟t counted. And that‟s 

something that‟s really of concern. 

 

Indeed the fifth estate, Mr. Mandryk, said today that . . . He‟s 

arguing, you find it to be . . . This is a quote: 

 

You find it to be an exceptionally convoluted argument 

for the premier to first claim that more seats are needed 

because rural ridings are becoming physically unwieldy, 

and then make rural ridings even larger by changing the 

format so children under 18 are removed from the 

formula that determines the constituency boundaries? 

True, but eliminating those under 18 years from the 

formula might be advantageous to preserving those Sask. 

Party rural ridings (with fewer children) at the expense of 

the more-inclined-to-vote-NDP urban seats (with more 

children). Yes, Mr. or Mrs. Average voter, a government 

would set aside such democratic principles and even a lot 

of its own rhetoric about the children being our future if it 

meant gaining an upper hand in the electoral process. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

What‟s that? You say the need for MLAs to be closer to 

their constituents is a particularly ridiculous argument 

because your MLA lives in Regina anyway? Well, I can‟t 

argue with you there. 

 

So it says, “You can‟t also figure out why they are adding five 

per cent more Saskatchewan MLAs at the time of „austerity‟ 

. . .” And they mentioned that earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

the cost associated with this Bill, we‟re looking at 

three-quarters of a million dollars per year to have these three 

additional members sitting in this Assembly. 

 

It‟s really hard to understand why this is something that‟s 

important to the government at this time. The government‟s 

already set targets to reduce the civil service by 16 per cent in 

four years through attrition. And again even attrition in that 

kind of context is really difficult on people that are left behind 

in the public service. I‟ve lived through it and that sort of 

downsizing and carving out . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Of 

course they‟re retiring. That‟s what attrition means. But what it 

means is the work doesn‟t retire. 

 

And that‟s the issue, Mr. Speaker. Too often in management, 

it‟s easy to just allow a position to remain unfilled when 

someone retires or leaves the unit. And I can tell you from 

experience, that creates incredible stresses on people in the 

public service and it really sometimes poisons the atmosphere. 

It often leads to acting appointments. And anybody who has 

worked in the public service knows these things, and they know 

how difficult these kinds of cost-cutting measures or leaning 

measures has an impact on people in the public service. 

 

Public service is an important part of the function of a 

democratic government. It‟s an important part of a healthy 

society. And when we have cuts, this kind of austerity, it‟s 

really unfortunate that public servants are the ones who suffer 

— and the taxpayers and the people. 

 

I think, having been in government for seventeen and a half 

years, I certainly have enough opinions about how public 

service could be better managed. I never moved into the 

management sphere; I was happy with my career as a public 

service lawyer, so I didn‟t really need to, I didn‟t have any 

occasion to make those improvements when I was in the public 

service but certainly saw the struggles that my management 

went through when those kinds of austerity measures were 

imposed. I lived through a freeze in the early ‟90s when the 

federal government froze, virtually froze the public service and 

there were a lot of negative impacts on the employees and on 

the services that were provided. 

 

So those kinds of austerity measures, particularly in the light of 

the message that we‟re hearing that this is the Saskatchewan 

advantage and this is boom times and everything‟s great and 

we‟re getting all these announcements about, you know, 

research and handing out all kinds of grant monies and yet . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the . . . Leave is granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — To you and through you to all the members 

of the Legislative Assembly, I‟d like to introduce Mr. Ernie 

Gaschler, executive director of the Insurance Brokers‟ 

Association of Saskatchewan. They are here at the legislature, 

at the building today to host a reception and dinner for members 

of the Assembly. We look forward to meeting with Mr. 

Gaschler after the session. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Leave is granted. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. I‟d like to join with the 

member from Douglas Park in welcoming Ernie Gaschler to the 

Legislative Assembly. Certainly the IBAS [Insurance Brokers‟ 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

Association of Saskatchewan] lobby, on an annual basis, is one 

of the more informative and well conducted public policy 

outreach endeavours in the province. And certainly one of the 

kickers for the event, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the draw that goes 

for the purple blankets. I had the privilege to have been so lucky 

to win in the draw. And I know that Carmichael Outreach was 

very appreciative of receiving those blankets, and I know that 

others through the years welcome that. 

 

But first and foremost, the work that IBAS does in representing 

insurance brokers throughout the province and ensuring that 

their public policy perspective is well articulated and well 

presented to the decision makers in this legislature is something 

that‟s been well-known for many years. And, Mr. Gaschler, we 

thank you and your folks with IBAS for that good work. 

 

So on behalf of the Official Opposition, we‟d join with the 

member from Regina Douglas Park in welcoming Ernie 

Gaschler and representatives from IBAS to the Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. One of the 

things I was saying earlier was my concern, the concern that my 

16-year-old son had about the loss of a week of holidays. And I 

think this kind of message is also going to resonate with 

students, those under 18. And we‟re already hearing a number 

of concerns from them about why don‟t I count? Why aren‟t I 

part of the electoral process? I am part of the community. I am 

part of the soccer team. I‟m part of the school. And yet when I 

have a concern about what‟s happening to me, there‟s no 

representation. There‟s no one MLA that‟s . . . I‟m not counted 

in the population count. 

 

And I think that‟s a really scary message to send to young 

people, particularly when they aren‟t all that engaged in the 

electoral process to begin with. I know as a teenager, politics 

wasn‟t one of the really high things on my mind when I was a 

teenager, but if I had heard this I would have, I know I 

would‟ve felt left out and been somewhat disappointed and 

perhaps even a little bit angry. I think that‟s what we‟re hearing 

from kids now, and my son‟s age group are going to feel that 

they‟re even more further removed from the electoral process. 

And again, particularly the ones that are 14, because they will 

be voting in that election. And I think that point is well-taken by 

The StarPhoenix editorial board. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So those are the kinds of things that I fear the government 

hasn‟t thought through very clearly. And if there is an agenda 

here for an advantage, then that‟s the only conclusion that we 

might be able to come to. Because if what the pundits are 

saying is that really it‟s just helping advance rural seats for the 

sake of demographics, then there‟s a concern there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think that the concerns about the size of the rural ridings is 

a valid one. I‟m not going to say that‟s not a concern. I know; I 

grew up in the country. I know how far distances are. And I do 

a lot of travelling around the province with some of the cultural 

work that I do. And I‟ve been in pretty much every corner in the 

last few years, from up to Lloydminster down to Stoughton and 

Kenosee. And from those two corners, I‟ve been over to Swift 

Current and up to Tuffnell, Saskatchewan, and all kinds of 

places. I know the distances that are involved in travel in rural 

Saskatchewan. But I think, even so, the number of people . . . 

and there‟s a quote here from some article that population is the 

most important thing about democracy. And if it isn‟t as equal 

as we can possibly make it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don‟t know 

why and what would motivate this government. 

 

So I think we need to look to the pundits and the analysts, and 

we need to look to what the political economists are saying and 

say, what is really happening here? What is the actual motive 

for this Bill? Is it to protect voters because we want to make 

sure voters are equally represented? Why would we exclude 

children and young people under the age of 18, particularly 

when they‟re going to be voting in the next election? Why 

would we exclude them from that process of being counted? 

 

And I guess ultimately, Mr. Speaker, what is the goal of this 

government? I mean, we have austerity warnings coming in the 

budget next week. We have a cut, 16 per cent in the civil 

service over the next four years, when we are arguably at the 

most prosperous time in our province‟s history, when there‟s 

people who have needs, and those programs are being cut. And 

yet we think it‟s important to add three more MLAs? 

 

We know what we do. I‟m starting to figure out what we do. 

I‟m new to this, but I‟m starting to figure out how this place 

works. And the work we do is important. But I don‟t think 

adding three more is critical to what we‟re doing right now. It 

certainly won‟t make a difference. It may tone . . . The volume 

might go up a little bit. That might be the only thing that will 

happen if we add three more MLAs to the mix at this point. 

 

If we‟re going to be austere, let‟s be austere here first. Let‟s 

show leadership in this House and in this Assembly. And if 

austerity is needed, there are ways to find austerity right here. I 

mean, I look at the CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association] dinner last night, wonderful event. That cost a lot 

of money, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m seeing these things throughout 

this building as I‟m starting to get used to what it means to be 

an MLA. And if there‟s austerity needed, maybe this House 

could be the model for that, rather than adding three new MLAs 

at the tune of $750,000 a year — a quarter of a million dollars a 

year. So we‟re looking at $3 million per term for adding these 

three MLAs when we‟re cutting the civil service. 

 

So on two sides, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m finding that this Bill 

makes no sense. It was not announced to the public during the 

campaign, so I think there are some serious questions that 

needed to be answered about that. And the pundits are looking 

at that now. It‟s cutting out children under the age of 18 who, 

you know, some of whom will be voting in the next election, 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

and it‟s adding a considerable cost at a time of austerity in 

terms of how this government is treating the budget next week. 

And I just don‟t see the use or the merit in having this Bill at 

this point in time. 

 

So I know that some other of my colleagues are looking 

forward to having an opportunity to comment on this Bill. I 

think the public certainly needs time to absorb the impact of 

this. And my son and his friends are going to have to think 

about it seriously too, and I expect that we‟ll be hearing from 

some of the younger people as the next few weeks go through. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn the debate 

on this particular Bill, and thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 15 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 15 — The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s a pleasure to rise and participate in the debate on The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 

2011. Certainly it‟s one that we look on with great interest. If 

you‟re going to be doing any building in the province, UBAS 

[The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Act] as it‟s 

colloquially known throughout the building sector, is something 

that a lot of folks have a lot of opinions on. 

 

But as relates to this particular amendment, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this would seem to be a fairly helpful set of 

amendments. And we‟ll look for ways to expand the debate on 

it, expand the discussion on it in committee, I know will be a 

particular focus for us. 

 

But in terms of the preliminary work that we‟ve done to date, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, reaching out to affected parties in the 

sector, we for example heard back from the good folks at 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

stating that they were indicating support for the proposed 

changes. They welcomed the opportunity to comment again just 

as they had welcomed the opportunity to be consulted on this 

legislation before it went forward. So again that was one 

particularly important bit of consultation that we‟d gained some 

assurance on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Certainly the minister quoted SARM as being consulted and 

supportive when this legislation was introduced and given 

second reading, a second reading speech on December 13th. So 

in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems to be fairly 

straightforward. 

 

One of the things that UBAS currently does is adopt the 

National Building Code of Canada as the minimum standard for 

construction, renovations, additions, and change in use of 

occupancy of buildings. Again referencing the second reading 

speech of the minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, quoting further 

from that speech: 

 

Although the provincial government adopts the National 

Building Code for the province, municipalities are 

responsible for enforcing the code within their 

jurisdiction, that is, they are provided autonomy with 

respect to whether they would like to adopt more stringent 

standards as well as autonomy to decide on how these 

standards will be enforced. 

 

So again sort of setting the envelope and then there being 

autonomy and self-direction within that for municipalities, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The minister further stated that: 

 

Currently the UBAS Act exempts farm buildings, 

including houses, from being required to meet these 

building standards. At the time this legislation was 

created it was thought that applying the National Building 

Code to farm buildings would be an added burden to the 

farming community. Today that thinking has changed. 

The farming community now believes that they‟re being 

treated differently because their health and safety isn‟t 

being addressed through application of the National 

Building Code. 

 

The important quote here, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

My ministry has heard that many in the farming 

community would like to ensure that their homes and 

other buildings are built or renovated to the same standard 

as the non-farming community. 

 

And again this is the kind of consultation that quite frankly 

should take place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you‟re going to . . . 

And I think is pointed out or is intimated in the Minister‟s 

remarks, this is the kind of consultation that had gone 

previously in terms of whether or not UBAS would be too much 

of an imposition for those in the farming community and the 

National Building Code. And again that the government has 

now determined that that is no longer the case and that there‟s 

room to move and to bring everyone to a level playing field. In 

terms of this regulatory change, we think that‟s positive and 

we‟re glad to see the progress. 

 

As well, as was referenced by the Minister again, there are 

provisions in the UBAS Act that do allow rural municipalities 

to apply building standards to farm buildings: 

 

The rural municipality must pass a resolution and request a 

regulation change. Government must then consider this 

request and amend the regulations. This regulation change 

will then apply building standards to farm buildings in part 

or all of their respective municipalities. However [and this 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

is a very important however, I might add parenthetically, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker] this provision only applies to rural 

municipalities. Cities, towns . . . and resort villages are 

currently unable to apply any building standards to farm 

buildings that might be located within their jurisdiction. 

 

Again pointing out the sort of differential on the legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in the way that this is being transitioned in. So 

I guess one other thing that is provided in the legislation is the 

removing of 

 

. . . the need for government to amend the regulations 

every time a rural municipality wants to apply building 

standards to farm buildings in their jurisdiction. It will also 

extend this autonomy to all municipalities. With these 

amendments a rural municipality, city, town, village, or 

resort village will simply pass a bylaw declaring that the 

building standards apply to farm buildings in all or in part 

of their jurisdiction. By removing the need for a 

government regulation, we speed up the process while 

reducing unnecessary administrative work across 

government. 

 

And again, that would seem to be fairly straightforward, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and we‟ll see how that plays out in fact. 

 

Again, referring to the Minister‟s second reading speech: “. . . 

although this proposed amendment reduces the administrative 

burden, it is not a deregulation of building standards.” Again 

you know, you try to make the regulatory regime smart and 

responsive and easily navigated for people as they set out to 

work with the regulations, but that balance is important, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of ease of access and ease of navigation of the 

regulations on the one hand, but not providing something that is 

unduly complicated or that‟s red tape for the sake of red tape. 

But on the other hand, you‟ve got to make sure that regulation 

is there to provide assurance on the quality, to provide 

insurance on any number of fronts, Mr. Speaker, that work 

being undertaken is work that is as it should be and that there 

aren‟t a number of consequences that would flow from that 

work not being as it should be under the regulations. 

 

I think it‟s also interesting that the minister in the second 

reading speech pointed out that: 

 

Since 1990, 20 rural municipalities have been granted 

regulation changes so that they can apply building 

standards to farmhouses . . . simply allowing 

municipalities to apply the National Building Code across 

the board through an amendment to the Act makes this 

process less onerous on the farming community, less 

onerous on government, and ensures consistent protection 

across the province. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, trying to strike that balance 

between adequate and appropriate regulatory oversight, but not 

forgetting that there‟s a point to having regulations in the first 

place, Mr. Speaker, and that is to ensure that quality that should 

be there. 

 

I guess one of the things that the minister said towards the end 

of his second reading speech, amending the UBAS Act so all 

municipalities can apply the National Building Code to 

farmhouses through their building bylaw serves several 

important purposes: honouring the autonomy extended to 

municipalities under municipal legislation, providing an 

adequate mechanism for applying building standards, and 

simplifying the regulatory burden on municipalities. Again 

we‟ll hopefully see this result borne out. 

 

The minister‟s betting that this will, the net effect of this 

legislation will provide:  

 

. . . safer, more secure homes, buildings, and communities 

that support this government‟s [and some fine rhetoric, 

rhetorical flourishes at the end of this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, communities that support this government‟s] 

commitment to safety and security and the growth of 

prosperity and opportunities in partnership with local 

government. 

 

I guess we were with them up until that point, Mr. Speaker. Any 

time they start talking fancy like that, we get a bit suspicious. 

And we start to check in our wallets, as it were, as to the actual 

effect of the legislation. 

 

But as much as that tempted us to get off the path with this 

particular piece of legislation, it would seem to be on balance, 

adequately consulted on, seems to be in the train of legislative 

developments that have gone previously. I‟ll have a bit more to 

say after we reconvene at 7 o‟clock, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but at 

the moment I would allow the Deputy Government House 

Leader to do his thing. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o‟clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 477 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 477 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 477 

  McCall ............................................................................................................................................................................... 477, 506 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 477 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 478 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 478 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 478 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 478 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 478 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 478 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 506 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 478 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 479 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 479 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 479 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Women in the Legislature 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................... 479 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 480 

 Heritage Month in Moose Jaw 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 480 

 5 Days for the Homeless 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 480 

 Saskatchewan Agriculture 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 481 

 2012 Saskatchewan Healthcare Excellence Awards 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 481 

 Saskatchewan Cross Country Skiing Association Annual Provincial Competition 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 481 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Possible Takeover of Grain Marketing Company 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 481 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 482 

 Human Rights Commission 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 483 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 483 

 Funding for First Nations Education 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 484 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 484 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 485 

 Federal Crime Legislation 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 485 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 485 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 485 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 486 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 486 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 New Emergency Youth Shelter 

  Draude ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 486 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 487 

 SaskPower to Fund University Research Chairs 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 487 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 488 

CONDOLENCES 

 Kenneth Roy MacLeod 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 488 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 489 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 489 



 

 Allan Stevens 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 490 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 491 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 491 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 491 

 Linton Alexander MacDonald 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 492 

 Willard Lutz 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 492 

  Harrison (transmittal motion) ................................................................................................................................................. 493 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Funding of First Nations Schools 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 493 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 10 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 493 

 Bill No. 11 — The Court Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de justice 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 494 

 Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 497 

 Bill No. 13 — The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les questions constitutionnelles 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 498 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 499 

 Bill No. 14 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 499 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 500 

 Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 500 

  Harrison (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................................... 501 

  Deputy Speaker (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................. 501 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 503 

 Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


