




















































Hansard: March 27, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 22A  TUESDAY, MARCH 27, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 777 

 March 27, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave for an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cypress Hills has 

requested extended leave for an extended introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Cypress 

Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the legislature today, I am 

pleased to introduce Dr. Daniel Fox in your gallery, the 

recipient of the Saskatchewan Distinguished Service Award, 

and accompanying him today, his spouse, Ms. Kathleen 

Andersen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1997 the Distinguished Service Award was 

established to recognize those people from outside of our 

province who have nevertheless made contributions that have 

benefited our province and contributed to the quality of life that 

we experience here today. Dr. Fox, Mr. Speaker, has 

undoubtedly made such a contribution as the international board 

member for the Saskatchewan Health Quality Council. 

 

His leadership and dedication on the board since it was created 

in 2002 has led to better health care in our province. His work 

has led us to the creation of the first nationally recognized effort 

to measure and learn from the experiences that patients have in 

our health care system. Throughout Canada the council’s work 

has been identified as significant. They have identified areas 

where improvement was needed to provide positive experiences 

through what can often be a difficult and challenging time in a 

person’s life. Dr. Fox’s knowledge and experience has greatly 

impacted these efforts, ensuring that it is the patients that 

remain the top priority for the health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, I would 

like to express how grateful we are for Dr. Fox’s commitment 

to the quality of health care, and more importantly to the quality 

of patients’ experiences in our health care system. His 

dedication to the health of our citizens continues to inspire us to 

strive for a better health care system and a better patient 

experience. 

 

Accompanying Dr. Fox and Ms. Andersen today are members 

of the Health Quality Council who will be introduced by the 

minister shortly. In the meantime, would all members please 

offer our appreciation to our honoured guests today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege also 

to welcome Dr. Fox and Ms. Kathleen Andersen, or Dan and 

Kathleen, who have become my friends over the 10 years that 

has been mentioned here. 

 

I can recall the morning phoning Dan to be our international 

expert on the Health Quality Council, and he said yes 

immediately. And I’m not sure if it was mentioned here, but 

he’s only missed one meeting in these 10 years and that was 

because of weather. 

 

So he has provided a perspective on all of the policy work that 

was done in our government and then now in the present 

government and has assisted the other people who will be 

interested shortly at the Health Quality Council, but I think also 

assisted many legislators who have participated in the 

Reforming States Group. 

 

Kathleen Andersen is the vice-president of the Milbank 

Memorial Fund which is a supporter of the Reforming States 

Group which includes Saskatchewan and all Canadian 

provinces and territories, but also all US [United States] states, 

Australia, New Zealand, Scotland, and England. And in that 

health-policy world, they have provided invaluable service for 

20 years. So I say on behalf of the opposition, thank you very 

much to you, Dan Fox, for being a true Saskatchewan citizen. 

You read our poetry, you read our books, but you tell people all 

around the world about what a great place Saskatchewan is 

from your vantage point in Manhattan, and we thank you for 

that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker 

to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, as was 

mentioned earlier, I want to introduce some members seated in 

your gallery, members from the Health Quality Council board. 

First of all is . . . and you can just give a wave, you don’t have 

to stand through this whole introduction. 

 

So, Dr. Susan Shaw who is the board Chair. Seated to her right 

would be Cecile Hunt. Dennis Kendel is there. Yvonne 

Shevchuk and Steven Lewis is there. As well as Quality 

Council staff members, the CEO [chief executive officer] is 

Bonnie Brossart, as well as Greg Basky and Gary Teare. These, 

not only board members which set the direction, I guess, for the 

Health Quality Council, but also the council staff do an amazing 

job and have done an amazing job over the past ten years in 

finding best practices, really quite frankly, around the world and 

introducing those to us in decision-making positions, I guess, to 

move the health system forward to make it the best that we can 

have in our province. So I want all members to join me in 

welcoming, not only the board members but the members from 

staff for the Health Quality Council to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

the members who have already spoken and welcome all these 

individuals who are here today, individuals who do a great 

amount of work to promote evidence-based approaches in 

health care here in the province. So thank you for the work 

you’ve done over the years and thank you for the work that you 

will do in the future as well. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I have the real pleasure of 

introducing two ladies who are in your gallery that are making a 

real difference for people with intellectual disabilities. Iris 

Miller-Dennis and Bev Duncan are joining us today. Iris is the 

president and Bev is the treasurer of Saskatchewan Approved 

Private Homes Inc. 

 

This morning I had the opportunity to go to Bev’s beautiful 

home and announce an 11.6 per cent increase in funding for 

approved private service homes and mental health approved 

homes. And I can’t tell you how gracious they were and what 

wonderful hostesses they were. And more importantly, we see 

that those homes are not just four walls, they’re the homes for a 

family. 

 

So on behalf of the people of the province, we thank you very 

much for the work that you do for people who are intellectually 

disabled, and I also welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the members of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I join the 

minister in welcoming these people to the legislature today. We 

certainly agree that the work that they do in the voluntary sector 

means so much to those who are in vulnerable circumstances. 

So we’d like to welcome you as well to the House. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — To you and through you, I’d like to 

introduce four very important people in your gallery today, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re all constituency assistants working for a few 

Regina members here. We have Kristen Reves; she’s my CA 

[constituency assistant]. We have Becky Mason working for the 

people of Douglas Park here in Regina; Ron Naidu and Delsey 

Roske working for the people of Regina Northeast. 

 

I think all members will agree how valuable CAs are to the 

people of the province and all the hard work they do. So please 

join me in welcoming them to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House . . . the 

Opposition House Leader, sorry. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks for the promotion, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, some individuals seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

I’m speaking of Amy Huziak with the Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labour’s young workers committee. I’m speaking of Donna 

Smith, also with the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, but on 

the CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] national pink 

triangle committee, as well as the executive of the Canadian 

Labour Congress; and Mikayla Schultz, who’s the director with 

the TransSask Services. They’re here today to witness some of 

the proceedings and that will become much more clear very 

soon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Please welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming these people to the 

House. I met with Mikayla in my office a few weeks ago and 

we had some interesting and productive discussions. Mr. 

Speaker, the work that is done by these groups is something that 

forms part of the fabric of our province. We value and respect 

the contributions that are made by these citizens and want to 

thank them and would like all members to welcome them to 

their Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and to all members in the legislature, I’m pleased to 

introduce, provide a general introduction to some of the faces of 

the film and television industry, both who currently work in the 

industry and students here in Regina who are hoping to find a 

career here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I see Crystal in the gallery who I had the pleasure of meeting 

yesterday. Crystal is a recruit actually from Toronto who moved 

to Saskatchewan three years ago specifically to work here and 

make a life in the film and television industry. She’s got quite a 

story to tell. Well anyway I would like to welcome you to your 

Legislative Assembly and ask all members in joining me. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This isn’t an 

oversight. I’d wanted to do this one in particular separate from 

my earlier introductions, but in your gallery is Ms. Norma 

Morrow who has joined our honoured guest today. She’s the 

most recent addition to the protocol office. I think this might be 

one of her first forays into the arena of distinguished guest 

hosting, and she’s done a great job as well as the colleagues that 

she works with at the protocol office. So I want to recognize her 

and her associates in that office who do such good work on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know that in 

the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe 

was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was working 

at a gas station in Yorkton alone and unprotected from 

intruders. But we also know that armed robberies late at night 

are not isolated events in Saskatchewan. We saw it just two 

weeks ago in Saskatoon in my riding and also in Regina on 

January 23rd and 24th. So we need Jimmy’s law. We know 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

British Columbia and other provinces have brought several 

safety precautions through law, including a requirement that 

workers cannot be alone during late night, early morning hours. 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are 

from the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the management and accounting of 

our provincial finances. 

 

The petition reads as follows, and the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with a fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhoods of Dundonald and Hampton Village, and it’s 

about the need for a new school in Hampton Village: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to present a petition in support of the film and television 

industry, in particular in support of ensuring that we maintain 

our competitive advantage by keeping the film employment tax 

credit. The petition references the fact that the Film 

Employment Tax Credit is “money in” rather than money out 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Just a note here, Mr. Speaker, this petition complements an 

online petition which as of two hours ago had more than 7,000 

signatures on it. It was just begun on Friday. So with that, I 

would like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan continue to 

provide a tax incentive for film, video, and television 

employment to leverage investment, employment, and 

growth in the province’s film, video, and television sector. 

 

This petition is signed by residents in Saskatoon and Regina. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

currently in the middle of Transgender Awareness Week, and 

Saturday will be the International Transgender Day Of 

Visibility. 

 

I’m presenting a petition that calls for the enhancement and the 

protection of the rights of transgendered people in the Human 

Rights Code. The prayer in this petition reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

provide protection under the law to trans-identified and 

gender variant residents of Saskatchewan through the 

inclusion within The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code of 

the terms gender identity and gender expression as 

prohibited grounds for discrimination. 

 

This petition is signed by individuals from St-Denis, Prince 

Albert, Regina, North Battleford, Fort Qu’Appelle, Milestone, 

Dundurn, Richard, Cochin, Martensville, Craven, Saskatoon, 

Delisle, Warman, Qu’Appelle, Humboldt, and Duck Lake. I so 

present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of the trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are of concern for 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearms use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind our guests before we 

start that they are not to participate in events on the floor, and 

that includes applause. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Transgender Awareness Week 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 25th through 

the 31st is Transgender Awareness Week. This week is aimed at 

building understanding and of course awareness of the issues 

facing transgendered people. Events have been taking place 

throughout the province to mark the week, and the proceedings 

will be capped off at the Rally for Visibility on Saturday, March 

31st, which serves as the third International Transgender Day of 

Visibility. The Day of Visibility and Transgender Awareness 

Week have been proclaimed by 10 municipalities throughout 

the province, including Lloydminster, Melville, Melfort, 

Melville — or pardon me, there we go, two times the Melville, 

Mr. Speaker — Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose 

Jaw. And it is my understanding that the provincial government 

will be proclaiming March 31st as the Day of Transgender 

Visibility. 

 

This effort has been supported by a number of elected officials, 

and I want to commend them for that. To quote Mayor Jeff 

Mulligan of Lloydminster from an article in the 

Meridian-Booster: “Anything that creates awareness and 

inclusion makes you a better, more understanding society.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in the official opposition certainly agree. The 

numerous proclamations and events marking Transgender 

Awareness Week are a direct result of the hard work and 

determination of the good folk at TransSask Support Services, 

especially those of Mikayla Schultz. She knows first-hand the 

struggles involved in being a transgendered person in 

Saskatchewan and, among other admirable work, she 

spearheaded the petition that I tabled in this Assembly earlier 

today calling for the inclusion of gender identity in The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 

 

Mikayla Schultz has said the following: “You don’t see us . . . 

we don’t show ourselves out of fear of oppression, further 

oppression, marginalization, and harassment.” It’s this sad fact 

that has spurred on the efforts of Mikayla in promoting 

Transgender Awareness Week, and I think she should be 

congratulated for it. May oppression and harassment and hate 

be replaced by understanding and awareness. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Investment in Saskatchewan’s Highways 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

recently tabled 2012-13 provincial budget confirms our 

government’s commitment to improving highways and 

infrastructure throughout Saskatchewan. A highways budget of 

581.5 million, the second largest highway budget in our 

province’s history, puts us on track to fulfill our government’s 

campaign promise to spend 2.2 billion over four years on 

highways and transportation infrastructure. 

 

For too long our province’s highways have been neglected. To 

help address this, our government has invested 275.3 million for 

new capital projects for 2012-13 including, among many other 

projects, a 3 million investment in a new passing initiative for 

Highway 10 from Balgonie to Fort Qu’Appelle. To quote Al 

Rosseker of the Saskatchewan Trucking Association: 

 

During the last five years this government has used 

highways and infrastructure as a road to economic 

prosperity. Today’s budget expenditure of 581.5 million 

clearly indicates the Wall government’s steadfast 

commitment to building, improving, and maintaining 

Saskatchewan’s roadways. This vision will benefit 

generations to come. 

 

An estimated 1200 kilometres of road will be improved this 

year including the completion of twinning Highway 11 from 

Saskatoon to P.A. [Prince Albert] ahead of schedule. 

 

I believe Shantel Lipp, president of the Saskatchewan Heavy 

Construction Association, sums up the thoughts of the province 

the best: 

 

Since 2007 this government has demonstrated 

commitment to dealing with years of neglect of our 

highways and infrastructure while at the same time 

ensuring new infrastructure is in place to accommodate 

our growing economy. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Shift Work Recognition Day 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, March 

20th has been proclaimed Shift Work Recognition Day, and 

many communities, including Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Regina, 

Yorkton, Moose Jaw, North Battleford, officially mark the day. 

 

Sandy Weyland, Chair of the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour shift work committee said, and I quote: 

 

People that do shift work provide our communities with 

valuable services but often at the expense of their own 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

health. I’m extremely pleased that a number of 

communities in our province have agreed to recognize 

individuals that do shift work by proclaiming a day in their 

honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost one-third of Canadian workers are 

involved in some kind of shift work. Unfortunately, studies like 

the 2010 study at the University of British Columbia found that 

people that do shift work are almost twice as likely to be injured 

on the job and that women in particular are susceptible to 

problems related to shift work, including sleep deprivation and 

depression. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] 

shift work committee works to achieve a healthier lifestyle and 

workplace through research, education, contract language, 

legislation, and heightened awareness of workers along with 

their respective employers. They have hosted a number of 

conferences focusing on the stresses of shift work and offer 

many tools needed to deal with shift work and societal issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in recognizing 

Shift Work Recognition Day in appreciation, and a big thank 

you to all the shift workers here in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

National Biathlon Competition 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to congratulate a young athlete from my constituency. Flight 

Corporal Jason Reimer of the No. 43 The Battlefords Royal 

Canadian Air Cadet Squadron is a biathlon athlete who has 

proudly represented his squadron and this province. Corporal 

Reimer competed at the local level, then the zone, then 

provincial levels to earn the right to represent our province at a 

national competition. 

 

Biathlon, for those who are unfamiliar with the sport, is the 

combination of skiing and shooting. The competitors ski a 

circuit and then shoot targets and repeat the process until the 

course is finished. Corporal Reimer is a 15-year-old cadet who 

has participated in this sport for several years and has worked 

hard to earn the right to represent his province at the Canadian 

National Biathlon Competition which was held this year in 

Martock, Nova Scotia. 

 

This was Jason’s second time to represent our province at the 

national level, and he proudly joined a team of 12 cadet athletes 

from the air, army, and sea cadet corps from around this 

province. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to report that Jason placed 

sixth out of 20 in the mass start competition and seventh out of 

20 in the pursuit competition. And in the relay, the composite 

team finished eighth out of 25. Three top-half finishes is a 

remarkable record for this young athlete and for his team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask my colleagues to extend 

congratulations to Jason, and indeed to the entire cadet corps 

team who represented this province so well at the national 

competition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

Hoopla 2012 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I 

had the honour of attending the 33rd Saskatchewan High 

Schools Athletic Association Hoopla 2012 basketball provincial 

championship. The Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic 

Association basketball season culminates with the road to 

Hoopla, from conference playoffs the second of week of March 

and advancing to the regionals the following weekend where 

the winners then advance to a 48-team provincial 

championship. 

 

Hoopla has become one of the biggest championships on the 

Saskatchewan high school athletic calendar. Housing the 

tournament at the University of Regina with its three 

gymnasiums adds to the intensity. Spectators from across the 

province are able to enjoy all levels of the game in a single 

facility. The Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association 

is fortunate to have partnered with the University of Regina to 

showcase the best basketball in the province and to introduce 

students and parents to the next level of education at the U of R 

[University of Regina]. 

 

A special congratulations goes out to the teams in my 

constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Riffel Royals 5A 

boy team, they brought home the gold. The Lumsden 3A girls 

teams won the gold. And Winston Knoll Wolverines 5A, those 

girls won the bronze. 

 

I would ask all members to join in congratulations to all the 

athletes who participated in this week’s . . . Thank you very 

much to the Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association 

for making this tournament such a great success. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

2011 Citizens of the Year 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on March 

the 22nd, I had the honour to bring greetings at the CTV 

[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] Citizen of the Year 

luncheon. The Citizens of the Year for 2011 was given to not 

one but two constituents of Regina Wascana Plains — Rory and 

Lorie Allen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Rory and Lorie are known worldwide as 

professional entertainers. But it’s their charitable performances 

and their incredible dedication to our community that separates 

them from others. 

 

Rory and Lorie have given benefit concerts for numerous 

groups, including the Regina Food Bank and the You’ve Got a 

Friend telethon in support of the Regina Humane Society. Mr. 

Speaker, the Allens have also shown their incredible 

selflessness and kindness, donating their time through the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region to perform for palliative care 

patients and their families. Mr. Speaker, this speaks to the true 

spirit of these two wonderful people and what an amazing job 

they’ve done as citizens of our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

Rory and Lorie Allen for being selected as Regina’s Citizens of 

the Year for 2011. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Expansion of Borden Care Home 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was pleased to 

accept the invitation recently to bring greetings at the grand 

opening of phase 2 of the Borden Care Home. The Borden Care 

Home is a true example of community co-operation, governed 

by the RMs [rural municipality] of Great Bend, Corman Park, 

and Mayfield as well as the towns of Borden, Radisson, 

Maymont, and Langham. This home has served these 

communities for 10 years and operated since 2001 as a 

non-profit charitable personal care home. 

 

Originally started with 10 beds, phase 2 will allow this home to 

serve 20 residents and is a great local development in excess of 

$1 million. One of our goals regarding seniors is to provide 

services that allow them to stay in their homes and their 

communities, independent, healthy, and active. Our government 

has focused efforts on providing a variety of great services to 

seniors. 

 

Saskatchewan has the lowest per cent of seniors living in 

low-income situations; completed or is working on 405 new 

senior housing units; doubled the seniors’ income plan benefits 

and the number of those eligible; 3.5 million for the new 

personal care home benefit, giving seniors and personal care 

homes up to $278 more per month. 

 

The contributions seniors have made to the development and 

advancement of this province have been enormous and we hope 

that you will continue to contribute and pass down your 

knowledge to the upcoming generations. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday there were over 100 

people here from the film industry when the Premier confirmed 

that many of them would be getting their pink slips. Mr. 

Speaker, these people were devastated. We’ve heard many of 

them say that the type of work that they do and the jobs that 

they have are not replaceable. They can’t go to the oil and gas 

industry or the potash industry to get another job. Many of them 

are left with no option but to sell their houses, uproot their 

children, and move to another province. My question to the 

Premier is: why didn’t he have the courage to come out and 

face these people? What kind of leadership does that show? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I welcomed the opportunity, along with the minister, 

to meet with the association yesterday for some period of time. 

We talked about a number of issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I did make it clear that in terms of the bidding war that is this 

film tax grant that happens across the province, across the 

country . . . And, Mr. Speaker, it is a grant because it doesn’t 

relate at all to taxes paid. It doesn’t relate at all to whether or 

not the taxes are even paid in this province. It’s just a large 

amount of government subsidy that goes to the production of a 

motion picture. So I indicated that we would not be changing 

our position with respect to that film tax grant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also indicated that there were other things we might be able 

to work on, including making that tax credit a non-refundable 

tax credit. We did that in the budget and in other areas on the 

innovation side and even with the graduate retention program, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s better policy. It means that taxpayers aren’t 

then in a bidding war for any particular economic development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the industry asked for an extension of the deadline 

in terms of applications for the program, indicating that they’re 

in the middle of an important season in the industry. I can tell 

this House, Mr. Speaker, that I talked to, I talked to the head of 

the association just moments before the legislature, and we’ve 

issued a press release indicating that the government’s prepared 

to extend till June 30th, which was their request, the 

opportunities for applications, and then work for other 

measures, work on other measures to support the industry. But 

we are not in the bidding war any longer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people like to be 

recognized on the national stage. We take great pride in our 

economy, our culture, and our province. The Premier’s got 

millions of dollars for three more politicians, but he doesn’t 

have money for an industry that returns millions of dollars to 

this province each year in jobs and economic spinoffs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again Saskatchewan is on the national stage, 

but for the wrong reason. People around the country don’t 

understand the Premier’s decision to cut the legs out from under 

the film industry. He’s made a little bit of a change today. But 

my question to the Premier is this, Mr. Speaker: is he proud of 

the national attention he has brought to Saskatchewan by this 

attack on the film industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, first of all — we hear 

members say this time and time again — there will not be 

millions of dollars. There will not be one additional dollar over 

and above the Legislative Assembly budget of this province for 

any new members of this legislature which may come as a 

result of the redrawing of the boundaries — something that the 

Deputy Leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party] supports, 

by the way. The Deputy Leader of the NDP supports this 

decision for new MLAs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ll answer the member’s question. Right now this 

province is known across this country, across North America, 

and in parts of the world, frankly, for something that is very 

unique in the world today — a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a master of spin; 

there’s no question about that. But the Premier has heard from 

people inside and outside the film industry saying they don’t 

understand his decision. It makes no sense. It makes no sense 

from a common sense, Saskatchewan perspective. Having a 

form of tax credit in the film industry is the way this industry 

works across North America. Not only does the tax credit make 

sense; it makes millions for our communities. Will the Premier 

reverse his decision and reinstate the tax credit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a grant 

here. That’s what this is. It doesn’t relate at all to taxes paid in 

the province of Saskatchewan. What we’re prepared to do with 

the industry, and we indicated that to Mr. Goetz and the 

association, is work on a tax credit that’s based on businesses in 

this province, film producers in this province — and there’s a 

number of them, and they’re valued — and that we would be 

able to reduce the taxes paid in this province as an incentive for 

that kind of investment in Saskatchewan. At the heart of the 

hon. member’s question is, well everybody else is doing this; 

everyone else is in this bidding war with taxpayers’ money; 

everyone else is offering these grants. Everyone else has a 

deficit budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government 

made it clear on budget day, and the Premier confirmed 

yesterday, that they are in fact gutting an entire industry in our 

province by eliminating this film tax credit. When it comes to 

this decision, ideology has trumped common sense. Norm 

Bolen of the Canadian Media Production Association had this 

to say following the meeting with the Premier: “How do you 

function in a competitive environment if you have chosen to no 

longer be competitive?” Even Great Britain’s Conservative 

government introduced, just last week, a new tax credit for this 

industry there to be competitive. 

 

To the Premier: how can he justify simply using ideology when 

making a decision that has a negative impact on the lives of 

thousands of people in Saskatchewan, jobs in Saskatchewan, 

and economic development in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question as always. Mr. Speaker, as 

we’ve said in the House before, no one is denying the fact that 

the film industry creates economic activity. Every industry does 

that. And no one certainly is denying the fact that the film 

industry creates unemployment, or employment. Every industry 

does that too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is the central question: do we put more and 

more and more tax dollars into this industry and subsidize it at 

an ever higher rate when we are also being asked to deal with 

issues like affordable housing, like child care spaces, like 

autism funding, like cancer treatment, like surgical wait times 

and building schools, hospitals, and highways? Mr. Speaker, we 

determined that we couldn’t do all of that within our balanced 

budget, and that’s why we are winding down the FETC [film 

employment tax credit] program and are working with the 

industry members to look at creative alternatives. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After yesterday, the 

Premier has people in the film and television industry hanging 

their hats on a slim hope that this government will come up 

with something effective to replace the existing tax credit. He 

and his government sold off SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] two years ago to the detriment of 

this industry. After a negative backlash, the government 

convened a task force to find ways to assist the industry to 

remain competitive. This task force involved months of work 

by those in the film industry working alongside representatives 

of government. 

 

The Premier said yesterday his government is willing to work 

with the industry — and he said that again today — to come up 

with solutions. But the task force worked for months on 

solutions that have been sitting on a shelf since 2010. To the 

Premier: he didn’t listen to the expertise from the industry then. 

Why should anyone believe he is going to listen to them now, at 

the 11th hour? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, the first thing that we 

need to clarify is that the task force specifically advised us to 

concentrate on Saskatchewan companies, and that’s exactly 

what we’re doing here. Mr. Speaker, in addition to all of the 

investments to the film employment tax credit program, we 

must also mention that another $110 million has been provided 

in other direct subsidies to the sound stage, to SaskFilm, to 

cultural programs provided by SaskCulture and the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a grand total of $210 million. That’s a 

lot of public investment. And despite the very best efforts of the 

industry — and they have been best efforts — the industry is 

collapsing dramatically. Production volume is down 70 per cent 

in the last five years. Employment is down almost 55 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again the central question we had to ask 

ourselves as a government is: do we enter into a bidding war 

with other provinces or do we reallocate scarce resources to 

other priorities and look for creative alternatives? We’re 

looking for creative alternatives. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard from 

the Premier today that he’s willing to extend the tax credit until 

June. But he said his government might come up with some 

kind of mystical replacement to the tax credits. But many in the 

film and television industry are still on tenterhooks. He’s put off 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

the stay of execution for this industry, for this entire industry 

until June. So to the Premier: what is his plan to work with the 

industry, and when will he get down to work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A brief 

answer to a brief question indeed. The work starts today. We 

had the meeting with the industry representatives yesterday. As 

we said, it was a productive meeting. It was a very positive 

meeting. I want to take this moment to, an opportunity to thank 

Mr. Ron Goetz and the members of the industry for their time 

and for their insight. It was very helpful indeed. 

 

We are in fact retiring the old grant program. The Premier was 

very clear, very firm. The industry understands this, Mr. 

Speaker. They have already absorbed that message. They’re 

already looking for creative alternatives. That’s exactly the 

creative environment that we’ve established here, Mr. Speaker. 

We look forward to those discussions with real enthusiasm. 

We’re looking for results. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier did not 

face the people who were here in the legislature yesterday. But 

surely you’ve seen the thousands of comments on petitions, on 

Twitter, on Facebook pages, and in every news report. 

Yesterday he asked people affected by this cut to be patient. 

Should people wait a few days before they continue to plan 

their future? Should they wait a few months? Should they wait a 

year? Or should people feel confident that they can spend their 

lives here in Saskatchewan continuing to build a career that 

they’ve already worked so hard to achieve? To the Premier, a 

simple question: do these people have a future here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — A brief answer to that question, Mr. 

Speaker. Of course they have a future in Saskatchewan, and 

we’ll find more about the detail in three months time. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Resources for Economic Development 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, last year the Sask Party government provided about $4 

million a year to 16 enterprise regions throughout 

Saskatchewan. As we found out in last week’s budget, the 

funding has been pulled. People across Saskatchewan changed 

their lives to implement the Premier’s pet project, and now this 

government is abandoning this system and we have to go back 

to where we were. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some regions are faced with paying out employees 

and closing offices, and that certainly wasn’t what people in 

Saskatchewan thought was coming. Mr. Speaker, we have 

instead more politicians and fewer economic development 

officers. To the minister: why is he cutting the Sask Party pet 

project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve been, as a government, very clear that we 

believe local economic development is best handled at the local 

level. And, Mr. Speaker, these enterprise regions belong to the 

local level. They’re governed by local boards. These regions 

can continue if the municipalities see that to be the appropriate 

response. We’ve increased revenue sharing to municipalities by 

nearly $21 million this year alone, Mr. Speaker, next year 

increasing by a further $35 million. The resources are very 

much there for these enterprises to go forward, and we look 

forward to working with them in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this kind of answer is nonsensical 

in the sense that they’re kindly off-loading to the municipalities. 

And it’s just a prime example of how this government really 

does do the spin of off-loading responsibilities, giving in one 

hand and taking twice with the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, local municipalities worked in partnership with 

the province to reach regional economic development goals, but 

now they’re being told the province wants nothing to do with 

them. And not only that, Mr. Speaker; it’s pulled millions of 

funding from the regions to do their work. 

 

To the minister: why did this government waste millions in 

setting up these regions only to spend more on closing them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The premise of the member’s question is simply wrong. The 

revenue increase to municipalities by this government has been 

over 100 per cent in the last four years. In 2007, transfers to 

municipal governments were $127 million; today, $237 million. 

The resources accorded to local government are at the highest 

level that we have ever seen. And what do we hear from the 

members opposite, from the Leader of the Opposition in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, who said we should cut more money from the 

municipalities. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I know this 

minister loves to recite the numbers, but it’s cold comfort to 

families that have moved and are now looking at their future 

and what are they going to do. And what does he do? Just recite 

these stats. 

 

But this is what Paul Martin, this is what Paul Martin had to 

say, News Talk radio’s business commentator. And I quote, “I 

think that’s probably going to . . .” And I quote: 

 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

I think that’s probably going to leave some noses out of 

joint in the countryside, people who have said, okay we 

changed our lives to meet your system and now you’re 

abandoning the system and we have to go back to where 

we were. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this failed pet project is a costly step back for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: will this government apologize for wasting 

millions on reorganizing these REDAs [regional economic 

development authority] into enterprise regions and admit this 

flagship government program is a failure? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very 

clear that we believe that local economic development is best 

handled at the local level. We’re going to be focusing our 

resources at the national and international level. For that reason, 

we’ve increased funding to STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and 

Export Partnership] by nearly, by $500,000 next year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Our government’s moving forward, pursuing innovation. And 

this member wants to talk about the economy, Mr. Speaker. The 

economy of this province has never been better. We have the 

highest population we’ve ever had, 1.067 million people. We’re 

projected to lead Canada by almost every private sector 

forecaster in GDP [gross domestic product] growth, in 

economic growth, in job growth, in job creation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are moving back to Saskatchewan after 

years of our young people being chased away by the members 

opposite. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to focus on what 

is the appropriate role of the provincial government and we’re 

going to continue to move Saskatchewan forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I think this is an interesting answer, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister now is talking about his national, 

international plans. But this is cold comfort to some of the small 

communities, mid-sized towns throughout the province who put 

a lot of work into these enterprise zones in the belief that the 

government would be there for them. And now they’re left high 

and dry and they’re being off-loaded with expenses. There are a 

lot of work to do in municipalities, including infrastructure, 

making our roads better. But this government has decided 

instead that they would set the agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask again: will this government apologize for 

setting up the local communities for failure? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Again the premise of the member’s question is just 

plain wrong. The massive transfers in revenues to municipal 

governments has been over 100 per cent in the last four years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are incredible resources for municipal governments to 

focus on local economic development and make those decisions 

locally, Mr. Speaker. I believe local communities have a much 

better sense of how to move forward with local decisions than 

do bureaucrats here in Regina. And for that reason, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve increased the resources to municipalities and 

allowing them to take the lead on local economic development. 

That’s just the right approach. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, not only do the choices of 

this government not add up or make sense. Neither does its 

budget. The Sask Party’s once again trying to play budgetary 

games with Saskatchewan people. For one, they’ve been overly 

optimistic on potash revenues. We’ve seen this before. We’ve 

seen how it turned out and it wasn’t pretty. 

 

For two, they’ve used some creative accounting in health and 

education capital to mask a few numbers, trying to make the 

numbers work on paper, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For three, they’ve moved $100 million of public debt on to the 

books of universities, Mr. Speaker. They did this so they could 

explicitly hide the deficit that they are managing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why won’t this Minister of Finance come clean 

with the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, there are some numbers that 

are crystal clear to the people of this province. For the first time 

in the province’s history, this province has a AAA credit rating 

while jurisdictions across the world are struggling. Mr. Speaker, 

what we know, Mr. Speaker, is this government has paid down 

about 44 per cent of the debt, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

more than $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. What that means, Mr. 

Speaker, is that since the day that we had the opportunity to 

form government under the leadership of our Premier, we are 

saving taxpayers about $160 million in interest payments on the 

debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are numbers that the people of this province can bank on. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they can bank on having the highest number 

of people working for the month of February, the highest 

number of people working full-time for the month of February. 

And they can bank on this government making sure that we’re 

dealing with the financial situations and conditions of this 

province with a great degree of fiscal probity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister didn’t 

hear. We’re speaking about budgetary balance or the lack 

thereof, Mr. Speaker. A deficit budget is one where the 

expenses are higher than the revenues. Based on the 

government’s own documents, our debt is projected to rise by 

well over $1 billion in this year alone, and will continue to rise 

over the next four years. In fact, there is no plan for debt 

repayment in the budget documents, despite the fact that they 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

promised to do so in the election. That’s using their documents, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s why it’s not surprising but certainly 

disappointing, this government has changed accounting and 

punted public debt on to the books of universities. They want to 

try and mask their deficit once again. 

 

To the minister: why won’t he be straight with Saskatchewan 

people? What’s he afraid of? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen in recent 

days is this government table yet again another balanced budget 

on behalf of the people of this province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

TD Economics offered this: 

 

Overall, the tone being struck this year is of careful 

management of public finances notwithstanding the 

province’s enviable prosperity. Potentially Saskatchewan’s 

projected surplus of $47 million . . . could turn out to be 

Canada’s only provincial surplus in the year ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the quote continues, “Although Saskatchewan is 

facing more prosperous economic times than most of its 

provincial counterparts, the budget reaffirmed its focus on 

sound fiscal management.” Mr. Speaker, that’s the theme that 

we’re going to stay with on behalf of the people of this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, one thing’s for sure: this 

government sticks to their lines. They don’t let reality or facts 

stand in their way. They stick to their lines. But despite sticking 

to this slick public relations line of budgetary balance each and 

every budget, their record actually stands in the way. Verified 

by the auditor, the story is something very different. 

 

For three consecutive years, it’s been deficit followed by deficit 

followed by deficit. And that’s in good economic times, Mr. 

Speaker. In 2009-10, a deficit of 173 million. In 2010-11, a 

deficit of 145 million. In 2011 and ’12, the current fiscal year 

that we’re just coming to a close, the deficit exceeds well over 

$300 million. These aren’t my numbers, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

the Provincial Auditor’s numbers, Mr. Speaker, from her 

reports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why won’t this minister simply level with 

Saskatchewan people and admit sadly that this will be the 

fourth consecutive deficit budget from this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, there is one deficit in the 

House and that’s a logic deficit on the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they began question period by asking for 

more spending, Mr. Speaker. They continued by more 

spending, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we have, Mr. Speaker, is TD Economics, CIBC 

[Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce], BMO [Bank of 

Montreal], all coming forward and praising the prudence of this 

Saskatchewan Party’s government, Mr. Speaker, and the 

leadership of our Premier and our Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you want facts and figures. Manufacturing 

shipments are up 17.7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The retail trade is 

up, Mr. Speaker. Wholesale trade is up, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan is an economic leader, Mr. Speaker, and the key 

reason for that is fiscal probity and the balanced budget that was 

just delivered. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the minister in no 

way wants to touch the question or in no way does his answer 

reflect the facts as the Provincial Auditor puts forward. And 

clearly evidenced here again today, this government’s choices 

simply don’t add up: the mismanagement of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, the disastrous cuts to the film industry, and the 

budget itself and the accounting and PR [public relations] 

games, Mr. Speaker, its choice to spend millions to increase the 

number of politicians, doing so on the backs of seniors and 

families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it isn’t fair, it doesn’t add up, and it doesn’t make 

sense. Mr. Speaker, why are this government’s priorities so 

messed up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we saw in November 

was a party addicted to spending promises, Mr. Speaker. And 

every day, Mr. Speaker, we were out listening to people. And, 

Mr. Speaker, people made it clear: make sure that you continue 

to manage the province’s finances with great probity and 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the details regarding the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, I 

will offer this from December 8th, 2011, Mr. Speaker. Here’s a 

press release from the auditor, and it says, “The auditor has 

given these statements a clean audit opinion.” Mr. Speaker, 

straight from the auditor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Funding Increased for People With 

Intellectual Disabilities 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

pride that I rise in the House today to talk about a very 

important announcement that will improve the lives of 

Saskatchewan people with intellectual disabilities. I was 

pleased to introduce two women in the legislature today who 

are part of a group of people who are making a difference to 

people with intellectual disabilities. 

 

Today I am proud to announce that on May the 1st, the 

Government of Saskatchewan will provide approved private 

service homes and mental health approved homes with an 11.6 

per cent increase in their funding. This enhancement will 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

provide $1.75 million annually and an increase in the following 

years. 

 

Saskatchewan Approved Private Homes Inc., that represent 

both mental health homes and community living homes, will 

receive annualized resources of $150,000 starting in year 

2012-13 to ensure the delivery of enhancements to the approved 

private home sector. 

 

This investment builds on our government’s four-year 

commitment to eliminate the wait-list of 440 Saskatchewan 

people with intellectual disabilities who will require services 

and programs. By the end of 2012, services for 373 people, or 

85 per cent of the wait-list, will be in place or in development 

across our province. 

 

These funds will help ensure that our most vulnerable citizens 

continue to receive the services they require in the community 

where they live and help make Saskatchewan the best place in 

Canada for people to live with disabilities. 

 

The homes that are provided are so much more than just food 

and shelter. They are places where people share their love, 

where they support each other. They provide refuge and 

security and offering opportunities to learn and grow. They’re 

more than just homes; they are families. 

 

I want to thank Bev for the hospitality in her home and Iris for 

introducing her two sons to us today. And I want to thank the 

400 homes right across our province that take care of 1,500 

individuals with intellectual disabilities. We can’t do it without 

you. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank 

everyone across the province who have opened their hearts and 

their homes to the people with intellectual disabilities. As we go 

forward as a province, we’ll be working closely with the 

Saskatchewan Approved Private Homes Inc. to work towards a 

goal of making Saskatchewan the best place to live for 

everyone in the province, including those with disabilities. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to thank the minister for sharing a copy of her remarks 

before the House sat, and I do appreciate that. And I want to 

join in in saying, this is a good news announcement. This is 

very good. We appreciate the attention that is on this initiative, 

that it’s an important one. And of course we all want to think of 

Saskatchewan as the best place that people with disabilities, 

particularly with intellectual disabilities, find Saskatchewan the 

best place to live. So this is good news. 

 

I won’t go on long, but I just want to say that the enthusiasm, 

the commitment this government has taken to eliminate the 

wait-list of 440 Saskatchewan people with intellectual 

disabilities, we’d like to see that taken on in terms of other 

housing initiatives. We have agreed with this. And quite often 

the government will use a benchmark system, and we think 

that’s a good idea. But we know there are other wait-lists 

involving affordable housing, particularly for seniors and those 

on social housing, that we think should be in place as well. 

So with that, again we would echo the thank you to the people 

in the gallery and to people who have made this responsible. 

Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 249 through 294. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 249 to 294. 

 

[14:30] 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. It’s 

indeed a pleasure today to join into the debate on this balanced 

budget that was tabled by the Finance minister last Wednesday 

in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I believe it’s the only balanced 

budget thus far in Canada and quite likely going to be the only 

balanced budget in Canada, and one of only three in North 

America is what I’m told. 

 

Before I begin my remarks on the budget itself, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to acknowledge a couple of people up in your 

gallery that were introduced earlier by the member from Regina 

Dewdney. And those are my constituency assistants, Ron Naidu 

and Delsey Roske, who do a great deal of work for me in the 

constituency office. Of course we have Kristen and Becky there 

as well, who ably assist the member from Regina Dewdney and 

the member from Regina Douglas Park who I have the pleasure 

of sharing a constituency office with here in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I just want to acknowledge all of them and thank them for the 

very hard work they do, particularly for me as I’ve been quite 

busy lately since the election serving on Treasury Board in the 

development of this budget. And we couldn’t do it without 

them. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the caucus staff 

here at the Legislative Building and all of the ministerial staff 

that work in the various ministers’ offices who assist us as 

private members. Quite often we’ll get enquiries or questions or 

issues come up with constituents, and our constituency 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

assistants, along with ourselves obviously, work with the 

caucus staff and with the ministers’ offices in answering those 

questions or helping them out. And they do a terrific job here, 

and I think we all owe them a round of applause as well, with 

my colleagues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to join in this debate on, as I 

said earlier, the only balanced budget tabled so far in Canada. I 

think it’s important to acknowledge the fact that this Minister of 

Finance deserves congratulations on tabling this type of budget 

in the economic conditions that the entire world is faced with 

today. I think this budget, Mr. Speaker, I know this budget is 

fiscally responsible and it is targeted to those priorities of our 

government. And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it fulfills the 

campaign promises that we campaigned on last fall during the 

election. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening to the debate in the 

Assembly here over the last few days about the budget, and I 

find it quite interesting, particularly from members of the 

opposition side, in analyzing the budget and critiquing the 

budget and criticizing the budget, and I’ve yet to hear anybody 

on that side of the Assembly find anything good in this budget, 

Mr. Speaker, which I find passing strange. 

 

I also heard the member from Saskatoon Massey Place last 

night as he engaged in this debate, his opening comment was 

that this government has misplaced priorities with respect to 

this budget. And, Mr. Speaker, as I review this budget and 

heard the Minister of Finance deliver it in this Assembly, this 

budget has record spending in health care, education, highways, 

social services, and infrastructure renewal, Mr. Speaker. So if 

those are misplaced priorities, then those are misplaced 

priorities of the people of Saskatchewan because that’s what 

they voted for last fall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also take great pride in the fact that after 

the election the Premier asked if I would serve on Treasury 

Board, and I had a front-row seat in the development of this 

budget. And why I offer congratulations to the Minister of 

Finance and take my hat off to him is because I don’t think the 

people of Saskatchewan get an opportunity to see how much 

work goes into the development of a provincial budget. I don’t 

think they get to see how many hours this particular Minister of 

Finance and his officials in the Ministry of Finance as well as 

all ministers in the cabinet, Mr. Speaker, and their officials 

work to put the budget together. I was very fortunate, as I said, 

to have a front-row seat in watching that develop, and it was a 

fascinating experience. It was a fascinating experience because 

you get to see a cross spectrum of all the ministries at work 

across government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now governing is about making choices, and governing is 

about making some difficult choices, and government is about 

fulfilling the campaign promises that you ran on as well as 

ensuring that you’re meeting the priorities of the people of this 

province. In a time of economic upheaval, Mr. Speaker, 

throughout the entire world, and the probability that every other 

province in Canada is going to be running massive deficits this 

year and placing financial burden on future generations, this 

Finance minister ensured that Saskatchewan stands as a beacon 

of fiscal prudence and responsibility. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the development of this budget there are a 

number of components that contributed to it. There is the 

caucus and what my colleagues in the caucus brought back to 

the caucus table about what they were hearing in their 

constituencies and what were the priorities that they heard on 

the doorstep in the campaign last fall, Mr. Speaker. There were 

also the campaign promises that the Premier made last fall that 

the people of this province voted overwhelmingly for. 

 

So when I was going around my constituency, Mr. Speaker, last 

fall, and over the course of two years before that, I can tell you 

that the number one issue raised with me on the doorstep was 

health care. I had many individuals in my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, tell me very personal stories with respect to their 

interactions with our health care system here in Saskatchewan. 

Some of them were good; some of them not so good. Some of 

them dealt with family members that were currently going 

through the health care system. Others dealt with family 

members who had been through the health care system or their 

own personal stories and the experience that they had. And I 

found them compelling stories, Mr. Speaker. And when I asked 

them, what is it that we should be doing as a government with 

respect to the health care system, I heard over and over and over 

again, keep doing what you’re doing. Keep reducing the 

surgical wait times in this province. Keep attracting more 

doctors to this province. Keep hiring more nurses. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the people on the doorstep tell you that 

as their number one priority, I think it’s important that that get 

integrated into a provincial budget to address those issues. So in 

response to those kinds of comments and concerns, Mr. 

Speaker, our government responded by some of the following 

initiatives within the health care budget. And I think it’s 

important to have this on the record because I hear a lot of 

flourishes of rhetoric from members opposite as to the budget 

cut this and the budget cut that and it doesn’t do enough here 

and it doesn’t do enough there and that. 

 

But what are we really talking about, Mr. Speaker? We’re 

talking about targeted funds to programs that help those in 

society that are our priorities as a government, including 

committing $60.5 million for the Saskatchewan surgical 

initiative. Now, Mr. Speaker, this money will allow us to 

perform 8,000 more surgeries this year than would have been 

done in the year prior to the surgical initiative being launched. 

This surgical initiative, Mr. Speaker, will allow us to stay on 

track to reducing wait times to no more than three months by 

the year 2014, a target the Premier and the Minister of Health 

have set out and we’re determined to keep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also set out $4 million to expand the 

colorectal screening program province-wide. We saw an 

announcement by the Minister of Health the other day, I think it 

was yesterday, and it’s being lauded across the entire province 

by those in that profession — the oncologists and those that 

work in cancer across the province, Mr. Speaker — as a 

visionary decision on the part of this government. 

 

In this budget, the Minister of Finance also allocated $5.5 

million to implement and get off the ground, literally get off the 

ground, the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 

helicopter ambulance program, Mr. Speaker. Now I note when 

that program was announced, I wasn’t a member of this 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

Assembly, but I do note the opposition’s reaction to it and they 

basically scoffed at it, Mr. Speaker. They said it was a pipe 

dream. They said it wasn’t even necessary. They said it would 

never happen. And this budget has five and a half million 

dollars in it to ensure that that program takes off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also allocates $17 million in an 

increase to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency which will fund 

new patient referrals, chemotherapy treatments, and 

mammograms. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if those are misplaced priorities, I don’t 

know what priorities the government should have with respect 

to their health care budget. We have over $10 million to 

continue the government’s commitment to expanding the 

registered nurse training program by 170 seats, the very things 

the people on the doorsteps told me in Regina Northeast: get 

more nurses to work here in the province. And following 

through on our campaign commitment to forgive up to 

$120,000 in student loans for new doctors and $20,000 for new 

nurses, these are the priorities that the people of Regina 

Northeast spoke about when we talked about health care, Mr. 

Speaker. And I believe this Minister of Finance and this 

Premier have responded in spades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second issue that I heard about most often on 

the doorsteps was that our government should continue to 

support those most vulnerable in our society, particularly people 

with disabilities, intellectual disabilities, physical disabilities, 

and low-income seniors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Premier and this Minister of Finance with this 

budget spoke directly to those concerns with initiatives such as 

expanding the Saskatchewan assured income for disability 

eligibility so that the number of clients will rise from 3,000 to 

10,000 adults this year, and benefits will increase by $200 a 

month beginning in July and rising to an increase of $350 a 

month four years out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also increased the seniors’ personal care home 

benefit by $278 a month, and that will rise to an increase of 

$369 a month by our fourth year. Now these don’t get a lot of 

headlines, Mr. Speaker, but they make the world of difference 

for the people that it directly impacts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we also . . . And this one I know gets under 

the skin of the members opposite because for 16 years they 

didn’t touch this, and I heard about this on the doorstep, Mr. 

Speaker, the seniors’ income plan. Not only did the government 

double it in its first mandate, but during this term we’re 

increasing the seniors’ income plan by $50 a month this July 

and rising by $10 a month over the next three years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, new funding for the children and youth 

agenda, including new monies for enhancing the autism 

spectrum disorder therapies and fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third area that I heard about the most on the 

doorstep from the constituents of Regina Northeast was in the 

area of continuing to build our highways, repair our existing 

highways, and invest in our infrastructure here in the province. 

In response to that, Mr. Speaker, well over half a billion dollars 

has been allocated in this budget for new highways and in 

excess of a quarter of a billion dollars in unrestricted transfers 

to municipalities throughout the province. This translates, Mr. 

Speaker, into a 133 per cent increase in funding for the city of 

Regina since this Premier was elected in 2007. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those were the priorities, the top priorities I 

heard about on the doorstep when I was campaigning in Regina 

Northeast. And the people of Regina spoke loud and clear in 

that particular election. Prior to the election on November 7th, 

of the 11 seats in Regina, the NDP held eight and the 

government held three. And after the election, the government 

held eight and the NDP held three. And it’s because, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the members opposite forgot about the 

priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. They became 

misaligned with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when I look at the members opposite criticizing the 

government, criticizing the budget, offering their critiques and 

never offering anything as an alternative to what they would do 

with this budget, Mr. Speaker, I find that passing strange. So the 

only thing I can go on is to think about with respect to what 

their platform document said last fall and where their spending 

priorities were if they were government. Now I know they’ve 

ran away from that platform as fast and as quickly as they 

possibly could, and they don’t want to talk about it any more, 

Mr. Speaker. But it’s instructive. It’s instructive to the people of 

Saskatchewan to understand, what would the NDP do if they 

were government and they had controls of the purse strings in 

this province, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So I wanted to make sure that I got their platform correct, and I 

went back to the website and had a look at it. And I find it, on 

the first page, rather interesting when they had announced their 

platform, Mr. Speaker, that they were going to review potash 

royalties to ensure Saskatchewan people get their fair share of 

revenues. Review potash royalties. And what do we see a 

couple of weeks after they launched their platform? They 

weren’t just going to review potash royalties, Mr. Speaker. 

They were doubling the tax on the potash industry. As Mr. 

Lingenfelter said time and time again, it’s only a nickel. It’s a 

nickel to a dime. Now the people of Saskatchewan know that, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s a 100 per cent increase on the taxes on the 

potash industry in this province. 

 

They further went on to say that the NDP’s platform is fully 

costed, affordable for Saskatchewan, and will not increase taxes 

for any citizen in the province. It includes a plan to pay down 

debt, save for the future using the innovative Bright Futures 

Fund, and address much needed infrastructure repairs including 

fixing highways and helping municipalities with water, sewer, 

and recycling services. Sounds kind of familiar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then I went to their actual platform document because I 

thought there’s some good ideas in there, and I’m sure that they 

— because it says it’s fully costed out — I’m sure they were 

going to want to show the people of Saskatchewan exactly how 

much that’s going to cost. So we looked at the promise for 

resource revenue sharing with First Nations in the province. No 

costing for that in the platform, Mr. Speaker. No idea how 

much that was going to cost the people of Saskatchewan. It was 

a promise made up on the back of a napkin as the leader of the 

opposition went into a First Nations community because it was 

the announcement of the day, Mr. Speaker. 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

They were going to twin the highway from Yorkton to 

Balgonie, estimated cost $200 million. Not in the platform. 

Nowhere in the platform, Mr. Speaker, and no costing for it. 

Then they were going to twin the highway, Highways 6 and 39, 

from Regina to the US border, estimated cost $250 million. Not 

in the platform. No costing of that. No idea where they were 

going to pay for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Oh and then the trip to Prince Albert. And I remember the 

member for Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker — the Finance 

critic who was the financial architect of their platform last fall 

and who would be the de facto Finance minister had they won 

the election, Mr. Speaker — standing shoulder to shoulder with 

the then opposition leader in every camera shot he got at every 

announcement, two, three times a day here in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, announcing all of these different programs with no 

costing to them whatsoever and no idea how they were going to 

pay for them. They went up to Prince Albert and announced a 

new bridge for the city of Prince Albert, estimated cost $50 

million. Nowhere in the platform, Mr. Speaker, no costing of it.  

 

They announced a 400-megawatt wind farm, Mr. Speaker — I 

had a little experience at SaskPower looking at the costs of 

these kinds of projects — estimated cost approximately $500 

million. No budget for that. No budget for that. That one was 

mentioned in the platform, Mr. Speaker, surprisingly, but there 

was no budget for it and no word to the people of this province 

what their electricity utility rates would be had they gone ahead 

with a 400-megawatt wind farm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So then I look at, going back to their platform document, we are 

going to include fixing highways and helping municipalities 

with water, sewer, and recycling services. And shortly after the 

budget was brought down last week, Mr. Speaker . . . What’s 

their true agenda? What do we really know what the NDP was 

going to do had they formed government? 

 

A reporter asked the Leader of the Opposition — and I don’t 

think his caucus colleagues knew he was doing this interview or 

what he said that morning because I recall question period, and 

they were rather shocked at what he said, Mr. Speaker — the 

reporter says, okay, so if there’s more money needed for 

Saskatchewan filmmakers, where would the money come from 

out of the budget, in your mind? And the Leader of the 

Opposition, Mr. Speaker, said, “well practically,” and I quote: 

 

Well practically there are a number of areas where they 

could have left money for films. And one of the things 

they could have done is look at some of the initiatives 

around agriculture and look at some of the things they’ve 

done for municipalities. 

 

In the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, that party turned their backs on 

rural Saskatchewan, and it cost them every seat in rural 

Saskatchewan. In the 2007 election, Mr. Speaker, seniors and 

the youth of this province figured out that they don’t stand for 

them. They don’t speak for them. And when I was 

campaigning, Mr. Speaker, in 2011, what the people told me 

on the doorstep is that they haven’t got clue one what they’re 

doing with respect to fiscal responsibility. They got into a 

bidding war here with respect to every announcement every 

single day, two or three times a day, Mr. Speaker, worth 

hundreds of millions of dollars, and no idea how to pay for it. 

 

So they said to me, Mr. Speaker, on the doorstep, we want a 

steady hand on the till. We want a responsible government 

that looks at our finances and manages them in a responsible 

and fiscally prudent way. And that’s what they voted for, Mr. 

Speaker. So as I look at what the three priority areas were for 

my constituency, what my constituents indicated to me, we 

had funded those things in spades in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker. We have addressed those priorities. We have 

fulfilled campaign platform commitments, and we have not 

recklessly spent our children’s future like other provinces are 

doing right now. 

 

And the one thing, Mr. Speaker, I notice no one has talked 

about yet with respect to this budget — not a single tax 

increase. There’s no tax increases in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker. We campaigned on not raising taxes, paying down 

debt, and funding the priorities of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And we’ll do it in a balanced fashion, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s exactly what this Minister of Finance 

delivered last Wednesday during the budget. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment put forward 

by the opposition, and I will be supporting the main motion 

as put forward by the Minister of Finance. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise in the debate today. I say a pleasure 

intentionally because of course it’s a real privilege and an 

honour that is entailed in this job that we’ve been given by the 

people in each of our own respective constituencies. And it’s 

something that we shouldn’t take lightly, Mr. Speaker, and I 

know that I don’t. I know that I’m very grateful for the support 

that has been given me by the people in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre and that I’m very humbled by the trust that 

they have extended me in a number of elections now. And that 

the job that they have given to myself and to members of the 

opposition, one of the things we’ve got squarely in front of us, 

Mr. Speaker, is to keep, this government, their feet to the fire, to 

hold this government to account. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we just had an election, and the 

people spoke very clearly in that election. And they built this 

House, Mr. Speaker. And I guess I recognize that, and I respect 

that as a democrat, and I respect that as someone who feels 

quite blessed to live in the parliamentary democracy, to live in 

the free and open society that we live in, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

also very aware that the cost of that is eternal vigilance and that, 

in terms of gainsaying and securing those freedoms and fighting 

for those freedoms, there is a role in that, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of the work of the opposition in holding the government of the 

day to account. 

 

And again that time will come when we put that alternative 

before the people of Saskatchewan in terms of how we think we 

can respond better to the hopes and dreams of Saskatchewan 

people. But there is a certain recognition, obviously, that 

members opposite have a mandate. And that is to be respected, 

and that should serve as the basis for holding them to account. 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

So I guess that informs my perspective, Mr. Speaker, in what 

I’ll be saying in my remarks today in this budget speech debate. 

 

I guess before I get too far into that, I do want to say, as others 

have in this debate, a word of thanks to family and friends, to 

supporters, and to the people in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, the 

people that help me to do the work that I have set before me. I 

want to thank the folks in the different critic areas that I have 

the privilege to represent and to try and seek better answers and 

better accountability for the people of Saskatchewan. And that 

is again something for which I am quite thankful. 

 

I guess the one thing that stood out for me in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, is again for 11-plus billion dollars of expenditure for 

the massive mandate that the members opposite received in the 

campaign, for the great attention that’s been paid over the years 

to, you know, put forward a platform, put forward lists of ideas, 

and then the great pride that is taken in checking those off. I 

think, you know, promises made, promises kept has been a bit 

of a battle cry over the years for members opposite. 

 

The thing that I found most interesting in this budget were the 

things that hadn’t been campaigned on. And certainly, you 

know, I go no further than the remarks last night from the 

member from Cypress Hills, who I consider to be a wise 

individual, an honourable individual in this Assembly, and I 

think he brings a lot, I’m sure, to the debates of that caucus and 

certainly brings a lot to the debates on the floor of this 

legislature. 

 

But one of the things that I couldn’t disagree with him more 

about was the treatment that he gave the situation around 

expanding the number of members of the Legislative Assembly, 

the numbers of politicians by three. And I think, Mr. Speaker, if 

there had been a . . . That of course is one part of a piece of 

legislation, Bill No. 36, that was brought forward to change 

how we build the constituencies in this province, that changes 

how people get counted in that fundamental element of our 

electoral system, eliminating everyone under the age of 18 in 

terms of the purposes of how we count for the building of 

constituencies.  

 

That was one part of Bill 36, but the other part was the question 

of adding three additional politicians. And the member from 

Cypress Hills, being the wise, insightful individual that he is, 

offered up a number of reasons as to why this was called for. 

And I think that begs the question, Mr. Speaker . . . It’s not so 

much the merits of the measures on the table. One of the things 

that is indisputable is that that as a proposal was nowhere in the 

platform of this government when they were on the hustings 

this past fall. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, when you’re going after the very rules 

by which we conduct our elections, after the very basic building 

blocks of our electoral system, the real bricks and mortar of our 

democracy as we practice it here in Saskatchewan, if you’re 

going to do something like that, at very least you should talk to 

the people before you get a mandate to govern. And if you don’t 

have a mandate to do that, Mr. Speaker, and then you foist that 

on the people instead, that says a lot about the commitment of 

your party to democracy. 

 

And I’ve heard different things from members opposite about 

how other governments have done this or other people have 

done this. And I think if that’s their defence, Mr. Speaker, that 

all the other kids are doing it too, or you know, if they’re all 

going to jump off the bridge, I suppose these people would as 

well, but if that’s the defence, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear 

what this is about. And again, there are some thoughtful 

arguments that can be marshalled about the merits of the 

proposals of themselves. But what is indefensible, Mr. Speaker, 

is the fact that this was brought forward after the election 

without gaining a mandate from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Not once did this government come forward to the people of 

Saskatchewan and say, hey what do you think of three more 

MLAs? What do you think of discounting everyone under the 

age of 18 and what that means for the drawing of the electoral 

boundaries in Saskatchewan? And that’s a pretty fundamental 

question, Mr. Speaker, as to how we conduct elections in this 

province and as to how a government would govern. And if 

they hadn’t, if they haven’t got a mandate to do that, then they 

shouldn’t be surprised when we on the opposition benches say, 

that is something you didn’t campaign on. That’s something 

that you weren’t straight with the people of Saskatchewan 

about, and that is something that we will oppose you on. 

 

And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, you get into the question of, 

you know, three MLAs, responding to growth and how that 

does or does not provide for better capacity in the electoral 

system and on and on. You know, again, fair enough arguments 

within a fairly isolated sense, Mr. Speaker. But when you put 

that alongside the fact that this is a government that has 

campaigned on being ready for growth, but alongside that 

they’re reducing the public services that people count on in so 

many different ways by 16 per cent. And that’s what they like 

to call, I think in some circles, cognitive dissonance, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of you say, we need to cut on the one hand 

because we’re growing on the other, but we won’t cut the 

number of politicians. Oh, and by the way, the one part of the 

civil service that is exempt from the four-by-four initiative is 

the Premier’s office. 

 

So on a number of fronts, Mr. Speaker, you know, the members 

opposite, they get up with this hue and cry about, you know, 

how could you oppose us? And they’re so very disappointed in 

us, and all this and that. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re disappointed 

in them because we think they should have campaigned on that. 

If this was such a great idea for them, they should have gone 

out on the hustings and talked to the people from door to door 

and said, you know, all those problems that you’ve got in this 

province — guess what, we’ve got an answer, and it’s going to 

be three MLAs coming forward. We think that would have been 

real interesting to see how that worked out, Mr. Speaker. But 

what they did instead was come after the election, bringing in a 

measure that wasn’t in the platform, wasn’t in the Throne 

Speech, but gets slid in as a last-minute measure just before 

Christmas. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, this is a measure . . . The members 

opposite don’t like it when we bring it up, but this is something 

that shows, I think, priorities on the part of that government 

opposite. And if they’ve got money for more politicians, if 

they’ve got time and effort to devote to messing around with the 

basic building blocks of our democracy, then we find that — to 

borrow a phrase from the member from Northeast — we find 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

that more than just a little passing strange, Mr. Speaker. We 

find that to be a clear example of misplaced priorities. 

 

Another thing that’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

something that I wish that they would have campaigned on in 

the campaign, was the fact of the increase that is going forward 

for the children’s and seniors’ prescription drug plan and 

increasing that amount from $15 to $20. And that’s on a single 

prescription, Mr. Speaker. And if you’ve got multi prescriptions 

and you’re on a fixed income, that adds up very quickly. And 

leaving aside the fact that . . . You know, it gets brought up in 

this House in some kind of equivalency. They say, yes, we have 

to make a tough choice on the one hand; but don’t worry about 

it, we’re increasing the seniors’ income plan on the other, and 

aren’t we great people into the bargain. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, again in terms of the total 

expenditure involved, for the one hand, the increase that’s 

anticipated for the seniors’ income plan, it’s $3 million. But for 

the tax expenditure involved or the amount of money that’s 

involved in the increase on the prescription drug plan and the 

way that’s going to have grandma and grandpa paying more for 

their medicine, that’s worth $10 million. So as the Minister of 

Finance said in the first hours after the budget, this is a 

government that likes to give on the one hand but take and then 

take and then take some more on the other. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, was that something that they got a 

mandate from the people to go out and do, in the way that they 

conduct the finances of this province? It was not. Was that 

something that was in their platform or was in the Throne 

Speech? No, it was not. This is something that comes in after 

the budget. And again they wonder why we have a problem 

with the way they’re conducting their affairs over yonder. Not 

accountable, and it was nowhere to be seen in the election, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And I’ll tell you this for sure. The seniors that I talk to, and I 

have a fair contingent of seniors in the fair riding of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, they were quite interested in what the 

members opposite had to say. They were quite willing to give 

those members a chance in terms of making their case, and they 

were interested in some of the measures that were brought 

forward. 

 

But I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker. They’re particularly 

interested in the fact that after the election, they’ve now come 

forward with this measure to stick it to seniors, to make 

grandma and grandpa, moms and dads, people that have 

contributed all their lives, this is one way where . . . When that 

government was saying the only day better in Saskatchewan is 

tomorrow, well guess what? Tomorrow you’re going to be 

paying extra on your prescription drug plan. And it would have 

been great if they’d campaigned on that, Mr. Speaker. But that 

was not the case. So they wonder why we’re opposing them on 

this, Mr. Speaker? That’s exactly the kind of reason why we are 

opposing them. 

 

I think about what happened with the enterprise region and 

certainly the flagship document that the Premier put out around 

The Promise of Saskatchewan: let’s keep it. Enterprise 

Saskatchewan was of course one of their flagship entities. And 

what they did was overlay that on top of the regional economic 

development authorities. And you know, as my colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre had pointed out in question period today, 

citing the remarks of Paul Martin, everybody got to rearrange 

their lives according to this new way of doing business, and 

how it was going to get government out of the business of 

picking winners and losers, and you know, no end of far-flung 

right wing rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the brass tacks of it, the bottom dollar of it is that this was 

an idea that took something that was working, jacked it around 

for a couple of years to a place where it wasn’t working. And 

you know, we talk to business people as well that were quite 

frustrated with the experience of working with Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. And they come back and say, well okay, we’re 

going to shut it down; we’re going to throw what was good 

about the REDA system out with the baby with the bath water. 

 

And I guess, you know, they’ll talk about increased revenues 

for the municipalities on the one hand. But this is something 

that they didn’t go out and campaign on at election time and 

say, guess what, city of Regina? All the good work that you do 

through the regional opportunities corporation and good folks 

down at RROC [Regina Regional Opportunities Commission] 

— who I might add are located in beautiful downtown Regina 

and part of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, Mr. Speaker — all that 

good work you do, well it should slide back to the city, and the 

city’s going to have to pick up the dollar, and you’re going to 

have to deal with losing a sizable amount of your budget and 

figure it out from there. 

 

And this is a group that’s done tremendous work around 

economic development in the Queen City, has a solid track 

record, and they didn’t even warrant consultation on this, Mr. 

Speaker. This was something where the sector very much felt 

sucker-punched by this government, where the sector felt like 

they had been doing things well and in a very successful, 

productive way. They had been told to reorganize in light of the 

new sort of buzz phrases and plans of the members opposite and 

how this was going to be part of the promise of Saskatchewan, 

and let’s keep it. They do all that, Mr. Speaker, and then they 

get sucker-punched come budget time. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, it would’ve been great if they’d 

campaigned on that at election time because I think we could’ve 

had a real good debate about that, but that was not to be. But 

what does leave, what is falling to the official opposition is to 

hold them to account on this measure. 

 

I think about the tourism agency, Mr. Speaker, and the great 

success that it has had over the years. And alongside that, Mr. 

Speaker, running parallel is the years and years and years of 

trash talk I’ve heard from various other members opposite about 

Crown corporations. I think one of the greatest ironies in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that they’ve rolled it over into a 

Crown corporation. And it’s not because Tourism 

Saskatchewan was failing. Far from it, Mr. Speaker. And you 

know, a number of reviews and including various of their own 

analyses and the cultural paper they put out on the sector, this is 

an agency that is working and working well. But what seems to 

be their central motivation, Mr. Speaker, was revealed by the 

Finance minister when he said this was more about more 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

closely coordinating the communications activity of Tourism 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And you know, I guess given the decade-plus worth of rhetoric 

I’ve heard from certain of the members opposite about, you 

know, Big Brother and control and Crown corporations and the 

dead weight of the public sector and on and on and on, you’d 

think that they could at least live up to some of their own 

rhetoric on this front, Mr. Speaker. But that’s not the case. 

They’re taking what has been a very successful industry-led 

partnership with people who know their business best, that has 

been adjudicated as such not just by, you know, industry 

participants but by their own sort of policy documents when 

they like to roll them out, they’re taking that and they’re rolling 

it over into a Crown corporation — so what, Mr. Speaker? — 

so then they can get their hands on the communications dollars 

and better coordinate the spin. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s something that they 

should have campaigned on. I think that would have been great 

to have a real discussion about out there on the hustings, about 

how you’ll take an agency that is working and working well for 

the province of Saskatchewan, and your main problem with it is 

that you can’t control it enough, that you can’t get your hands 

around its steering wheel hard enough. So again, Mr. Speaker, it 

would’ve been good if they come out to the hustings on that. 

But that was not to be. 

 

The one that I think is most shocking in terms of measures that 

weren’t campaigned on, measures that this government took 

distinct steps to try and sand down the rough edges of the way 

they were perceived by the sector and by people when it came 

to the arts and culture sector in this province, was the film and 

television industry change that we’ve seen in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And again I’ve not been here as long as some in this Chamber, 

Mr. Speaker, but I’ve been here for a while — and not pointing 

any fingers specifically, Mr. Speaker, class of ’91. But the thing 

I want to point out is this. I’ve been around here long enough to 

hear from members opposite about the way . . . I’ve seen them 

throw stones at the film and television industry and to see them 

question various of the decisions and investments that were 

made on what turned out to be a rousing success. And it was 

with great interest that I watched, after the 2003 election in 

particular, Mr. Speaker, the way that members opposite under 

their then new leader, now the Premier of the province, went 

about trying to set out this narrative of no, no, no, we’re not . . . 

We’re not threatening people. We’re very nice. We understand 

the creative economy. We understand the contribution that arts 

make to the economy. And you know, this is an industry that, 

since 1998 with $100 million in the tax credit, has returned six 

times that, Mr. Speaker — more than six times that — $623 

million worth of economic activity. 

 

So the members opposite had sort of come around to at least 

sort of soft-pedalling their arguments around how this was all a 

bad thing, and in fact you know, seemed to really take on a real 

liking for the industry. And when it came time for cameo 

appearances on Corner Gas, Mr. Speaker, you know, you 

couldn’t beat them away with a stick over there. They were real 

excited to come on down and get shined up and, you know, 

jump on the bandwagon. And I guess that’s, you know . . . 

Having seen some of the history play out, Mr. Speaker, that 

kind of makes you a bit sick. But you know, at least it seemed 

to indicate some kind of evolution on the part of the thinking of 

members opposite, some kind of recognition of the facts, that 

the film and television industry provided good jobs for a lot of 

creative people that we want very badly in this economy. It 

provided economic benefit, much more than that 1 to 6 ratio 

that I’ve talked about in terms of the great sort of spinoff 

involved. 

 

But I guess, Mr. Speaker, the chickens come home to roost in 

this budget where, you know, we’d seen them make the move 

on SCN, which again was characterized as cutting off an arm of 

the industry, to moving to the budget, where they moved to cut 

off the head of the industry. And the thousands of people who 

have signed the online petition and what they have to say, it’s 

worth going through those comments, Mr. Speaker, to see what 

those folks have to say. 

 

And there’s some very wise counsel offered up in the 

Leader-Post this morning, Mr. Speaker, by columnist Murray 

Mandryk about the need for the Premier of this province to 

listen to what people in that industry are having to say. And I 

guess, Mr. Speaker, I’m skeptical obviously because I’ve seen 

some of the history for various of the members opposite when it 

comes to the film and television industry. There’s a hostility to 

it that I don’t quite understand. There’s a willingness to ignore 

the way that the studies keep coming in about the financial 

returns on it. There’s a willingness to do something like SCN 

and then, as a sop, promise a task force that takes months and 

months of people’s time and gets them involved and builds 

some kind of sense of hope only to come back around to the 

measure in this budget with the film tax credit, the film 

employment tax credit. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if you . . . There’s an adage that I often 

think of in political life wherein with reasonable people, you 

can reason. And in the case of this measure, Mr. Speaker, I 

think there’s nothing, nothing more plain than just the sort of 

hostility that has been allowed to bubble up after years that I 

remember quite well. But the way that members opposite had 

campaigned and sort of tried to present a sense of the illusion of 

moderate, thoughtful, culture-sector-friendly government and 

on this one decision, Mr. Speaker, reveal what was really at 

hand. 

 

And again, I don’t entirely understand what’s happened here, 

but it doesn’t make sense on the facts. It doesn’t make sense on 

the economic analysis. It doesn’t make sense in terms of the 

way that members opposite went out on the hustings in the last 

campaign, you know, for years before that liked to shine up the 

set of Corner Gas and cameos and all of that. All of that doesn’t 

make sense, but we’re left with a situation where an industry 

has been dealt with by what some characterize as a death blow, 

and this measure consisting of cutting the head off the industry 

and the thousands of people who will be sent from this 

province. 

 

And I urge the members opposite to look at the facts and look at 

the . . . listen with your ears open to the people and find a way 

to make this work. Because this is an industry that’s been built 

up over many years and has had a lot of people devote a lot of 

sweat, blood, and tears to it, Mr. Speaker and that tells the 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

Saskatchewan story so very well. That gives us something to be 

proud of in this province, that helps us to, of all those things we 

have to be proud of in this province, Mr. Speaker, that helps us 

to tell that story to the world. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if they didn’t campaign on it, how the 

heck does it . . . And not only that, Mr. Speaker, not only did 

they not campaign on this, they sent people out for a task force 

and said, we’re going to listen to you. So we’re skeptical about 

this stay of execution that has been provided to the sector by 

members opposite. But I — and maybe this is naive of me, Mr. 

Speaker — but I hope that the members will look at the facts. 

They’ll do the analysis. They’ll talk to people in the industry. 

They’ll talk to people around Canada, and they’ll get over their 

ideological blinders and make a common sense decision on this 

and make a sense, make a decision that works for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So for all of those reasons, Mr. Speaker, there are other things 

that I can say about different issues that I have with this budget, 

but I think that’s where it does get summed up in the 

amendments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, you know, some of the members opposite have 

complained that we haven’t been balanced enough in our 

commentary or that they get very angry and they shout and yell 

about, you know, why aren’t you happier with us and pleasing 

us and why aren’t you saying nice things. And they’re doing 

this in sort of a shouting tone, Mr. Speaker. But you know, 

that’s how some of the folks over there do business. 

 

But I do want to point out some things that I think are valuable 

initiatives in this budget that I like to, that I hope will have a 

positive impact on people’s lives, that I am glad to see in this 

budget. And again, particularly under the better access to health 

care segment of this budget, I am very interested to see what 

impact the increase in funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency fulfills. And again I think, I think as we all know in this 

House, Mr. Speaker, cancer touches so many lives in so many 

terrible ways in this province. And I have so much admiration 

for the people that join that battle with such a terrible disease 

and the dignity and the determination with which people make 

that fight. And I guess any time that we as a government can 

come together and help people that need that help, I think that’s 

a good thing to see. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And I think we’re all reminded of that in various ways in this 

very Chamber today, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the different sort 

of challenges that even members in this Legislative Assembly 

have had put in their way as of this minute. And I guess I don’t 

want to get preoccupied about that, Mr. Speaker, but I think 

that’s representative of the way that cancer touches lives right 

across this province. So in terms of seeing the dollars put 

forward for the cancer fight, I think that’s a particularly 

important expenditure of the public purse, and I’m glad to see 

it. 

 

We’re very interested to see how the surgical care initiative 

works out. We hope that the way that the headlines are being 

written matches up with the story on the ground, but again 

that’s an expenditure that we’re glad to see in the budget. 

I’m glad to see that there’s continued progress on the 

Saskatchewan assured income for disability eligibility. I do 

think that’s an important measure, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 

earlier today, one of the individuals that was introduced around 

the care home announcement, Bev Duncan, before she’d gone 

on to this aspect of her career, had done tremendous work over 

years with the Saskatchewan Voice of People with Disabilities 

and, you know, for me has been a very valuable sort of teacher 

on these issues. And I know that those are people that we’ll be 

looking to hear how this is working out on the ground. But the 

way it appears on the face of it, Mr. Speaker, this appears to be 

a good measure, and I’m glad to see it in the budget. 

 

The child and youth agenda, again I think those are incredibly 

important dollars to be put forward in this budget. We’re glad to 

see those, the work that continues on. Again the minister’s 

introducing Mr. Mark Fox and the folks from FoxValley the 

other day when they were here at the Legislature, we’re very 

interested to see how that work carries on on the ground. But 

again on the face of it, it would seem to be a good expenditure. 

The autism spectrum disorder therapies, additional investment 

there. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, we’re glad to see those 

expenditures. 

 

Something I’m particularly interested in seeing how it works 

out, given where I come from, Mr. Speaker, is the Community 

Mobilization project in Prince Albert. I’m interested to see how 

this investment does in fact bolster and improve what seems to 

be on the face of it some pretty promising work. 

 

I guess the one beef I would have with it is that in the inner city 

of Regina we’ve had some very good work done over the years 

with the inner city community partnership. So not to be too 

much on the, well what about the inner city community 

partnership in Regina, but what about the inner city community 

partnership in Regina, Mr. Speaker? 

 

This is something that brought together the community and the 

three levels of government and made some very significant 

progress on a number of fronts, one of them being improving 

the quality of housing stock in North Central and Core — now 

renamed Heritage Regina — work that was done that informed 

work on the provision of addiction services, work that helped 

build community pride, Mr. Speaker. That was a very important 

initiative. And I know that, for me, this is sort of how I 

understand what’s going on with the Community Mobilization 

project. But one thing for sure that we’ll be looking for is to see 

how that works out. But I think that there were some very 

valuable lessons learned in the experience with the inner city 

community partnership that should have been built upon, 

instead of the way that the momentum stalled and in some cases 

went backwards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Housing has long been a particular interest of mine, Mr. 

Speaker. And again when you know we have a point six 

vacancy on rental accommodation in the city of Regina right 

now — we had it in the fall, and we’ve had it through the winter 

—and in terms of the casework that comes into the constituency 

office in Regina Elphinstone-Centre and some of the most 

desperate circumstances that you’ll encounter with people 

struggling so hard to pay the bills and to put bread on the table 

and to get the kids off to school and to make all these things go 

round, Mr. Speaker, against a backdrop of, like, a desperately 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

tight housing situation and the way that that impacts a life, you 

know, a house is not necessarily a home but try to build a home 

without a house, Mr. Speaker, and you’ve got too many families 

out there that are struggling with that. 

 

And there has been some action over, there were some 

announcements on the part of the government that I’m 

interested to see again how they work out. Some of those 

announcements have been in the works for a considerable 

period of time, Mr. Speaker. Some of those announcements in 

fact represent dollars that were expended quite a few years ago. 

Some of those announcements, Mr. Speaker, will await the 

proof and how that fits into the pudding. 

 

And again, one of the things we’re very skeptical of on this side 

of the House, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that one of the first 

actions the government, that Sask Party government undertook 

when they came to power was to cut the budget for Sask 

Housing Corporation. And so they cut the budget on the one 

hand and then that prompted the need for the Merriman-Pringle 

task force. And the recommendations from that good work, you 

know, still continue to show up to this day, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the way that wasn’t seized upon by the government, 

the way that Merriman and Pringle were able to do their work 

and then the way that the housing crisis continued to get worse. 

So again that didn’t seem to have an effect. And then years after 

that, we had the summit and again, you know, different 

measures on the part of the members opposite. But we know 

this: the point six vacancy rate in terms of rental 

accommodation. We know that homeless shelters and 

emergency housing is desperately, desperately tight in the city 

of Regina. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, for every good measure that the 

members opposite bring forward, and I’d cite the Habitat for 

Humanity monies put in this budget as one example, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly in Regina after they’d reorganized in 2006 

under the able leadership of then Chair Peter Bergbusch and the 

way that that work has been carried forward by Dennis Coutts, 

we think that that was work well done. And we’re glad to see 

those dollars brought to bear in the great work that Habitat for 

Humanity does. 

 

But the thing that we worry about, Mr. Speaker, is that they 

have been one of the main actors on the housing front for too 

long. And different other measures that the members opposite 

have brought forward, frankly we’re skeptical about how that is 

going to put a dint into the desperate situation that we see. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, the vacancy situation around rental has 

been like that for years. And the way that that translates into 

different things, Mr. Speaker, like the increased utilization of 

food banks, again in times when this government has been 

preaching prosperity, we’ve seen the utilization of food banks 

go up. And one of the members that I was very interested to see 

come to this Chamber is the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland  . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. So I’m hearing some from the Minister 

of Social Services. 

 

While it’s very interesting to see that, you know, there’s of late 

a decrease in the utilization of food banks, but what we’ve seen 

for too many of the years under the members opposite — so 

much so that the member from Saskatoon Sutherland 

commented on it when he was both the CEO of the Saskatoon 

Food Bank and the Sask Party candidate for Saskatoon 

Sutherland — too much not being done to help out the most 

vulnerable in our society. And this, the spike in it, is really 

driven by the fact that you’ve got people that, you know, if 

you’re going to make the rent, you’ve got to pick it up 

somewhere else. And you see people responding to that in 

different ways. But certainly utilization of the food bank was 

one of those ways, Mr. Speaker. So that’s something we’ll be 

keeping a very close eye on. 

 

In my duties that have been entrusted to me in the House, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve been entrusted as the critic for SaskEnergy; the 

critic for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing; the critic for 

First Nations Métis Relations; and a critic for Provincial 

Secretary. In those ministries and in that Crown, Mr. Speaker, I 

guess, a few general observations. There’s not enough being 

done in terms of better engaging First Nations and Métis people 

in the economic and educational opportunities in this province. 

And you know, you don’t have to take my word for it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

After the budget there were some pretty scathing comments 

come out from different First Nations leaders on the 

shortcomings of this budget. And again this week saw the final 

arrival of the task force which has been retooled as the First 

Nations and Métis education and employment task force. It 

started out solely focused on First Nations. Rita Bouvier, Don 

Hoium, Chair Gary Merasty — you’re good people and have 

made a great contribution to the public life in this province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the fact that they are now finally being put 

into play when they were supposed to have been put into play 

back in the fall, to see that coming now late, especially when on 

the other hand, Mr. Speaker, members opposite were quite, 

quite happy to make cuts in a very expeditious fashion. I think 

of the cut that was made to the Aboriginal employment 

development program, the way that that program was axed 

unilaterally where agreements were torn up on budget day with 

the press of the fax button, Mr. Speaker. Again, we think there’s 

the hype and we think that there’s the rhetoric, but on the other 

hand, there’s the record. And this of course is taking place 

against a backdrop . . . In 2007, First Nations unemployment 

was on the order of 13 per cent and unacceptably high, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The problem is for the different sort of things they like to 

sprinkle and select in the way that they presented their budget, 

and you know, good things in their own right. It doesn’t take 

away from the overall picture where First Nations 

unemployment is north of 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And again, 

there’s the hype and the rhetoric on the part of members 

opposite but there’s the record, and the record is that 

unemployment for First Nations people has gone from an 

unacceptably high level to increase by almost a third, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again we have high hopes for the work of somebody like 

Don Hoium or Gary Merasty or Rita Bouvier, but you stack that 

up alongside the record of members opposite, and it gives us 

cause for concern. 

 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a great other number of things that I 

could get into in terms of this budget. I think about the fact that 

different unfunded pressures that are coming in the corrections 

system, the way that the Crowns are being used again as a cash 

cow, the way that this government likes to preach a balanced 

budget on budget day but come the mid-term, or the third 

quarter, well guess what? They’ve gone to the Crowns yet again 

to get another dividend to make up for the shortcomings in the 

budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that was interesting 

about the language in the budget was there was, I think it was 

the regular special dividend. You know, any time you’re taking 

the regular special dividend, for one, George Orwell is smiling 

some place, but for two, it for me symbolizes the fact that the 

members opposite have . . . You know, it’s no small wonder 

that they’ve got religion on the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, and you 

know, people like the member from Wood River who suddenly 

is so excited about creating Crown corporations that they want 

to roll over Tourism Saskatchewan from an industry-led agency 

to a Crown corporation. You know, given the way that the 

Crowns have served as the piggy bank for this government 

when it comes to balancing their budget and making sure that, 

you know, if it didn’t add up on budget day and it didn’t add up 

in the first quarter or the mid-term, well then we’ll just go back 

and get another regular special dividend. Again, pretty 

interesting to watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

In so many ways I think about the — to close, Mr. Speaker — I 

think about the seniors whose doors I knocked on in the election 

and who I see on a daily basis in Elphinstone, and I think about 

the way that they were interested in this government opposite, 

but the way that they have reacted in a very negative way to the 

increase on the prescription drug plan that wasn’t campaigned 

on, Mr. Speaker. I think the way that they reacted and the fact 

that, you know, it’s one thing to cut public services on the one 

hand and be promoted by the members opposite and, on the 

other hand though, add three more politicians, three more 

MLAs that they didn’t campaign on. 

 

I think about the young families in Cathedral and frankly 

throughout Regina Elphinstone-Centre, and the people that have 

made good livings and who have been creative and who have 

added to this pride that we have in being from Saskatchewan 

and telling those Saskatchewan stories, and I think about the 

way that this government did not campaign on the film 

employment tax credit being eliminated, Mr. Speaker. And 

worse than that, the way that members opposite over time 

would like to go shine up various film sets, such as the cameo 

from the Premier on the set of Corner Gas. I think about that, 

Mr. Speaker, and the way that that doesn’t jibe with the 

priorities of the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. And I 

know that I’ll not be supporting the budget. 

 

I think about the fact that we’ve got the North Central Shared 

Facility again, what should be, what should have been up and 

running by now but has stalled and gone sideways and had 

multiple announcements from members opposite, but precious 

little in the way of action, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I think 

that that’s a shame and I think it’s something that shows where 

the priorities of the members opposite are and how that doesn’t 

serve the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

I think about the haste with which Herchmer School was torn 

down, but the lethargy or the startlingly slow pace when it 

comes to finding that replacement facility for both Wascana and 

Herchmer, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I think that this is a 

government that has got some pulling up of its socks to do. I 

think of the way that overall the government campaigns on 

saying that it’s a balanced budget and likes to say a lot of harsh 

things in this House, but doesn’t recognize the history or 

recognize the fact in 1991 of more money being spent on 

servicing the debt than was being spent on the entire Education 

budget, Madam Deputy Speaker. I think that’s telling. 

 

I think when there’s a labour skills shortage in this province and 

you see the government increasing the amount that apprentices 

have to pay, I see that as . . . while at the same time going 

around the world to try and find labour to bring to 

Saskatchewan, and not being able to line up that tremendous 

potential labour force that we’ve got here in Saskatchewan with 

those labour force needs, I think that shows a government that’s 

got priorities that are out of touch. 

 

So on so many grounds, Madam Deputy Speaker . . . And again 

there are some good things in this budget, and we don’t dispute 

that. What we dispute, Madam Deputy Speaker, what we 

oppose, what we demand better on, Madam Deputy Speaker, is 

the fact that they campaigned on something that was very 

different from various of the aspects of this budget. And for that 

we will not stand. And for that we will stand opposed to this 

budget. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, to close, I stand in favour 

of the amendment and I will oppose the budget of this 

government. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Ms. Deputy Speaker. This is the 

first time that I get to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Madam. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Madam. Okay, Madam Speaker. This is the 

first time that I get to stand here and take part in a budget 

debate, yet again another balanced budget put forward by the 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

But first, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my wife, 

Marjorie, for all her wonderful support in this endeavour that 

we have chosen to embark upon. And I also want to thank my 

children, Geoff, Dylan, and Ryan, and let’s not forget Kyle — 

actually these are young men building their future in 

Saskatchewan, not children — and their support that allows me 

to be here. 

 

And I want to thank my mom and dad for getting me here as 

well. My mom actually came to watch the budget speech and 

this is the . . . It was the second time she was in the House. The 

last time she was here, she said, she was eight or nine years old, 

but I won’t say how many years it’s been since she’s been here. 

And it was the first time she came to see a budget speech, and 

she was so impressed by the Minister of Finance and the way he 

delivered the budget and keeping Saskatchewan moving 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

forward. 

 

Some of our members, and even the Finance minister, has 

spoken of this before and it’s about our kids coming home. And 

then some of us with younger families and those of us with our 

kids just getting ready to leave the house and become empty 

nesters — well for some of us, we hope we’re there — and we 

don’t have to worry about sending them away to other 

provinces. They actually get to build their future here in 

Saskatchewan. And it’s budgets like this one that enable us to 

honestly say that. 

 

This budget is about keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. And 

what this means is that we were able to balance the budget, 

keep the economy going, and keeping our services affordable 

and sustainable in the long run. 

 

You know, around the world today we see the chaos created by 

unsustainable debt growth and that governments were not living 

within their means. Here in Saskatchewan, we don’t do that any 

more. It’s about fiscal responsibility, without which we can’t 

keep this province moving ahead. To keep moving forward, we 

are doing what we said we’re going to do. And it’s like the 

first-time homebuyers tax credit, that equates to an $1,100 

non-refundable tax credit to families. 

 

We also have the strategy to increase housing supply across the 

province, including direct investment in affordable housing 

projects, improving housing affordability, and enhancing 

strategic planning for housing together with the current program 

and enhancement in this year’s budget. 

 

We expect to have up to 10,000 new rental units and over 2,200 

new entry level homes and over 650 new student residences. 

This budget has funding specifically directed towards the 

housing projects of $15.9 million, an increase of $2.9 million. 

Not a decrease. Not a decrease. This is spread over the rental 

construction incentive and affordable home ownership program, 

because these programs were way more successful than 

projected with the rental construction incentive receiving 

applications for 6,200 rental units and there was only 2,900 

projected. And with the affordable home ownership program, 

there were 850 and only 250 more than that anticipated. 

 

On top of that, this budget includes a 10 per cent per point 

reduction in the corporate income tax levied on income earned 

from the construction and rental of qualifying new multi-unit 

residential rental projects. Funding for this initiative is 

estimated at $34 million for the first five years of the program. 

And this is something that was actually brought to me at the 

doors in Moose Jaw Wakamow during the election. 

 

And some of the other budget highlights related to housing 

include $10.2 million invested in new expenditures by the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, including $1 million for 

Habitat for Humanity to help an additional 20 low-income 

families achieve home ownership. They’ve talked about that. 

We’re helping people achieve home ownership. And $9.2 

million for the rental development plan to develop an additional 

200 rental units in the communities with the long-term housing 

needs. 

 

So what this means to the people of Moose Jaw Wakamow is 

. . . Actually on Friday, I was at a ribbon cutting for the 

construction of a new $2.8 million condominium development 

for 15 low- to moderate-income families, and that’s with 1.9 

million in financing assistance from the Government of 

Saskatchewan through the Headstart on a Home program. And 

I’d like to quote the Minister of Social Services here: 

 

We are pleased that Moose Jaw is the latest community to 

take advantage of HeadStart on a Home to help meet the 

need for entry-level housing in Saskatchewan . . . 

Increasing housing supply within the price range of 

families and individuals currently renting will help many 

Saskatchewan citizens purchase their first home. This 

program is a key initiative under our housing strategy for 

Saskatchewan . . . [and it was] released in August last 

year. 

 

So it’s affecting the people back home in my home community, 

and again, it’s good for Saskatchewan. But that’s what we say 

about our budget and how we like it. And of course being on 

the government side of the House, we’re going to like what we 

say. But let’s listen to what the people of Saskatchewan say. 

 

So let’s quote SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association]: 

 

SUMA is thrilled with the new Corporate Income Tax 

rebate on rental housing. The government is leading the 

way in Canada in addressing this critical urban need, and 

today our current and future residents are better off 

because of this announcement. 

 

And that’s quoting Jim Scarrow, vice-president of the cities, in 

the SUMA news release. 

 

Again, quoting Bill Madder, spokesperson of the Association of 

Saskatchewan Realtors: 

 

Tax reduction lowers the key barrier that has kept private 

dollars from flowing into rental accommodation. This new 

initiative is a very positive step in the right direction. 

 

The rebate on business income tax puts Saskatchewan in a 

leadership role nationally. Tax treatment of rental 

investment and income has been a major federal-level 

problem. Here we see Saskatchewan stepping outside the 

box to come up with a [new] home-grown answer. 

 

News releases out there. And again it’s the people of 

Saskatchewan speaking, not the government. 

 

Well actually we’re quite pleased, something that we 

actually didn’t see coming — the rental housing tax 

rebate. And we’ve been stressing for a couple of years 

now that the tax treatment of rental properties has been a 

real disincentive for people getting into the rental 

marketplace. Well I think it’s a huge step on the rental 

side, and again, the ownership side is something that the 

market tends to take care of itself. But over many years, 

we’ve had a real shortage on the rental side, so I think it’s 

a big help. I think it’s a potential home run for the 

provincial government. 

 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

And that’s Bill Madder, spokesperson for the Association of 

Saskatchewan Realtors, and he was speaking on CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] radio. 

 

The move on housing that you just referenced is going to 

be a positive thing. One of the biggest challenges to our 

growth is a lack of housing for the new people — 

immigrant and new people moving home. But overall 

they’ve struck a good balance. 

 

That’s Steve McLellan, president of the Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce, and that was on CKRM radio. 

 

This is good news, and it’s a surprise too. We have a 

housing crisis in this province and city, so to the extent 

that they’re offering new programs to help this is very 

good news. 

 

Michael Fougere, Saskatchewan Construction Association, 

CJME radio. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And I can go on and on and on with quotes from the people of 

Saskatchewan, not the government. But let’s move on to the 

municipal funding that’s been put forward. The 2012-13 budget 

provides 349 million of direct provincial support to the 

municipalities. This represents a $45 million or 15 per cent, 15 

per cent increase from the 2011-12 budget and 107 million or 

44.2 per cent from the ’07-08 budget. 

 

Now I’m not a math whiz, but when it goes from 15 per cent or 

44 per cent, and it’s being based on actual spending, that 

doesn’t seem like a cut to me. That seems like an increase. This 

funding includes only provincial funding to municipalities and 

as such does not include the $86.9 million of federal funding 

that flows through the ministry directly to the municipalities. 

The revenue sharing in 2013 through Municipal Affairs will be 

. . . Oh, lost my spot. What this means to the people of Moose 

Jaw is that the funding for the city of Moose Jaw in ’07-08 was 

$2,822,796, increased to $6,310,203 in the 2013 budget. 

 

You know, and the thing is we can go right to the website now. 

The Municipal Affairs department has set up this wonderful 

website. You go to www.municipal.gov.sk.ca/revenuesharing. 

I’m a big computer guy, so I like going there. It’s got it set up 

for your cities and your RMs, pulls up this wonderful little 

chart, and it shows every year where we increased the funding. 

We haven’t decreased the funding. 

 

So in Moose Jaw what it means is it’s gone, over the last five 

years it’s gone up 124 per cent. Now it’s not just the cities that 

have increased the funding. What it means is the RM of 

Baildon, which just happens to be part of Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, has seen an increase of 63 per cent. And then the 

RM of Moose Jaw since ’07-08 has seen an increase of 232 per 

cent. Again we see revenue sharing in Saskatchewan going up, 

not going down, not cuts. 

 

So you know, the one thing I’ve noticed most since I’ve been in 

the House is the difference between optimism and pessimism. 

We hear it a lot. And this side of the House appears to be very 

optimistic about the future of Saskatchewan. It’s really hard to 

sit here day after day after day and listen to negative and 

pessimistic. And I love this province, you know. It’s great. My 

kids don’t have to leave because this government has enabled 

them to build their future right here. Pessimism is not the way 

to go, and it showed in the election in November. We have 49 

members; the opposition has nine. And that’s pretty simple 

math, you know. It’s pretty straightforward. And when the 

people of Saskatchewan spoke, they asked us to do that. They 

asked us to move ahead with this province, and that’s what 

we’re doing. And it doesn’t quit with municipal funding. 

 

Let’s take a look at education, education. So again the transition 

strategy will provide school divisions with a transition period of 

two to four years to realign their spending to the new funding 

levels. It will also allow them to strategically plan for changes 

to their service delivery and look for operating efficiencies 

rather than layoffs. An additional $10 million will be provided 

to the school divisions for transitional assistance in 2012-2013. 

As a result of the new funding formula together with the 

funding increase, school divisions will see funding increases 

this year ranging from 1.7 per cent to 14.4 per cent. Now again 

I’m not a math whiz, but when it’s going up by 1.7 to 14.4, that 

signifies an increase to me. 

 

So the operating funding of our schools, the Government of 

Saskatchewan’s overall funding to school divisions has 

increased by 20.7 per cent since 2007. Again that seems . . . It’s 

not rocket science. It’s just math, simple math — 20.7 per cent 

increase. So to sum it up, just about 21 per cent is not a cut in 

funding like the members opposite say. 

 

Again we need to listen to what the people say. 

 

Today’s budget demonstrated shared commitments and 

priorities among the Government of Saskatchewan and 

school boards across the province. We welcome the spirit 

of the new capital funding model and are committed to 

working with the province to ensure that the children and 

youth have adequate, safe, and healthy places to grow and 

learn. 

 

And that’s from Sandi Urban-Hall president of the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association. 

 

We have more news releases: 

 

Well I think that the most exciting piece is that there’s 

recognition that education is a foundational piece to 

growth in Saskatchewan. So with that then there was a 

number of pieces that we heard that are very promising to 

us. 

 

Again, that’s Sandi Urban-Hall and that was on CBC. Now let’s 

hear from the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation]: 

 

STF welcomes priority placed on education in the 

provincial budget. 

 

The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation welcomed the 

provincial government’s pledge that pre-K to 12 education 

is a priority in this year’s provincial budget. 

 

And that’s a Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation news release. 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

You know, Steve Allen, the president of the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation, on CJME radio had this to say: 

 

The increase to funding is welcome and the fact that 

education is placed as a priority for the government. We 

think education is an investment. It’s an investment not in 

just infrastructure, in other things. It’s an investment in 

children, in the people of the province. So that’s very 

important. We do welcome the increases that there are. 

 

And again, that’s Steve Allen, the president of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 

 

And, you know, we can go on and on and on. We can go into 

the northern spending. The 2012-13 budget provides a $273.4 

million or an increase of 2.3 million for activities that benefit 

those in the northern administration district. You know, I’ll talk 

about First Nations and Métis funding. I’ve been a president of 

Métis for a few years now. The 2012-13 budget provides 172.4 

million, an increase of 4.7 million, or 2.8 per cent for First 

Nations and Métis people. And this funding excludes provincial 

expenditures that may be accessed by the general population. 

So again we’re seeing increase, we’re seeing increase. 

 

Training, impacts on post-secondary students, impact on people 

with . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — More numbers. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Yes, more numbers, basic numbers, you 

know, R & D [research and development] again. And, Madam 

Speaker, I just want to sum this up. I want to sum this up and 

keep it simple. We provide a balanced budget and a growing 

economy. The Government of Saskatchewan has achieved a 

balanced budget that keeps the economy growing. By what? 

Maintaining lower debt, historic tax reductions, investing in key 

capital program areas, and sustaining and enhancing core 

government services. And we haven’t even got into health care 

— better access to health care, improved quality of life and 

making life more affordable. This is why, Madam Speaker, I’m 

speaking in favour of the budget and against the motion from 

the opposition. Thank you very much. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I 

remember members of the opposite when they were . . . 16 

years of running this province, and I remember their campaigns, 

how they campaigned about, you know, they’re going to do 

this, they’re going to do that. But they never once said that they 

were going to raise the PST [provincial sales tax]. And as soon 

as they got elected, what did they do? They raised the PST. And 

what have we done? We decreased the PST. 

 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am honoured and humbled to be 

standing here today to address the budget of 2012. I would first 

like to thank my wife, Sheila, for all the support she gives me to 

be here. It wouldn’t be possible for me to be here without her 

support and being behind me all the time and not worrying 

about where I was. 

 

Madam Speaker, the areas of the budget I will discuss are all 

things that I believe are very important to the good people of 

Saskatoon Meewasin, Saskatoon, and Saskatchewan as a whole. 

These are all concerns that I’ve heard at the doorstep and they 

truly resonate with seniors, students, work families. The themes 

of my speech all begin with the letter H, Madam Speaker — 

housing, highways, and health care. 

 

Madam Speaker, it my privilege to stand in the House today to 

present to you and through you these important aspects of the 

budget. Madam Speaker, before I was elected I spent a lot of 

time assisting Aboriginal groups acquire homes for people with 

lower income. Housing to me is a very important issue, to be 

sure. With this budget the government has assured that housing 

in Saskatchewan is available and affordable. 

 

The rapid growth of our province is a mark of progress and a 

sign of our economy is thriving. However the rapid growth 

comes with growing pains. Affordable housing is a concern for 

many Saskatchewan residents, Madam Speaker. These concerns 

were heard at the door by the government and was addressed in 

this budget as well as last year’s budget. At that time, Madam 

Speaker, we announced a five-point plan to make purchasing 

new homes simpler and potential homebuyers with modest 

incomes. This, along with the immigrant investment program, 

has been successful in providing homes to low- and 

moderate-income families. With a goal of 4,600 new housing 

units, these initiatives will certainly help this deserving cause. 

 

Low-income housing is not a cut and dried model, as we cannot 

simply build houses and hope they get filled up. Madam 

Speaker, rental properties, therefore, are equally as important. 

Condominium units in North Battleford, Saskatoon, Prince 

Albert, Moose Jaw, and Yorkton are currently under 

construction through the affordable home ownership program. 

This program was estimated by the government to have 40 units 

purchased and a remarkable 164 applications have qualified for 

funding. Madam Speaker, this is impressive and an example of 

how this government is maintaining the Saskatchewan 

advantage. 

 

Another way government is aiding construction of low-income 

housing is by easing taxation on companies that wish to build 

low-income housing. Madam Speaker, the corporate income tax 

rebate introduced by the Minister of Finance last week will 

equate to 10 per cent of the rental income accrued from these 

projects over 10 years. With this rebate and the other initiatives 

this government has introduced, we expect that an additional 

10,000 new rental units will be constructed. This is a positive 

number, Madam Speaker, and we will continue to support those 

who do work with lower income housing. 

 

We recognize that there is much left to do, but we believe that 

Saskatchewan is in a much better position than it was prior to 

2007. Madam Speaker, we have averaged 5,908 housing starts 

per year since our government took office, and we can all agree 

it is a marked improvement from the 2,900 housing starts per 

year average for the 16 years previous. This government 

housing initiative helped keep the Saskatchewan advantage that 

this province deserves. 

 

Here is some quotes. Pat Fiacco, mayor of Regina, stated: 

 

Thanks to the Premier and the government for the rental 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

construction tax incentives. It’s needed in my city and our 

province. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Another quote: Jim Scarrow, vice-president of cities, stated: 

 

SUMA is thrilled with the corporate tax rebate on rental 

housing. The government is leading the way in Canada in 

addressing this critical urban need, and today our current 

and future residents are better off because of this 

announcement. 

 

Madam Speaker, infrastructure has been a central theme for this 

government since it took office in 2007. Since our government 

was elected, we have invested $2.2 billion in highway 

infrastructure. As an avid outdoorsman, I tend to travel more 

roads than simply Highway 11 between Saskatoon and Regina. 

I and my colleagues understand the importance of road 

maintenance. Over the last four years, Madam Speaker, we have 

built, rebuilt 770 kilometres of rural highways and have repaved 

another 1485 kilometres of roadway. Overall, over 6000 

kilometres of highways have been improved since 2007. 

 

Our government has facilitated much work for these roads. 

However, there is much more that must be done to fix the 

dilapidated highway infrastructure we inherited from the NDP. 

In the first four years of our mandate, Madam Speaker, we 

spent 64 per cent more on roadway infrastructure than the 

previous administration spent in their last four years. The 

government has had to fix many potholes left by the NDP, 

Madam Speaker, and we are just now catching up. This 

budget’s highway provisions in the last four years of road repair 

and maintenance are key parts of keeping the Saskatchewan 

advantage. 

 

Here’s a few quotes: Shantel Lipp, president, Saskatchewan 

Heavy Construction Association news release: 

 

Since 2007, this government has demonstrated 

commitment to dealing with years of neglect of our 

highways and infrastructure, while at the same time 

ensuring new infrastructure is in place to accommodate 

our growing economy. 

 

Another quote. Sean Wilson, board of directors, Saskatchewan 

Heavy Construction Association news release: 

 

This budget will allow us to work in partnership with the 

Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure to maximize the 

efforts of our industry. This kind of spending means we 

can promise long-term, predictable employment to our 

employees. 

 

Madam Speaker, health care is quite important to me because, 

Madam Speaker, frankly, none of the members present today 

are getting any younger and that includes myself. Health care 

under our mandate has seen great improvements and we intend 

to continue the good track record of our government with this 

budget. Over the last four years, Madam Speaker, we have 

worked diligently on the Saskatchewan surgical initiative, 

which was created to improve access to patient care in 

Saskatchewan. Since the initiative’s implementation, Madam 

Speaker, we have seen drastic reductions in wait times. The 

number of people waiting longer than 18 months for surgery 

has dropped 81 per sent since the initiative began. And the 

number of people waiting more than 12 months has dropped by 

69 per cent. These are positive numbers, Madam Speaker, and 

we are proud of them. We have much to do here, but we hold 

our heads high and stand firmly behind this initiative and the 

impressive results it has produced. 

 

A promise to increase the Saskatchewan Income Plan by $50 

was kept with this budget, Madam Speaker. This initiative is 

important to those seniors who depend on this money, and it has 

been far too long since this amount of money has been raised. 

The increased seniors who qualified for Saskatchewan Income 

Plan will receive $240 per month, which means, Madam 

Speaker, that these qualifying seniors will receive $2,880 a 

year. This is a very, very positive increase as much a needed 

one considering what these qualifying seniors were receiving 

before 2007. Prior to 2007, seniors received $90 per month 

through the Saskatchewan Income Plan, which amounted to 

$1,800 less than what seniors will receive after this budget. 

Madam Speaker, in the five years we’ve been fortunate enough 

to govern Saskatchewan, we have tripled the amount provided 

through the Saskatchewan Income Plan. Madam Speaker, this is 

another reason we will retain the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

The most important initiatives in this budget, Madam Speaker, 

are those that will help the people that need it the most. The 

first initiative is the increase that this government has given to 

the Saskatchewan assured income for disability program. 

Madam Speaker, as the Minister of Finance so eloquently, on 

budget day, on budget day: “Our goal is to make Saskatchewan 

the best place in Canada for persons with disabilities and to 

make that part of the Saskatchewan advantage.” 

 

We have added nearly $18 million to this very worthy program, 

which translates to an increase of available benefits of $200, 

and an increase of 350 in the fourth year. An increase to this 

program also means that the number of people who are eligible 

for the program will more than triple to as many as 10,000 

eligible adults. We promised expanded coverage for people 

with disabilities and we kept that promise, Madam Speaker. 

 

The second initiative is geared towards reducing wait times for 

cancer patients in Saskatchewan. Madam Speaker, cancer is a 

horrible disease that unfairly takes the lives of those inflicted 

with it well before their time. This piece of the budget is 

crucial, Madam Speaker, so we can reduce the wait times for 

treatment and attempt to eradicate this disease. We have made 

significant progress in this area since we received our first 

mandate in 2007. The wait-lists have dropped from almost 600 

people waiting for treatment to less than 100. This has 

positively impacted people in our province, and we will 

continue to build on this success. As the Minister of Finance 

told us, this budget provides an extra 13.8 per cent for the 

Cancer Agency which translates to $16.9 million. This funding 

provides for more than 6,000 new patient referrals, nearly 

30,000 chemotherapy treatments, 39,000 mammograms. This is 

a huge increase and an important one, Madam Speaker. 

 

We will also be providing an extra $4 million to expand the 

screening program for colorectal cancer province-wide. We are 

on the right track with this much needed funding, but there is 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

still much to do in this area. We will continue to support cancer 

patients through their battle with this extremely unfair disease, 

and we will pledge to do all that we can to aid them, Madam 

Speaker. 

 

Here’s a quote. Rosalee Longmoore, president, SUN 

[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] news release: 

 

We are interested in the budget’s potential to work 

towards addressing patient and workplace safety, 

improving access, and reducing surgical wait times. SUN 

is looking forward to continuing our collaborative 

partnerships with the government and the ministry to see 

exactly how these initiatives and resources can be used to 

further enhance quality of care in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan patients and their families. The safety of our 

patients and their families is paramount important to 

registered nurses in Saskatchewan. SUN supports the 

government’s attention to this issue. 

 

Madam Speaker, this budget is balanced, prudent, and is what 

residents of this fine province want to see and wanted to see 

when we were most recently elected. Saskatchewan residents 

want fiscal responsibility for their government to make good 

economic decisions with this budget. 

 

Madam Speaker, we are providing all of these things, especially 

so in the areas I touched on today. It is important for our 

government to grow responsibly and to make sure that we are 

spending within our means. With this budget, Madam Speaker, 

we are keeping promises while balancing the books. This is the 

responsibility that Saskatchewan residents want and deserve. 

Madam Speaker, this is what this government is providing. 

With that, Madam Speaker, I support this budget. Thank you, 

Madam Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member for 

Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam 

Speaker, I just want to acknowledge the city of Moose Jaw and 

how proud I am to represent the people of Moose Jaw North 

and the city of Moose Jaw. And that was kind of confirmed in a 

news release that came out just last week that says, 

“Saskatchewan cities keep competitive advantage.” It cites that 

Moose Jaw, Regina, Saskatoon and Prince Albert all placed in 

the top one-third ranking in a comparison of 133 business 

locations across 14 countries. Saskatchewan cities have 

continued to maintain a competitive advantage according to the 

2012 competitive alertness study released by KPMG. Among 

33 Midwest American and Western cities, Moose Jaw ranked 

first, Prince Albert second, Regina fourth, and Saskatoon 

seventh. So it’s good to acknowledge the cities and the progress 

of the cities in this great province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Madam Speaker, I am pleased to talk about Saskatchewan. 

We’ve come a long way over the past number of years. There’s 

been great change in this province, change in direction from 

mediocrity to pride, from have-not to leading the nation in 

many factors: population growth, economic development. The 

nation of many factors includes the growth that we see in our 

cities, in our towns. We’ve gone from depopulation to the 

strongest growth and the lowest unemployment rates in Canada. 

This has become the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Through this growth and economic success is the challenge of 

keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. Madam Speaker, this 

budget is keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. It’s balanced. 

It’s sustainable. It’s keeping the promises of improving the lives 

of Saskatchewan people and continue growth in infrastructure, 

education, health, keeping the economy strong. Yes, 

Saskatchewan has enjoyed unprecedented growth over the past 

number of years. We have seen the province grow from 

have-not status to a province that’s leading the nation in 

economic growth. Saskatchewan is forecast to lead the nation 

with 3.1 growth this year and again at 3.3 per cent growth in 

2013. 

 

There was an article in the Leader-Post just last week that 

Saskatchewan leads economic surge. Not just growth, Madam 

Speaker, economic surge. Saskatchewan will lead the province, 

and I’m quoting from the article, “Saskatchewan will lead the 

provinces in economic growth this year” according to the Royal 

Bank. RBC expects that rising demand of the provincial’s 

natural resources, increased capital expenditure and continued 

growth in agricultural production will continue to real GDP 

growth of 4.6 per cent in 2012 and 4.7 per cent in 2013, the 

article says. 

 

When we look back, and judging from some of the comments 

we heard from the member from Athabasca . . . And we look 

back, and what he’s saying was that the NDP is the only party 

that can lead this province. But we look back on their history 

and the mismanage of the NDP government. And my learned 

friend from Wood River talked about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company] and Navigata and 

dot-com, Craig Wireless, Channel Lake, even mega bingo, 

where that government lost over $200 million. And they 

complain about and say . . . talk about the expansion of three 

more MLAs, when they lost that kind of revenue — $200 

million in 15 different ventures. 

 

And to talk about good ethics, one of the things that always 

comes to my mind when we talk about ethics is the Murdoch 

Carriere case, where he harassed women. And I know, talking 

to the people in Moose Jaw that worked in the government 

building in Moose Jaw while this man was there, there was 

women that wouldn’t go in the elevator with him. It’s a 

two-storey building, Madam Speaker, and they wouldn’t go into 

the elevator because they knew they would be harassed. 

 

Well this man was found guilty on two counts of common 

assault. But did the present government, the NDP government 

fire him? No, they let him resign, and they paid him out 

$270,000 for a settlement and ensured compensation for 35 

years of pensionable service through the government services. 

The women in this case, nine women that came forward, had a 

combined restitution of $135,000, only half of what they paid 

this guy. And yet the member from Athabasca talks about the 

ethics and the goodness of the NDP. We can’t go back there. 

They’re unethical. They’re not good people to run this kind of a 

province. They have no understanding of growth. They have no 

understanding of business and they do not believe in success. 

 

If you remember the old map of resources that used to circulate 

— and I’ve got one in my office — of the natural gas and oil 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

wells in Western Canada, and there was a stark border crossing 

where the oil wells and the gas stopped right at the 

Saskatchewan border. It’s because it was never developed. It 

was never used for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 

Madam Speaker, those days are all changed, and now the 

province is doing well. 

 

[16:15] 

 

We can talk about our generation of children who left the 

province. I think that was the NDP idea of child care. Send the 

young people out. They’ll get established somewhere else. We 

don’t have to worry about child care. The lack of foresight in 

the development of our riches in this province has been changed 

around, for the province is doing very well. And, Madam 

Speaker, we’ve come a long way and we’re not going back 

there. We’ve come by it with honesty, integrity, and foresight, 

caring, and good governance, and above all, growth in the 

economy and growth for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The budget was about maintaining growth and keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage. The economic strife that we see 

throughout other parts of the world — and I think of Greece at 

this time — where trying to cut back on social programs has 

caused great strife in those places. Even when we look to our 

neighbours south of the border in the United States where 

they’re struggling with recession. Well here in Canada, even 

Ontario, which was a powerhouse for years, is now a have-not 

province. Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction, the only 

province, that has a balanced budget so far this year, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a balanced budget. It’s the fifth balanced budget of 

this government. And what is more, this budget, a balanced 

budget, has no tax increases and no new taxes. 

 

In the last four years we’ve had balanced budgets along with tax 

reductions, reductions in property tax and income tax, corporate 

tax, so that we can be competitive in this world. We’ve invested 

in infrastructure and highways and education, in training. 

We’ve paid down considerable debt — 44 per cent. And we still 

have a balanced budget with no new taxes, no increase in taxes. 

We’re growing the economy, improving services, and keeping 

Saskatchewan strong — keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

We’re keeping the budget balanced. We’re keeping the 

spending in check. We’re keeping our economy strong and 

growing, and keeping promises made in our election and 

keeping the debt low. Being responsible to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, focusing on quality of life for all citizens. This 

budget is about health. It’s about education. It’s about 

supporting the families and housing and the special needs for 

those that are most vulnerable. 

 

When we look at the health care, we’ve increased funding for 

the Saskatchewan surgical initiative. This will allow 8,000 more 

surgeries a year toward our goal of reducing surgical wait times 

to not more than three months by 2014. 

 

Planning continues on the hospitals in North Battleford. And of 

particular importance to the Moose Jaw and area is the new 

hospital in Moose Jaw. And I can tell you that planning is 

continuing. There’s negotiations going on right now between 

the city and the Five Hills Health Region. And in any day now 

they will be able to actually announce where the new site will 

be for the new hospital. Keeping the Saskatchewan advantage is 

investing in health care and looking after patients and making 

patients first. 

 

This budget introduces a new education funding formula and 

increases K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] funding. This 

formula developed a new model to ensure funding is provided 

in an equitable manner right across the province. With the new 

funding formula, education funding is increased anywhere from 

1.7 to 14.4 per cent. We’ve increased funding for school 

divisions by over 18 per cent in our first term. The budget is 

also providing $38.6 million to begin construction on six new 

schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Saskatchewan advantage scholarship provides all new high 

school graduates with up to $2,000 over four years to be applied 

to tuition fees at any Saskatchewan post-secondary institution 

and help cover the costs of post-secondary education. 

Saskatchewan already has the best student retention plan, with 

$20,000 for university and college graduates. This budget 

provides $12 million increase to support operating costs at our 

post-secondary institutions. Keeping the Saskatchewan 

advantage is supporting and improving education. 

 

When we look at family support — extending the PST 

exemption to children’s clothing for ages 17 and under, 

expanding the active family tax benefit for those 17 and under, 

and providing funding for 500 new daycare spaces. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve increased the daycare spaces from 8,850 under 

the NDP. We’ve increased that by over 4,400, an increase of 

over 40 per cent of daycare spaces when the new 500 are in 

existence. So we’ve increased and planned for an expansion of 

over 40 per cent. Keeping the Saskatchewan advantage is 

supporting families. 

 

When we look at housing, last year our government announced 

a five-point housing plan, making it easier for Saskatchewan 

people in modest incomes to purchase a new house. Our goal is 

to add at least 4,500, 4,600 new housing units over the next five 

years. And last week — and the member Wakamow mentioned 

this — last week we were pleased to attend the official opening 

of a groundbreaking project with the Social Services minister to 

provide 15 family units in under the Headstart program. 

Keeping the Saskatchewan advantage is assisting in affordable 

housing. 

 

People with disabilities is part of keeping the Saskatchewan 

advantage. We are keeping our promise to increase both the 

number of eligible individuals and increase the monthly 

benefits under the Saskatchewan assured income for disabilities 

program. We are adding another $18 million to the program to 

provide greater benefits to a larger number of people with 

disabilities. The available benefits will go up by $200 in July of 

this year, and our goal is to make Saskatchewan the best place 

in Canada for persons with disabilities and to be part of the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

To our low-income seniors, we will keep our promise to 

increase the seniors’ income plan by $50 a month and $10 a 

month for the next three years. Mr. Speaker, in our first term we 

doubled the benefits for the low-income seniors, which they 

have not had for 16 years under the NDP. And by the end of our 

first . . . by the end of this next time, Mr. Speaker, the seniors’ 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

income plan will have tripled from what it was under the NDP. 

Providing a seniors’ and personal care home benefit of up to 

$3,000 annually is also a benefit to low-income seniors residing 

in personal care homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, keeping the Saskatchewan advantage is assisting 

low-income seniors. To keep Saskatchewan moving forward, 

we will keep the Saskatchewan advantage, balance our budget, 

grow our population, invest in infrastructure of schools and 

hospitals and roads and highways. We will care for the 

underprivileged. We will make safe Saskatchewan, keep 

spending in line with fiscal responsibility, maintain a low debt, 

and keep competitive taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was some difficult choices. The film tax 

credit was a tough choice. I believe when it was first brought in 

it was a good decision. But as other jurisdictions became more 

competitive and the Canadian dollar, which once was 80 cents 

American, is now at par, without a bigger investment, the 

competitive edge is being lost. Yes I’ll admit that Corner Gas 

— and I like watching that show — really put Saskatchewan on 

the map and it was because of this tax advantage. But the 

follow-up series of Dan for Mayor and Hiccups all moved to 

BC [British Columbia]. So you can see that advantage has been 

disappearing. 

 

And yet the Leader of the Opposition wants to jeopardize 

growth in other areas. When he was asked where would the 

money come from, the Leader of the Opposition said there are a 

number of areas where they could find the money for films; one 

of the things they could have done is to look at some of the 

initiatives around agriculture and look at some of the things 

they’ve done for municipalities. Mr. Speaker, he was willing to 

jeopardize the agricultural sector, the rural sector, for the sake 

of films. I’m sorry, I don’t think we should go there. 

 

We are a responsible government. Enterprise Saskatchewan, in 

some areas, I think they were doing very, very good work, and 

we trust that the stage is now set that they will continue to do 

that work through local, regional support. I suggest that no one 

knows better than the local authorities what economic priorities 

should be. Through co-operation, municipal governments can 

best prioritize goals and work together to attract development 

for economic planning. 

 

With the new sharing formula for the municipalities of 1 per 

cent of the PST, municipalities received a 29.5 increase in 

2011-2012, and this year the municipalities will receive a 

further 9.5 per cent increase. In Moose Jaw itself, that went 

from 2,822,000 in 2007 to 6,310,000 in 2012 — that’s more 

than double, Mr. Speaker. I’m confident consideration will be 

given for investment in economic development for growth as 

this responsible government keeps on moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while other jurisdictions in Canada continue to 

struggle with sluggish economies, Saskatchewan remains strong 

and remains growing. This budget keeps the Saskatchewan 

advantage. It will keep our province moving forward. It will 

keep our province growing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment offered by the opposition is, really 

confirms the irresponsibility that they had and they still seem to 

have. I will not be supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker. I 

will support the government. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member of Massey Place has 

raised a point of order. Would the member briefly state his 

point of order? 

 

Mr. Broten: — Happy to, Mr. Speaker. I was listening to the 

remarks from the member from Moose Jaw North, and in his 

remarks he made some comments about members of Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. And the remarks that I heard in his 

speech, Mr. Speaker, in referring to members of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition, were that we were not ethical and not good 

people. The member will know that all members of the 

Assembly are honourable and that it is not appropriate in any 

way to impugn the character of another member of the 

Assembly. And I would ask the member from Moose Jaw North 

to please withdraw those remarks and apologize, and failing 

that, Mr. Speaker, for you to rule on the matter. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

believe the comments raised by the member for Moose Jaw 

North, I mean this was debate, points under discussion. 

Members yesterday from the opposite side were impugning 

members over here, at which point the Speaker actually had to 

intervene, had to remind them of the rules of decorum in the 

House. And I’m not sure if the member remembers that, but that 

happened last night. Mr. Speaker may want to review the 

matter, but my view is we were simply undertaking a debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I will review Hansard and bring back 

a ruling to the Assembly. I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

fellow colleagues and members opposite. It’s with great 

pleasure that I rise in the House today, and I’m thankful for the 

opportunity to participate in the budget debate of 2012. It’s an 

honour to attend this sitting of the Assembly and represent the 

interests of Saskatchewan Rivers constituency, and obviously 

I’m very pleased to be here today. And I’m excited about the 

future of people and their choice of the province. I’m very 

excited that they chose me to be here today. Thank you. 

 

And also I would like to thank my family and my very patient 

friends. And when I go home on the weekends and this little 

3-foot blond comes running up to me and says, grandma, 

grandma, I’m so happy to see you on this weekend. Well he 

says, grandma, I’m happy to see you because I’m home on the 

weekends, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then I realize all the 

sacrifices of the people in this Assembly, why we are here and 

what is important. And I’m here to help change the attitude of 

the province and also to bring positive change for my family 

and my friends and my family. 

 

And at this time I would also like to thank my CA, Marcus and 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

Joan for their dedication . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And I 

believe the members opposite will have their turn to speak. I 

would like to speak right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 

also like to thank my campaign team and my executive for their 

efforts to bring me here. And as they chirp across, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I do believe they’ll get their time. I would like my 

allotment. 

 

First of all, I would like to acknowledge the member from 

Canora-Pelly for his hours of work put forth for this strong and 

this very sound budget. It’s a budget which signifies and 

focuses on quality of life for all, a budget that is all about 

keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. It’s a balanced budget 

about making prudent choices and sustaining valued programs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, working in this building makes one think 

about accountability and integrity. The code of ethical conduct 

for members of the Legislative Assembly states, quote: 

 

We believe that the fundamental objective of public office 

is to serve our fellow citizens with integrity in order to 

improve the economic and social conditions of all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my speech I intend to prove that this 

quote is very true by highlighting our government’s budget 

objectives of growing the economy and leading the nation. Our 

debt is lower. Our province’s finances are sound. In fact our 

debt to GDP ratio is now the second lowest in Canada. 

Saskatchewan has projected to lead the nation in economic 

growth and we hope to keep our AAA rating from Standard & 

Poor’s that was recognized just before the new year. 

 

Communities all across Saskatchewan are growing as a result of 

our province’s strong economy. In fact 5,600 women were 

employed in Saskatchewan in 2010 than in 2008, 5,600 more 

women, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I came across this statement from John Rockefeller that I would 

like to share with you: “I believe . . . that the world owes no 

man a living but that it owes every man an opportunity to make 

a living.” I believe people want to succeed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I believe they want to reach their full potential. Our 

Saskatchewan attitude and our passion for hard work and 

continued growth will be the cement that holds together the 

building blocks of our province. Attitude is a small thing that 

makes a big difference, and that’s our Saskatchewan advantage. 

No other province in Canada has been able to deliver a balanced 

budget with a surplus so far this year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, people are coming here because they 

recognize Saskatchewan is a place of opportunity. A great place 

to work. A great place to raise a family. Our own family is 

growing. My daughter Brigitt and son-in-law, Chris De Villiers 

blessed us with a little girl named Ella, for my mother. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, she was born on the 11th hour of 11, 11, 

11. Our Creator is truly amazing. And I feel very fortunate to 

work and to build a life in this great province. 

 

Saskatchewan people have worked hard over the past few years 

to establish the Saskatchewan advantage, and we, your 

government, intend to do everything we can to keep this 

province moving forward with a balanced budget. 

 

I see Saskatchewan today with potential for more businesses, 

more families, more newcomers, and it’s important that we 

continue to build on that foundation of success that has been 

laid over the past few years. We cannot revert to the old 

patterns of thinking that kept Saskatchewan a have-not province 

for so long. With our incredible resource base and our great 

work ethic, we are just beginning to tap the potential that for 

years existed just below the surface, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just 

below the ground — not only mineral wise but in the attitude 

and in the spirit of Saskatchewan people. 

 

When you give people freedom and choice, they will do 

amazing things. Saskatchewan is now a place where people can 

prosper by moving things forward. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Winston Churchill once said, “We make a living by what we 

get, but we make a life by what we give.” 

 

I believe we are meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people, the 

needs of the rural communities of the Saskatchewan Rivers 

constituency that I represent. We are working with 

municipalities to keep Saskatchewan moving forward, and our 

budget provides record sharing revenue for Saskatchewan 

municipalities. This budget will provide 59.9 million in 

provincial support to municipal infrastructure, the second 

highest total in Saskatchewan history. We’ll also distribute 

237.4 million to municipalities in record municipal revenue 

sharing. Saskatchewan RMs, villages, towns, will continue to 

grow and Saskatchewan Rivers will benefit. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe we have the capacity to make 

this the best generation in the history of Saskatchewan. If we do 

our duty, if we meet our responsibilities and our obligations as 

Saskatchewan citizens, then this generation of 

Saskatchewanians are going to be the best generation in the 

history of Saskatchewan and a source of inspiration for others 

to follow. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was looking at the municipal revenue 

sharing, I was looking at all the towns and the RMs in Sask 

Rivers constituency. I came across Big River town, they will 

have an increase of 70 per cent; Meath Park, 113 per cent; 

Candle Lake village, 88 per cent; and the rural municipalities of 

Lakeland, 183 per cent; and Buckland RM, 202 per cent, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. That is great news for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact I would like to quote Dave Marit, president of SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]: “While we 

saw budget cuts in some ministries and limited increases in 

funding for others, the substantial increase in revenue sharing 

for municipalities is demonstrative of the Provinces’ 

appreciation for the growing demands on municipal 

governments.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sask Rivers is mainly a rural riding, and 

constituents have been contacting me with very positive 

comments on the budget. Saskatchewan farm and ranch families 

are the backbone of our province, and we will continue to be 

committed to agriculture in this budget. This is the second 

largest budget ever announced, and this government has had the 

four largest agriculture budgets in provincial history. I’m so 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

very proud of that. Record crop insurance coverage of $177 

million and record agriculture research continues to highlight 

this government’s commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to presenting the fifth consecutive balanced budget, 

the Saskatchewan government announced 99 million for 

research and development, the highest amount in Saskatchewan 

history, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This budget will also continue to 

fund beaver, rat, and wild boar control programs as well as farm 

and ranch water infrastructure programs. Also an important 1 

million in new funding for international marketing and trade has 

been allocated. Rural families have been and will continue to be 

a priority for our government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sask Rivers’ rural constituents have 

contacted me, unhappy with the opposition statements from a 

CTV live interview. The Opposition Leader quoted: 

 

Well practically there are a number of areas where they 

could have left money for films, and one of the things they 

could have done is look at some of the initiatives around 

agriculture and look at some of the things they’ve done for 

municipalities. And I think they forgot how much money 

is generated in something like the film industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that’s an insult to myself — I’m 

a rancher — to the other farming families, to rural 

municipalities, and all my neighbours and friends around the 

farms where I live. Rural Saskatchewan will not be forgotten 

under our government. 

 

Infrastructure continues to be a highlight of this year’s budget, 

and during the recent campaign, we promised to invest 2.2 

billion over four years. And we are on track to fulfill that 

promise. Saskatchewan Rivers constituency will continue to see 

improvements due to that promise. For example, residents 

between Nipawin and Love will see repaving on their Highway 

No. 55. 

 

23.5 million will be invested to support economic growth and 

safety on rural municipal roads from the municipal roads from 

the economy program. The budget for Highways and 

Infrastructure is 581.5 million. This will improve a lot of 

provincial highways. I believe the number is 1200 kilometres, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the twinning of Highway 11 between Saskatoon and Prince 

Albert will be completed this year as well, to the gratitude of 

many tourists entering Sask Rivers constituency from across the 

province and the nation. Our government makes highways and 

infrastructure a priority and will continue to repair and improve 

the Saskatchewan highways system. 

 

We, this government, are committed to major initiatives to 

ensure the safety and security of Saskatchewan’s transportation 

network. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to put on record a 

quote from Shantel Lipp, president of Saskatchewan Heavy 

Construction Association. 

 

She said: 

 

Since 2007 this government has demonstrated 

commitment to dealing with years of neglect of our 

highways and infrastructure while at the same ensuring 

new infrastructure is in place to accommodate our growing 

economy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are, all of us, our government, are 

keeping the promises we made during the election campaign. 

We are improving access to health care. Our budget commits 

5.5 million increase for the STARS helicopter ambulance 

program, and to facilitate a rural physician locum pool to 

improve access to physician care, 1.5 million has been 

implemented. We are committed, and we have committed 60.5 

million for the Saskatchewan surgical initiative, a 50 million 

increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I am very happy to live in Saskatchewan in this time frame. I 

am very happy to be bringing grandchildren into the province 

and watching them grow and prosper. To quote the Premier that 

“The only day better than today in Saskatchewan is tomorrow 

in Saskatchewan.” 

 

In conclusion, I am honoured to be a part of this government 

working with my colleagues, working together to create a 

strong and growing province, ensuring all people benefit in 

Saskatchewan’s growth. Most of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 

very humbled to represent the constituents of Saskatchewan 

Rivers, and I respectfully wish then to thank them for their 

continued guidance and their support in moving our province 

forward. Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting 

the amendment, but I am truly honoured to be supporting this 

budget. Thank you very much, sir. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, request for leave to make a 

statement. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave to 

make a statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Withdrawal of Statement 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, there was a derogatory remark 

in my comments. I would apologize and would like to withdraw 

the comments at this time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I thank the member from Moose Jaw North for 

his words. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

pleasure today to stand and talk along with the rest of my 

colleagues on this budget. Mr. Speaker, one of the first things I 

want to do is thank a few people. Of course, Mr. Speaker, the 

first is my wife Terry who has put up with me being gone a lot. 

Surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, that also includes Fridays and 

weekends. Now I know there are some people here seem to 

think that rural MLAs don’t do anything on Fridays and 

weekends, but I do beg to differ. It seems constituents in the 

rural areas want to put a face on their representative. Maybe 

that’s why there seems to be a lack of NDP memberships from 

rural Saskatchewan, or maybe that’s just why there’s a lack of 

NDP members, period. 

 

I would also like to thank the CAs in our office — Shelley and 

Cindy, and of course sometimes Charlene. Mr. Speaker, I’d be 

remiss if I did not mention Cindy just became a grandmother 

for the first time of a bouncing baby girl named Taylor Warner. 

Cindy’s starting to look very, very old, Mr. Speaker. In fact 

she’s starting to look like a grandmother. That being said, Mr. 

Speaker, these women do a great job of looking after the Carrot 

River Valley office, and I really would be lost without them. 

 

[16:45] 

 

This budget addressed many of the needs and wants of Carrot 

River Valley. First off, it’s balanced. It’s balanced on both the 

GRF [General Revenue Fund] and the summary, so I really 

don’t know what the member from Rosemont is complaining 

about. On the other hand, maybe I do. Remember last 

November, when the NDP were promising the world — what 

was it? — something like 4 billion or $5 billion in promises. 

They were coming out with them every day. That must be it, 

Mr. Speaker. They wanted us to be like Greece or maybe Italy 

or maybe . . . Well I’ll tell you what, I’m not just sure. 

 

But the one thing I am sure of, the people of Saskatchewan 

didn’t want that kind of debt. What the people of Saskatchewan 

wanted and the people of Carrot River Valley wanted was a 

fiscally prudent government, a government that could not only 

balance books but could also deliver on their promises, making 

Saskatchewan a better place to be. And that is why, Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is sitting on this side of the 

House and the NDP is over there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Carrot River Valley is a wonderful 

constituency — good farm land and farmers, plus lakes, forest, 

some industry, wildlife, although I’m getting a little long in the 

tooth for that. It’s just a great place to live and raise a family, 

and I am proud and honoured to represent it. Maybe some 

Friday and weekend that the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has off, she should come up and visit this great part of the 

province. I should warn her though that be prepared to put a fair 

number of kilometres on her car if she’s going to cover the 

constituency because it does stretch more than a few city 

blocks, a lot more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us take a look at what this government is doing 

to help Carrot River Valley move forward and the province. A 

new long-term care facility is being constructed in Tisdale, a 

new school earmarked for Hudson Bay, a new Cumberland 

College facility in Nipawin, mills reopening in both Carrot 

River and Hudson Bay, not because of government money 

being thrown at them, but because these companies see 

Saskatchewan as a new forward-thinking province. Removal of 

just about all the education portion of tax on farm land. You 

know, and there’s been so much road construction, so much 

highway work done in our constituency that it would just take 

too long to list them all. But I will say that now you can actually 

drive down the highways without having to use a four-wheel 

drive truck. 

 

Now the revenue sharing, that one point of the PST that was 

promised to our municipalities, let’s just take a look at what it’s 

done for our towns and our municipalities in Carrot River 

Valley. In the towns: Tisdale, since 2007 gone up 109 per cent; 

Arborfield, 90 per cent; Carrot River, 105 per cent; Nipawin, 

106 per cent; Hudson Bay, 76 per cent. 

 

And the RMs, with the work that they have to do on their 

bridges and their roads, they don’t have to go begging anymore 

because Arborfield RM went up 89 per cent. Connaught RM 

went up 99 per cent. Moose Range went up 57 per cent. 

Nipawin went up 62 per cent. Tisdale went up 80 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a look at agriculture 

because our Carrot River Valley is mainly an agriculture area. 

We do have some industry admittedly, but we have a lot of 

agriculture. Let’s just see what’s in this budget for agriculture: 

321.4 million to fund crop insurance, AgriStability, and 

AgriInvest; 11.8 million, a new funding for the 

federal-provincial Growing Forward programs, including 5.3 

million for the beneficial management practices program; 3.5 

million for the intensive livestock operations environmental 

program; 2 million for the wheat genomic research; 790,000 for 

the farm business development initiative for young farmers; and 

210,000 for the grain bag recycling program, which would be 

fully offset by federal government revenue; 1.3 million to 

ensure regional access to meat inspection services; 1 million for 

international market development and trade advocacy; 1 million 

for the rat control program; 530,000 for the Saskatchewan 

Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals to address 

cases of animal neglect; 500,000 in new funding for the beaver 

control program; and 250,000 for the Global Institute for Food 

Security. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are very important things, very 

important things in the Carrot River Valley constituency and, as 

I should say, all across the province. 

 

Now I would like to quote the Leader of the Opposition as he 

was being questioned by a reporter the day after the budget. The 

Leader of the Opposition said, and I quote: 

 

Also we’re extremely disappointed with what they’ve 

done with the film industry because these are young, 

talented people who have made their careers here, and 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

who have had the rug pulled right out from under them. 

 

The reporter, and I quote: “Okay, so if there’s more money 

needed for Saskatchewan filmmakers, where would the money 

come from out of the budget, in your mind?” 

 

Leader of the Opposition: 

 

Well practically, there are a number of areas where they 

could have left money for films. And one of the things 

they could have done is look at some of the initiatives 

around the agriculture and look at some of the things 

they’ve done for municipalities. 

 

So there you have it, Mr. Speaker. The NDP would just love to 

have the chance to throw rural Saskatchewan under the bus 

again, just like they did for 16 years when they were in power. 

Mr. Speaker, they devastated rural Saskatchewan. They 

devastated Carrot River Valley. Mr. Speaker, this will not 

happen under the Saskatchewan Party government. We work 

hard for all of the people of this great province of ours, not just 

a select few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2012-13 budget is about keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage — balanced budgets, a growing 

economy, and government services that are affordable and 

sustainable in the long run. 

 

When you take a look right here in Canada, other provinces like 

Ontario face severe choices in the years ahead. That’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. This budget is keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage by keeping our budget balanced, 

keeping our spending sustainable — which I know never could 

have happened under the NDP platform — keeping our 

economy strong and growing, and keeping the promises we 

made in the election campaign. 

 

Our overall spending will be held at 4.7 per cent this year, and 

3.9 per cent of that increase is in operating spending. The 

remainder is going to be in capital investments, of which this 

province was neglecting for many, many years under the NDP. 

The private forecasters expect us to lead the nation with a 3.1 

per cent growth this year and lead again with a 3.3 per cent 

growth in 2013. 

 

Just today . . . Well not just today but just this last year, we’ve 

learned that we have grown by 17,000 people, the largest 

population growth since 1953. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is good 

news because now what we have . . . And I have said many a 

time in this House, one of the reasons I decided to get into 

politics was because of my children. And you know, both of our 

children, both Morgan and Gina have now finished university. 

Gina, this is her first year out and she is a schoolteacher in 

Whitewood, and my son is working within the province also. 

Both of my children have jobs within Saskatchewan. That’s a 

lot different than it used to be under the NDP when we used to 

ship them out to Alberta. The member from across the way is 

kind of wondering about how that ever would happen, but that’s 

because we have a Saskatchewan Party in power here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, in conclusion I would like to talk 

about how this is keeping our election promises, how this is 

keeping our budget balanced, our spending sustainable, and 

keeping our economy strong. I believe that this budget will 

achieve all of these goals. And I guess I’ll just keep on talking 

for a little while longer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at what has also happened 

within the health care, the $17 million that we have just had put 

into cancer research, Mr. Speaker, these are things that this 

province desperately needs. We have a lot of people with 

cancer, have had cancer. The surgical initiatives that we are 

looking for to shorten our surgical wait times, which under the 

NDP had the longest wait times in all of Canada, we’ve got, I 

think it was . . . Was it $8 million? We’re going to be doing 

8,000 more surgeries this year to increase our surgical wait 

times. 

 

We’re also continuing to work on all of our highways, Mr. 

Speaker, highways that desperately, desperately needed to be 

worked on in the years that we have seen the lack of work on 

highways under the NDP administration. Our highways are 

finally getting so that they are driveable. And the people notice 

it. I talked to the people in Carrot River Valley and as they go 

travelling throughout the province to go visit their friends and 

neighbours, as they’re hauling grain, they have noticed a great 

improvement on our highways. 

 

One thing for Carrot River Valley alone was the improvement, 

the nine-month primary highway which makes the farmers, 

which makes it way cheaper for the farmers to haul their grain 

on the highways there. Now they can go with fully loaded 

super-Bs. And for every four loads, for every four loads that go, 

if they had to go under the old system, which was under the 

NDP system, it would have been five loads. So this is saving 

our farmers a lot of money in transportation costs. 

 

But it’s not just that. Even on the safety aspect of it, the 

highway was redone going from Carrot River out to Pasquia 

Park, and it was wide where you could pull into the park. 

Before, it was just a straight line. You came over the Carrot 

River hill and if there were trailers turning into that regional 

park, you could have an accident. This is a safety precaution. 

Our government believes in good highways and good safety. 

 

And speaking of regional parks, there’s a large increase for the 

regional parks this past . . . Well since we have been in power, 

the regional parks have been gaining a lot of money compared 

to what they were getting started at under the NDP. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I strongly support the 

budget put forward by this government and I do not support the 

amendment put forward by the NDP. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’re now at . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Yes. We have reached the normal 

time for recess. It is now past 5 o’clock and the Assembly, this 

House stands recessed till 7 o’clock this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ................................................................................................................................................................................ 777, 778 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 777 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 777 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 777 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 778 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 778 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 778 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 778 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 778 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 778 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 778 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 779 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 779 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 779 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 779 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 779 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Transgender Awareness Week 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 780 

 Investment in Saskatchewan’s Highways 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................... 780 

 Shift Work Recognition Day 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 780 

 National Biathlon Competition 

  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 781 

 Hoopla 2012 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 781 

 2011 Citizens of the Year 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 781 

 Expansion of Borden Care Home 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 782 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 782 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 782 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 783 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 783 

 Resources for Economic Development 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 784 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 784 

 Provincial Budget 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 785 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 785 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Funding Increased for People With Intellectual Disabilities 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 786 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 787 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 790 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 796 

  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 799 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 801 

 



 

  Broten (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 803 

  Harrison (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................................... 803 

  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................... 803 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 803 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 806 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 807 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Withdrawal of Statement 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 805 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 805 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


