




















































Hansard: May 14, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 45A  MONDAY, MAY 14, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1501 

 May 14, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections, 

Policing and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you and to the rest of the Assembly, I would like to 

introduce 11 grade 9 students from the community of 

Gravelbourg and the Gravelbourg High School, seated in the 

west gallery. They are accompanied by their chaperone, Craig 

Jamieson and their teacher, Darcey Huyghebaert. And I do have 

that pronounced correctly, Mr. Speaker, because it is my son 

Darcey that’s here with the group. I’ll have an opportunity to 

meet with the group after question period and look forward to 

answering their questions. And so I would ask all members to 

please join me in welcoming the group from Gravelbourg to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to request 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to introduce through you and to you some of the 

founding members and participants of last year’s 7000 

Generations Walk against nuclear waste. 

 

As all of the members of this Assembly will know, the 7000 

Generations Walk left Pinehouse Lake, Saskatchewan on July 

27th, 2011 and headed to Regina, meeting with Saskatchewan 

residents along the route, collecting petitions to support the pass 

of legislation to ban nuclear waste storage and transportation 

out of and through Saskatchewan. 

 

This group connected with people from all walks of life, and 

today they’re here in person for the tabling of the 12,000-plus 

signatures collected for the petition. Signatures were collected 

from over 250 communities in total, including 23 communities 

from outside Saskatchewan. I want to thank these guests for the 

work they do and for coming down here to join us in the gallery 

today. Together they’re currently members of the committee for 

future generations, which began a year ago. Their first meeting 

was on May 16th in fact. 

 

A few of the people that I’d like to introduce today are meeting 

actually with the Minister of Environment after the Assembly 

adjourns today. And I’ll just introduce those people, if they 

could give us a wave: Doreen Docken, Candice Paul, Max 

Morin who is the starter of it all, Fred Peterson, John Smerek, 

Meridale Dewar, Mark Bigland-Pritchard, Jim Harding, and 

Debbie Mihalicz. And these folks are just some of the leaders of 

a very large group that are here in the Assembly today. I would 

like to ask my fellow colleagues to give them a warm welcome 

to the Assembly on the one-year anniversary of the formation of 

their committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to join the member opposite in welcoming 

these citizens to their Saskatchewan legislature. It’s a venue for 

many views to be heard and certainly we’re welcoming of the 

debate and dialogue on this issue. Thanks very much, Mr. 

Speaker, and I ask all members to welcome these citizens to 

their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the legislature, I am very pleased to offer 

a welcome to some of the folks from the film and television 

industry who came from the rally outside and have made it in to 

some of the galleries here. There’s too many to name, but I 

would like to make sure that you know that this is your 

Legislative Assembly and you are more than welcome here. So 

with that, I ask my colleagues to welcome the folks from the 

film and television industry here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 

the pleasure of introducing my older sister, Arlene Stiglitz. I’d 

like everyone here to welcome her to . . . She’s right up there. 

She’s short like I am. Wave, Arlene. 

 

Arlene has been a very strong supporter of this present 

government and also when the Saskatchewan Party first formed. 

She sat on the executive of Minister Bjornerud’s, and as you . . . 

Oh sorry, Minister of Agriculture. I do apologize. She’s been 

very supportive of ensuring that everyone understands the 

positive aspect of the demise of the Canadian Wheat Board. So 

thank you very much for your support, Arlene, and I wish 

everyone here to extend a welcome to you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for leave 

for extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2012 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to 

all my colleagues in the legislature, I had the opportunity this 

morning to work with, to talk to 23 individuals with the 

Saskatchewan housing network. They have been spending 

years, volunteer years putting in, looking after our volunteer 

housing associations right across the province. In fact, between 

the number that are in the gallery today, they put in 905 

volunteer years together. 

 

I’d like to introduce them and maybe ask them to give us a 

wave when I call up their names: Vera Cadieu from Spiritwood 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Katherine Hamilton from Codette 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Dorothy Baber from Balcarres 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Lois Dixon from Balcarres 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Wanda Schiels from Semans 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Irene Buye from Fox Valley 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Kenneth Tanchak from Borden 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Alvena Oryszczyn from Lintlaw 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Anne Van Nortwick from Mayfair 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Alice Grigor from Mayfair 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Lewis Anfinson from Pelly 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Murray Crump from Welwyn 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Olga Morgan from Melville 

Housing Authority, 25 years; Guy Cyr from Debden Housing 

Authority, 25 years; Rudy Weber from Wilkie Housing 

Authority, 25 years; Evette Bailey from Debden Housing 

Authority, 25 years; Jacqueline Denis from St. Isidore Housing 

Authority, 25 years. 

 

Ruth Davis from White Fox, 30 years; Ken Oberkirsch from 

Radville Housing Authority, 35 years; Brian Watson from 

Dinsmore Housing Authority, 35 years; Victor Frank from 

Ogema Housing Authority, 35 years; Dianna Knaus from 

LeRoy Housing Authority, 35 years; and from Wynyard 

Housing Authority, for 40 years, we have Michael Lalach. 

 

And I’d also like to welcome some special volunteers who 

couldn’t be here today: Alma MacDonald from Mankota, 25 

years; Sharon Bakken from Craik, 25 years; Bernice Johnson 

from Codette, 25 years; Stephanie Sorba from Rose Valley, 25 

years; William Caird from Ogema, 25 years; Yvonne Morrow 

from Oxbow, 25 years; Peggy Genest from Harris, 25 years; 

June Bartel from Lanigan, 25 years; David Wooff from 

Turtleford, 35 years; and Cameron McKie from Foam Lake, 35 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these volunteers are from 29 of the 270 housing 

authorities that volunteer to assist families and seniors right 

across our province. I want to thank them for their years of 

commitment not only to the housing but to the community, and 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join in with the minister in welcoming and recognizing these 

volunteers. Truly is an impressive list and the time is really 

impressive — 25 years, 35 years, 40 years. What a commitment 

to our communities right across the province. We know there’s 

some 300 housing authorities in our province. It’s huge, it’s 

huge and they do such a good job to making sure our 

communities are safe and everyone has a home. 

 

So on behalf of the opposition, thank you very much. And we 

ask all members to welcome them to their legislature. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a very dear friend of mine, a high school classmate, 

teammate on the Rams with me, and fellow educator, Mr. Rick 

Sawa, up in the gallery behind me. Rick and I share some 

common educational interests in terms of the work we’ve done 

with First Nations. And I’d like to applaud Rick and ask all 

members of the House to welcome Rick to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome 

all our guests in the galleries today and to remind them that they 

are not to participate in events on the floor, and that includes 

applause. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present another petition calling for greater protection 

for late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we 

know that Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot and killed on June 20th, 

2011, while he was working at a gas station in Yorkton, 

Saskatchewan. He was alone and unprotected from intruders. 

 

We know there are positive stats that convenience store and gas 

station robberies are down by one-third since 1999, largely due 

to increased safety practices including two people working 

together on late-night shifts. But we still see the issue like in 

Regina in January and Saskatoon over the last couple of months, 

and in fact yesterday morning in Regina we saw yet another 

robbery at 3 o’clock in the morning on Dewdney where the 

convenience store was held up. And so we have much work to 

do. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon today. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a petition today 

about requesting the government to stop increasing the number 

of politicians in Saskatchewan so the money can be used for 

more appropriate things. So the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to not increase the number of politicians in 



May 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, and to continue 

including those individuals under the age of 18 in the 

determination of the constituency boundaries. 

 

And the people who have signed this petition come from the 

city of Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise to present petitions on behalf of northern residents as it 

relates to a highway in northern Saskatchewan and the 

condition of that highway. The petition states: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

undertake to upgrade the section of Highway 165 between 

Beauval and the English River First Nation by adding 

proper lighting for pedestrian traffic, by adding space for 

pedestrians on the highway and its bridges, and by 

properly surfacing the road with material needed for a 

busy heavy-haul road. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Beauval. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been developed and circulated by 

members of SEIU-West [Service Employees International 

Union] concerning creating safe workplaces in the health care 

sector: 

 

To the honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

in legislature assembled, to the petition of the undersigned 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, humbly 

showeth: 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan recognize the need 

for safe staffing levels for all valued members of the 

health care team. That SEIU-West members employed as 

health providers within Cypress Health Region, Five Hills 

Health Region, Heartland Health Region, and Saskatoon 

Health Region provide valuable care, compassion, and 

quality health care services to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan in acute care, community care, long-term 

care, and the public health sector. 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan realize that the 

utilization and value of the full range of professional skills 

offered by health care providers is promoted through the 

immediate address of retention and recruitment issues and 

by ensuring safe staffing levels; that such promotion can 

only be achieved through the commitment of necessary 

resources to fulfill required training needs or education 

supports in-house so as to ensure that vacancies are filled 

in a timely manner; that adequate funding be in place to 

address ongoing replacement issues where ill and injured 

employees are required to attend work as a result of 

employer attendance support policies, and to secure a 

buddy system to relieve workload pressures; that the 

government recognize and support the need for these 

additional measures and funding to endorse a full staff 

complement on a daily basis. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly will be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to create safe staffing levels in 

all health care sector workplaces and for all health 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition, hundreds 

of people, represent individuals living in a number of health 

regions throughout the province in large and small centres 

throughout Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today 

to present a petition in support of the film and television 

industry. More than 8,000 signatures have been garnered in just 

a few short weeks, Mr. Speaker. The folks here . . . I actually 

would like to read the petition. I think it speaks for itself: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: after 25 years of hard work and investment by 

the people of Saskatchewan, our province has become a 

national leader in film, television, and digital media. The 

success of acclaimed programs including Corner Gas, 

Little Mosque, Wapos Bay, and The Englishman’s Boy has 

contributed to our growing prominence on the world stage 

and brought renewed respect to our own Prairie heritage. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan work with 

industry partners to develop a new incentive program 

which allows film, television, and digital media to 

continue to flourish in our province. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by more than 8,000 people 

who are concerned about the future of the industry here in this 

province if the government doesn’t get back to the table and 

implement something that really means something, Mr. 

Speaker. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise in the legislature today to present a petition of 

more than 12,000 signatures. This is from the committee for 

future generations. With the help of individuals and 

organizations from all over the province, the committee for 

future generations has gathered over 12,000 signatures on a 

petition to the provincial government to legislate a ban on 

nuclear waste storage and transportation in Saskatchewan. 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2012 

And thousands of these people are from northern communities. 

The committee for future generations was formed on May 16th 

by concerned citizens of Beauval, English River, and Pinehouse 

to raise awareness of nuclear waste and promote informed 

choice for their people. This is especially true for northerners 

who depend so closely on the water, land, and animals. The 

North is one of the few places left in the world where they can 

still go out on to the land and water for moose, berries, 

medicine, plants, and fish. This is called food sovereignty and 

the North is very fortunate to still have that gift. One accident 

with nuclear waste, which according to the Nuclear Waste 

Management Organization’s own literature remains extremely 

hazardous for hundreds of thousands of years, would put all of 

that at risk. What amount of money or jobs could buy back our 

clean water and land? There is no price tag. 

 

They believe that prosperity can be gained in ways that will not 

poison our environment. Countries around the world are 

developing sustainable energy policies which builds the 

economies while protecting the environment for future 

generations. So their work is focused on saying yes to 

renewable energy: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, 

respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly pass 

legislation to permanently ban nuclear waste storage and 

transportation of nuclear waste into, out of, and through 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is respectfully submitted from people from Aberdeen, 

Abernethy, Ahtahkakoop Cree Nation, Air Ronge, Alameda, 

Albertville, Allan, Alvena, Annaheim, Arborfield, Archerwill, 

Balcarres, Balgonie, Batoche, Battleford, Beardy’s & Okemasis 

Reserve, Beauval, Bellevue, Bienfait, Big River, Birch Hills, 

Bjorkdale, Black Lake, Blaine Lake, Borden, Broadview, 

Bruno, Buckland, Buena Vista, Buffalo Narrows, Bulyea, 

Cairns, Candle Lake, Canoe Narrows, Canora, Canwood, 

Carievale, Carlyle, Carpenter, Carrot River, Chitek Lake, 

Choiceland, Christopher Lake, Clearwater River, Cochin, 

Codette, Cole Bay, Colonsay, Consul, Coronach, Cowessess 

First Nation, Craik, Craven, Creighton, Cudworth, Cumberland 

House, Cupar, and Cut Knife, Davidson, Debden, Delisle, 

Denare Beach, Deschambault Lake, Dillon, Katepwa, 

Domremy, Duck Lake, Dundurn, Earl Grey, Eastview, 

Edenwold, Elbow, Emma Lake, Esterhazy, Estevan, Eston, 

Flying Dust First Nation, Fond du Lac First Nation, Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Foxford, Frenchman Butte, Gainsborough, 

Gallivan, Girvin, Glaslyn, Glen Ewen, Glenavon, Govan, 

Grandora, Gravelbourg, Green Lake, Grenfell, Griffin, 

Guernsey, Hagen, Hazlet, Hoey, Holbein, Hudson Bay, 

Humboldt, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Indian Head, James Smith 

Reservation, Jans Bay, Jansen, Kelliher, Kenaston, Killaly, 

Kinistino, Kipling, La Loche, La Ronge, Laird, Lanigan, 

Lashburn, Leader, Leask, Lebret, Leoville, Lestock, Lipton, 

Livelong, Lloydminster, Lone Rock, Loon Lake, Love, 

Lumsden, Macdowall, Maidstone, Makwa, Manitou Beach, 

Marcelin, Martensville, Mayview, Meadow Lake, Meath Park, 

Medstead, Melfort, and Melville, Meota, Michel Village, 

Middle Lake, Milden, Mildred, Mont Nebo, Montreal Lake, 

Moose Jaw, Moosomin First Nation, Muskeg Lake First Nation, 

Muskoday First Nation, Naicam, Nipawin, Nokomis, Norquay, 

North Battleford, Nut Mountain, One Arrow First Nation, 

Onion Lake First Nation, Osler, Oxbow, Paddockwood, 

Pakwaw Lake, Patuanak, Paynton, Pelican Lake, Pelican 

Narrows, Pense, Piapot First Nation, Pierceland, Pilot Butte, 

Pinehouse Lake, Poundmaker Cree Nation, Preeceville, Prince 

Albert, Prud’homme, Punnichy, Radisson, Radville, Raymore, 

Red Earth First Nation, Regina, Rosthern, Rouleau, Saltcoats, 

Sandy Bay, Saskatoon, Shaunavon, Shellbrook, Shoal Lake, 

Sintaluta, Smeaton, Spalding, Spiritwood, Spruce Home, St. 

Louis, Stanley Mission, Star City, Stony Rapids, Stoughton, 

Sturgeon Lake First Nation, Success, Sweetgrass First Nation, 

Swift Current, Theodore, Tisdale, Turnor Lake, Turtleford, 

Tway, Unity, Uranium City, Victoire, Vonda, Wahpeton 

Dakota Nation, Wakaw, Waldeck, Warman, Waseca, Waskesiu, 

Waskesiu Lake, Waterhen Lake First Nation, Weyakwin, 

Weyburn, White Bear First Nation, White City, Whitefish, 

Whitewood, Wilkie, Wollaston Lake, Wolseley, Wynyard, 

Yorkton, and Zenon Park. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern for our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued, and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use, in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

Saskatchewan Fashion Week 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today and recognize the hard work of fashion and creative 

industry professionals and volunteers in the organization of 

Saskatchewan’s inaugural Fashion Week. This event was 

unique in Saskatchewan as a celebration of thriving fashion and 

creative industries. Thirty designers from Swift Current, 

Saskatoon, and Regina were selected to reveal their 2012 

collections for men, women, and children, influenced by 

worldwide trends and cultural influences. 

 

This three-day event took place in Regina’s City Square, north 

of Victoria Park, from May 10th to May 12th. All showcase 

selections were available for purchase directly from designer 

trunk show displays that were open the day after the collection 

had been shown on the runway. 

 

There were various ways to participate in this great event. Event 



May 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

programming was different each day, exposing participants to 

new styles and designs. The swag lounge featured culinary 

fashion and creative trends where ticket purchasers sampled 

products and services. The catwalk was another innovative Sask 

Fashion Week event, allowing businesses to showcase fashion, 

beauty, interior design, and culinary offerings. I would like to 

take this opportunity to thank all organizers and volunteers who 

worked tirelessly to bring this idea to fruition. You have 

successfully increased the profile of our fine province and fine 

Saskatchewan businesses while hosting a great event in 

Regina’s new downtown square. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

“Made In Saskatchewan” Film Appreciation Night 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana and I had the pleasure of 

attending the “Made In Saskatchewan” Film Appreciation Night 

at Broadway Theatre in Saskatoon. With appearances by Kim 

Coates of the popular TV show, Sons of Anarchy, and Ron 

Goetz, the president of the Saskatchewan Motion Picture 

Industry Association, the event showcased the amazing pool of 

Saskatchewan film industry talent by featuring films including 

the award winning Lupine Life, Neighbours Dog, Bionic 

Bannock Boys, Interpersonalities, Rabbit Fall, Wapos Bay, The 

Sideshow Christmas, and the never-before-seen Resurrection 

SK and Rufus teaser. 

 

Our Saskatchewan film industry workers create phenomenal, 

beautiful, high-quality films — films that create jobs for 

Saskatchewan people, films that generate six times the amount 

of money for our economy than what is spent on the 

Saskatchewan film employment tax credit, films that put 

Saskatchewan on the map, films that tell our stories, films of 

which we can all be very, very proud. 

 

But while I left the film appreciation night with a sense of pride, 

I also walked away feeling profound sadness. We are about to 

lose this industry and many of the fine creative workers and 

families that come with it. No matter how the members opposite 

spin the elimination of the Saskatchewan film employment tax 

credit, it makes absolutely no sense. Without a competitive tax 

credit, our film workers are going to have to pack up their 

families and leave this province to work elsewhere. So much for 

the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this moment to thank 

the passionate and resourceful team who have been 

instrumental in organizing last evening’s event and today’s 

rallies to support the film industry. You have done an amazing 

job of reaching out to people and shining a spotlight on our 

incredible, creative, valuable film industry. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Employment Statistics 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today and speak about the Saskatchewan employment numbers 

announced last Friday. Statistics Canada reported in its April 

labour force survey that employment numbers have taken quite 

a jump in this province — 13,100 more people are working in 

Saskatchewan now than there were last year. Saskatchewan has 

the second highest growth rate among Canadian provinces with 

a year-over-year employment increase of 2.3 per cent and is 

currently tied with Alberta with the lowest level of 

unemployment in Canada at 4.9 per cent. 

 

Canadian employment numbers were also strong in April, with 

an increase of 58,000 jobs. Many of these gains were credited to 

full-time jobs in the goods manufacturing, natural resources, 

and agriculture sectors. This is quite the accomplishment for 

our great province in the nationwide context. Saskatchewan 

contributed 11.7 per cent of the nation’s job gains in April with 

only 2.8 per cent of the nation’s population. 

 

Job growth in the province indicates increasing opportunities 

for all our citizens. So far in 2012, not only have we had great 

job numbers, but the numbers include all segments of the 

population. Aboriginal employment is up to 3,200 positions 

compared to 2011. 

 

The government is looking forward to the rest of 2012 and 

continuing to promote the Saskatchewan advantage to the rest 

of the nation and the world. I would like to thank all those 

workers and entrepreneurs in our province for achieving these 

wonderful results and helping move our province of 

Saskatchewan forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Grandmothers 4 Grandmothers Present Jabula 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday 

evening, Stephanie and I were pleased to partake in Jabula, a 

wonderful fundraising evening organized by Grandmothers 4 

Grandmothers here in Regina. 

 

Grandmothers 4 Grandmothers is a group of Regina and area 

grandmothers and others who are dedicated to alleviating the 

plight of grandmothers in Africa as they care for children 

orphaned by the AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] 

pandemic. This nationwide movement has been inspired by and 

supports the Stephen Lewis Foundation’s campaign. 

 

The evening featured keynote speaker Sally Armstrong, an 

Amnesty International award winner, member of the Order of 

Canada, journalist, teacher, author, and human rights activist. 

She was also appointed to the International Women’s 

Commission at the UN [United Nations] in 2010. In her 

address, Ms. Armstrong emphasized the importance of making 

every voice count in an effort to create positive change while 

outlining the challenges of our era. It was a very inspiring 

evening, but also it was a strong reminder of the work needed 

right here in Saskatchewan. Though this province is home to 

just under 3 per cent of the Canadian population, Saskatchewan 

has a disproportionately large HIV [human immunodeficiency 

virus] problem that is sadly getting worse with each passing 

year. Clearly we have much work to do on the home front as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend warm thanks to 

Grandmothers 4 Grandmothers for their work and leadership. I 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2012 

ask all my colleagues to join with me to applaud this important 

initiative. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Remembering Huma Morrison 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 

this opportunity to recognize the hard work and passionate spirit 

of Saskatchewan mines inspector, Huma Morrison. Ms. 

Morrison recently passed away at her home near Prince Albert. 

She was just 38 years old. 

 

Huma was the first female mine inspector for the Saskatchewan 

government, and during her career she was regarded by her 

colleagues as a great worker and team player. Huma was 

incredibly energetic and passionate, loved to travel, dance, and 

ride motorcycles. She had a great sense of adventure and her 

caring and giving nature touched many lives. 

 

Recently Canadians recognized the 20th anniversary of the 

tragic Westray mining disaster that killed 26 miners, a disaster 

that brought attention to the need for mining inspector 

independence and regulatory control. Since this disaster, 

success has come in part due to the close working relationship 

between labour, management, and the mine safety unit. Huma 

dedicated her career to ensuring that disasters like Westray 

never happened again. 

 

Mining involves risk, but the industry’s safety record has 

improved dramatically in the past 10 years due to the hard work 

of people like Huma Morrison. On behalf of the Ministry of 

Labour Relations and Workplace Safety, I want to extend my 

condolences to Ms. Morrison’s family. We honour Huma 

Morrison’s contributions to the safety of workers in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Radville Citizen Named Man of Influence 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to congratulate Mr. Claude Carles on being 

recognized as one of Saskatchewan’s Top 10 Men of Influence 

by Saskatchewan Business magazine. Mr. Carles is a farmer in 

the Radville area and has been the president and chamber of the 

board of the Weyburn Inland Terminal since 1998. As president 

he has overseen the long-term direction and successes of this 

Weyburn company. As well, Mr. Speaker, under Mr. Carles’s 

leadership, this past fall the Weyburn Inland Terminal was 

inducted into the Sask Business Chamber of Commerce Hall of 

Fame as its 24th inductee. 

 

Mr. Steve McLellan, CEO [chief executive officer] of 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, had this to say about this 

accomplishment, and I quote: 

 

“[The] Weyburn Inland Terminal showcases the 

entrepreneurial spirit of Saskatchewan, originating from a 

group of farmers who saw a need and filled it, emerging 

not only as an economic leader, but [also as] a community 

leader as well.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to offer my congratulations to Mr. 

Carles on his outstanding achievement, along with the entire 

board, management, and staff and the shareholders, in making 

the Weyburn Inland Terminal an important part of a vital 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join 

me in recognizing Mr. Carles on his accomplishment, as well as 

those of the Weyburn Inland Terminal. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Souls Harbour Banquet and Graduation Ceremony 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday, May 7th, the 

member from Cypress Hills and I attended the annual Souls 

Harbour Rescue Mission Love Your Neighbour fundraising 

banquet and graduation ceremony for 2012. 

 

Souls Harbour is recognized not only in this industry, this city, 

but province-wide for the amazing work they do for those with 

addictions or just need a hand up. Their Christian-based 

programs and services have helped countless people with little 

hope find new life and dignity. The evening, emceed by Brad 

Grass of Big Dog 92.7 — who did a fantastic and entertaining 

job, by the way — was not only sold out but enjoyable and full 

of inspiration through the many stories of people involved with 

and helped by Souls Harbour. 

 

Many great door prizes donated by the business community and 

individuals were awarded during the evening, and Executive 

Director Joe Miller did a very touching address to update the 

capacity crowd on the challenges but mostly the directions and 

successes of Souls Harbour. Saskatchewan’s own Keith Kitchen 

of Swift Current entertained with music and further inspired by 

sharing some of his story. 

 

The highlight of the evening though, without a doubt, was the 

life-changing graduation ceremony of five people who have 

successfully completed their programs, and the heart-wrenching 

testimony of one of the grads, a young woman who told of her 

struggles with addictions and mental illness, and how Souls 

Harbour has walked with her to overcome her demons and be 

reunited with her children. 

 

Congratulations and thank you to all involved with Souls 

Harbour and may you both be blessed and a blessing for many 

years to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thousands of 

people have signed an online petition, and today I tabled a 

petition with more than 8,000 signatures in support of a tax 

credit that works for the film and television industry here. 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] have received 

hundreds of letters, email, and phone calls from concerned 



May 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

Saskatchewan people who support the industry. A poll released 

last week shows the majority of Saskatchewan people support 

the film and television industry. The concern is so great that 

today we had hundreds of people gathered here, including a 

certain son of anarchy who is proud to call our province home. 

Clearly the film industry is important to people in 

Saskatchewan. How can the minister continue to disregard 

something so important to so many? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question. Mr. Speaker, everyone 

understands that the film industry creates economic activity and 

employment in our province. All industries do that. 

 

The real question is, how much public money should be 

invested in this industry, one that has declined by almost 70 per 

cent in the last five years alone? Do we subsidize it at an even 

higher rate, as some have requested, when we are also being 

asked to deal with issues like affordable housing, child care 

spaces, autism funding, cancer treatment, surgical wait times, 

assistance for the disabled, and building schools and hospitals 

and highways? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we determined that we couldn’t do it all within 

our balanced budget and that’s why we made the difficult 

decision that the FETC [film employment tax credit] program 

had to change. Our promise to the people of Saskatchewan was 

to provide sustainable spending for programs and important 

infrastructure investments within a balanced budget. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re keeping that promise. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On budget day, 

those in the film and television industry were shocked to hear 

the Sask Party government was killing the tax credit. After a 

huge public outcry, the government agreed to work with the 

industry to come up with a replacement program. The film 

industry took the government at its word. 

 

Unfortunately last week it had the rug pulled out from under it 

once again when the government announced its own version of 

the industry’s proposal. The government took out its magic 

marker and changed the industry’s proposal by writing the word 

“non” in front of it. This simple word took the industry’s 

proposal from useful to utterly useless. Why did the minister 

bother to give all these people hope? Clearly he had no 

intention of working in good faith to ensure a strong and vibrant 

television industry here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As has 

always been the case in the province of Saskatchewan, budgets 

are approved by all of cabinet. Budgets are approved by 

members on this side of the House and then presented to the 

Legislative Assembly for a vote, for debate and vote. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to be clear, in light of some of the calls 

from industry over the weekend, there is support, complete 

support for the minister’s position that he’s outlined in terms of 

the industry. 

 

And to the member’s specific question, there ought not to be a 

surprise that our government’s moving to a non-refundable tax 

credit. We’ve been pretty consistent all along. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, on the 26th of March, Mr. Goetz, Ron Goetz speaking 

for the industry in an interview said, he — the Premier — made 

it very clear that he is not interested in subsidies, that he’s 

interested in the industry, interested in going forward on 

something, but he doesn’t want to go back that way. 

 

He was referencing a refundable tax credit. There’s other 

quotes, Mr. Speaker. We have adopted the tax credit proposal 

from the industry, but we’ve said it will be non-refundable. In 

other words — well, members laugh — in other words, it’ll be 

available to those companies who pay taxes in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I think, Mr. Speaker, there’s thousands of 

people who pay taxes in the province in the film and television 

industry who take great umbrage with the Premier’s comments. 

 

The minister has said many times in this House that our film 

industry can’t compete with Toronto and Vancouver. He’s 

talked about concentration of the industry in those cities. The 

people here today know otherwise. With the support of 

government, Saskatchewan’s film industry can compete with 

the rest of the country and on a global stage. In fact, it has. The 

minister, the Premier, and their government like to talk about 

how Saskatchewan is a have province open to all kinds of 

possibilities. Why does the Sask Party government believe we 

can be major players in every way except when it comes to the 

film and television industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know that everybody 

involved in any industry as individuals who are employed pay 

taxes. The point here is about the companies involved in the 

industry itself. The point here is that we can have a tax credit 

system for companies who pay taxes in the province of 

Saskatchewan. What we are stopping is a grant. It is a de facto 

grant that has existed up until now. Ninety-eight per cent of the 

monies paid under this tax credit have come as a grant before 

any profit is made, before any taxes are paid in the province of 

Saskatchewan. If it walks like a grant and it talks like a grant, 

the taxpayers think that they are supporting, in a very direct 

way, an industry. The member’s question is about whether or 

not this province is a have province. Of course it is. 

 

Here’s the way that we maintain have status within the 

confederation, within the Dominion of Canada: sound economic 

policies, Mr. Speaker, a balanced budget, an even-handed 

economic development approach that doesn’t favour one 

particular industry with a grant over any other particular 

industry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2012 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very simple. 

The Premier can say yes or no to the film industry in 

Saskatchewan. Saying yes means the government needs to get 

back to the table and work with the industry to come up with 

something that will sustain and grow the sector. If the answer is 

no, which seems more likely the case if one were to judge based 

on actions not words, then the people here today want their 

government to look them in the eye and be straight with them. 

Stop hiding behind a program that will not work. Mr. Speaker, 

people are listening. What does the Premier have to say about 

the future of the industry? Does he want it here? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, all decisions when we go through the budget 

process are difficult. None of the decisions are made by a single 

minister. Those decisions are upheld by cabinet and an entire 

caucus, Mr. Speaker. It’s about choices, Mr. Speaker. We chose 

not to follow through with an $8 million subsidy, an absolute 

subsidy to industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We chose not to follow through with that, but what we chose 

instead is a colorectal screening program for early detection. 

That’s what this government has chosen, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

also chosen to follow through with a campaign commitment for 

insulin pumps, Mr. Speaker, expanding that program to people 

up to age 25. That’s a choice, Mr. Speaker. Instead of $8 

million worth of subsidies, it goes to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll ask the members to come to order and 

allow the minister to complete his question. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Instead of 

an $8 million subsidy to one industry, Mr. Speaker, we chose 

colorectal screening programs. We chose insulin pump 

programs, Mr. Speaker. All of this within a balanced budget, 

the only province in Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s handling of this file 

is abysmal. We know that there is great support throughout the 

province for the film industry because it provides jobs for 

young, capable people. It’s brought lots of people back to the 

province. 

 

So my question to the Premier is, when the president of SMPIA 

[Saskatchewan Motion Picture Industry Association] says that 

the minister’s actions and the government’s actions are “put the 

entire Saskatchewan film and video industry in jeopardy,” will 

he listen to the film industry and make changes in the Ministry 

of Culture with the minister and with the policy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the president of 

SMPIA, after we met on 26 March said, about our position, 

about me in particular, was he was very passionate about the 

role of tax credit in this province. and he wants to not be in a 

bidding war any more with film. The president of SMPIA, the 

industry went on to say, they — the government — are really 

not wanting to be in that business anymore of granting. 

 

He went on to say, the Premier is very determined about the 

direction he wants to go with respect to tax credits. That’s 

because we said at that meeting that while we’re not prepared to 

go the way of this grant tax credit where 98 per cent is paid 

upfront without any money being made. Mr. Speaker, we were 

prepared to look at a non-refundable tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member has some explaining to do as well. 

Because the leader of the NDP, the day after the budget when 

confronted by the media with the question, if you’re not going 

to cut the film tax credit, what will you cut, he said he’d cut 

money to municipalities. He’d cut money to agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s got some questions to answer on his side of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very curious that the Premier 

quotes Mr. Ron Goetz, the head of SMPIA [Saskatchewan 

Motion Picture Industry Association]. I’m reading from the 

weekend edition of Metro, May 11th to 13th — it’s the 14th 

today, Mr. Speaker — and in this front page article with the 

headline “SMPIA calls for Hutchinson’s head.” Mr. Ron Goetz 

says, “We ask that he be replaced with a new minister that 

understands our industry and who wants to work with us to save 

us.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue is the Premier. The Premier has the 

ability to make a change. He can say look, we didn’t get this 

quite right. He can go back and say to the people on the 

Treasury Board and in the Finance department, let’s take 

another look at this. Let’s save an industry which is really 

important for the people of Saskatchewan. I ask the Premier: 

will he take that step, admit he’s made a mistake and go back 

and redo this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we give full 

credit to the industry. They’ve been clear from that particular 

meeting on the 26th and since that the only way they can 

survive is if they continue to get the subsidy. That’s what they 

say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think, by the way, there’s other parts of the 

creative industry that can prosper and can be very effective with 

respect to a non-refundable tax credit. But the industry has said 

and the NDP have said, if the taxpayers don’t pony up a direct 

subsidy, a grant to the tune of $8 million, then we will lose this 

particular industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget is about choices. And the Minister of 

Health and others later on this day will highlight the choices 

that this government made. Choices in favour of colorectal 

screening, choices in favour of those who have intellectual 

disabilities, choices in favour of building new schools, choices 

to balance the budget, Mr. Speaker, choices about policies that 

are overseeing the fastest growing economy in the Dominion of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker — those are the choices we made on this 

side of the House. 



May 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

When that member was asked the day after the budget, if not 

cutting the film tax credit, what would you cut? He’d take it out 

of farmers and municipalities. We disagree with that choice, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is about leadership. And the 

Premier is not showing leadership when he lets an industry like 

this go to the side when he forces young families to move away 

from our province because of a decision that they have made 

around the cabinet table. We know that 75 per cent of the 

people in Saskatchewan support the film industry. We know 

that the Premier has the ability to make a change. It’s happened 

before in other governments, in other times, in other places. 

 

And I ask the Premier, will he take steps to make sure that all of 

the families, all of the people, all of the industry in our province 

that work in film will keep their jobs and, more importantly, 

that all of the other industries that work together with them will 

keep their business? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

the members opposite and to everyone that’s listening, they 

need to know that the decision to end the grant for the film 

industry was not an easy one. It was not a decision by just one 

minister. It was a choice about balanced budget. It was a choice 

about keeping campaign promises. It was a choice about 

keeping campaign promises for people with disabilities, for 

people on Saskatchewan assured income for disabilities who 

have been waiting for years to have the dignity and respect that 

they deserve by having a separate plan. The decisions we made 

this year in our budget allow them to have an extra $200 a 

month, which they have never had before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also know that the members opposite left 440 people, 

people with a disability on a wait-list, people that didn’t have a 

home. We chose to spend money to ensure that people on that 

wait-list would no longer be looking for a place to live. With 

our government, they have a home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Review of Labour Legislation and Minimum Wage 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of 

the discussion items in the sham of a consultation document put 

forth by the Sask Party focuses on minimum wage here in 

Saskatchewan. When we’ve asked the question before about the 

potential for a training wage in this province, the Sask Party has 

been anything but straightforward. They loved what happened 

with Gordon Campbell in BC [British Columbia] when he 

brought in a $2 an hour reduced minimum wage for first-time 

workers. But this has people wondering, where else is this 

government willing to lower the bar for working people? To the 

minister: is this government considering a lower training wage 

for first-time workers here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re a government that 

chose to help the low-income people in our province by doing a 

lot of different things. We raised the basic personal tax 

exemption so that 114,000 more people have been removed 

from the tax rolls. Mr. Speaker, we have increased the 

minimum wage from 7.95 to 9.50 per hour. We’ve had an 

increase of 19.5 per cent over four years, an average of 4.9 per 

cent per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve continued to make those changes and will 

continue to go forward with looking after low-income people. 

We’ve taken steps to do that. We have a minimum wage board 

that meets on an ongoing basis. There may well be another 

increase later on; those members opposite will have to stay 

watching. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want to advocate changes 

to the minimum wage, I’d urge them to try and participate in the 

program and offer some meaningful input. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well that was certainly an interesting answer, 

Mr. Speaker, not a word about the training wage. You know, 

three years ago, I asked the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and training, and this is what he said when asked 

on May 4th, 2009: he said, and I quote, “I’m certainly not ruling 

it out.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has been far from clear on this 

so-called consultation about what is in and what is out. Will the 

Premier stand and clear this up once and for all? Will he bring 

in a training wage, here in Saskatchewan for first-time workers, 

yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, our goal with the 

consultation paper is to have a broad, comprehensive 

consultation. We are not ruling things out. We’re not ruling 

things in, Mr. Speaker. There is no intention. There is no 

discussion about a training wage, Mr. Speaker. We’ll allow the 

members opposite to have some meaningful input, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our goal is to try and enhance the role of our workers in our 

province. The women and men in our province contribute to our 

economy greatly. We look forward to finding ways to continue 

to support them, so that those people have got lower taxes, 

better opportunities with homes, better schools, roads. And we 

want to continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, and we want to ensure 

that we have a labour environment that fosters them in their 

pursuits as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 

BC finally raised its minimum wage after a decade of neglect, 

they hit back at minimum wage workers. They put into place a 

server’s wage, a right wing invention to lower the minimum 

wage once again for servers in bars and restaurants. 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2012 

Now the minister says he won’t prejudge what is in or what is 

out in the consultations. But surely he can agree that a server’s 

wage, a two-tiered minimum wage in our economy, is simply 

unfair and unjust. Will the Premier stand today and rule out a 

server’s wage for Saskatchewan? Yes or No. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, a year ago the government 

in Alberta chose to have a two-tiered system. We chose to raise 

our minimum wage instead. We did not adopt a training wage at 

that time. We did not adopt a service wage at that time. It’s not 

something that’s on our agenda, not something that we’ve heard 

from. We don’t see that there’s a need for that in our province. 

If the members opposite want to raise that as something they’re 

interested in having a discussion about it, I guess let them wear 

that one. But we’re not going to, Mr. Speaker. We’re moving 

forward and upward. 

 

We think workers should earn more, not less. We think it’s the 

right way for our province to go. We’ve steadily increased 

minimum wages, Mr. Speaker. When we formed government, 

we’ve actually raised wages four times, and we’re going to 

continue to do that each and every time we think it’s 

appropriate. And where the cost of living has gone up, we think 

that should be reflected in the amount of money that our 

workers earn. Our workers work hard. They’re committed to 

our province. We want them to continue to move back. We’ve 

got a labour shortage in our province. We’re moving upward. 

We’re not wallowing in what they’re doing over there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Surgical Wait Times 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in the 

Assembly, the Minister of Health stood in the Assembly and 

said that surgeons in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

were not being punished for two things: (1) complaining about 

operating rooms sitting idle; and (2) advocating for their 

patients. The minister said in the House, “Nothing could be 

further from the truth.” 

 

My question to the minister: does he stand by those remarks 

today, or does he wish to correct the record? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, last week we were 

talking about the fact that the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region isn’t meeting its targets. That’s a concern. That’s why 

I’ve talked to the CEO and the board chair. There is more to 

report on that in the coming weeks as they work on a more 

aggressive plan to meet the targets, Mr. Speaker. Part of that 

conversation to be able to meet those targets is absolutely with 

physicians. We want physician input. Mr. Speaker, all 

physicians need to be, and especially the surgeons, need to have 

input, as well as the operating room nurses and others within 

the health care sector, especially in Regina Qu’Appelle. 

 

I have said that our surgical care initiative that I think has done 

a very good job so far, Mr. Speaker — more work to do, but has 

done a very good job — is largely made up of surgeons from 

across the province. Their input is extremely important, Mr. 

Speaker, and I stand by the words to say that absolutely we 

want physician input. We want all health care professionals’ 

input so that we can get away from the longest wait-lists in 

Canada that was left by the NDP [New Democratic Party]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under this minister’s 

watch, operating rooms within the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region, the existing operating rooms are sitting idle and not 

running at full capacity. The minister says that physicians aren’t 

being punished for speaking out and advocating for their 

patients. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, reports in the media tell a different story. 

Mr. Speaker, it says, from Global, it says, the president of the 

Regina Qu’Appelle medical association said: 

 

There were some concerns raised to me by the members of 

the Department of Surgery with being concerned about 

speaking out about some of the goings on, or lack of 

goings on within the operating room, specifically the 

amount of surgeries going on. 

 

Some individuals felt that when they did speak out, they 

had their operating room time cut. 

 

Last week the minister dismissed these concerns, said they were 

not true. We know, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow evening there’s an 

extraordinary meeting of the regional medical association to 

deal with this issue of surgeries in the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region. My question: who are we to believe, the 

minister or the Regina Qu’Appelle medical association? Who’s 

telling the story? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you know, I won’t, I 

can’t stand in the House and say that there has been no surgery 

cancelled because of a physician having to do another 

emergency surgery. But no surgeries have been cancelled 

because of the staffing issues, Mr. Speaker. People don’t get put 

on a list and then cancelled because we don’t have the operating 

room. What it does do is it delays the time that people get put to 

have their surgery, Mr. Speaker. So from that point of view, 

there has not been cancellations due to the staffing issues 

around Regina Qu’Appelle. But what I would say is people 

aren’t getting their surgery as soon as they should be, as soon as 

the targets were set, Mr. Speaker. There is a difference there, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve said all the way along that surgeons are 

extremely important. We want them to have their input. I know, 

after speaking to the CEO and board chair that next evening, 

Mr. Speaker, Dwight Nelson was meeting with surgeons. There 

will be more meetings conducted through the past week and 

into the next week. That’s the only way we get their input, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s the only way targets will be met. 

 



May 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

We are seeing targets met in other jurisdictions, Saskatoon, in 

eight other health regions, Mr. Speaker, in this province. They 

have met their targets. Saskatoon is close, and we believe 

Regina can get there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister did not 

answer the very specific question. There are two very different 

stories being told on this issue. The physicians, the surgeons are 

saying, Mr. Speaker, when they speak out, when they are 

concerned about operating rooms sitting idle, Mr. Speaker, they 

say that they’re being punished and losing OR [operating room] 

time. The minister in question period says that is not the case. 

The minister needs to explain which story is true and who has 

the facts. 

 

My question to the minister: we know that there are challenges 

with recruiting more physicians. We hear a lot of talk about 

wanting to retain the physicians we train, about attracting other 

physicians here. But when physicians complain about a lack of 

OR time in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, when we 

hear of punishment being levelled on these physicians, Mr. 

Speaker, how does that encourage and support recruitment and 

retention of doctors in the province? 

 

To the minister: who is telling the correct story — the regional 

medical association or the Minister of Health? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I have had the 

opportunity to meet with a number of physicians in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region. Mr. Speaker, about two Fridays ago 

I was at the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] elected 

council meeting, met with the board, and then the general 

assembly. Later on, on that weekend, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday 

I was at the doctors’ night out in Regina, which had about 60 or 

70 physicians from the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

 

I talked to many of them, Mr. Speaker. I’ve talked to Dr. 

Sridhar, to Dr. Joy Dobson, many of the physicians that are part 

of the surgical care initiative. I haven’t heard them come back 

and say that there are threats, that there is intimidation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we want is all the input of physicians to 

make sure that Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region can meet its 

targets like eight others are doing in the province, like 

Saskatoon is very close to doing. Mr. Speaker, I think there are 

things that we can learn from those health regions. 

 

But I will say, Mr. Speaker, the commitment has never been 

stronger, with $60.5 million, a choice that had to be made. Not 

$8 million worth of subsidy, but $60.5 million that went to the 

surgical care initiative that it’s seeing better service for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

International Minerals Innovation Institute 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House today, Mr. Speaker, to 

tell people across the province about an important new 

initiative, the international minerals innovation institute, a 

centre of excellence for post-secondary skills training and 

innovation and related areas of applied research. 

 

This institute will be jointly funded by industry and government 

and will ensure that minerals and mining, especially pertaining 

to this important sector in our economy and across the 

Saskatchewan province, has access to a skilled workforce and 

new and innovative areas of technological needs. 

 

Innovation Saskatchewan is providing an initial $500,000 

investment to support start-up costs for the institute. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to inform the House that an inaugural 

board of directors is in place, representing industry, 

government, and educational institutions. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — For example, Mr. Speaker, Engin Ozberk, 

the vice-president of technology and innovation at Cameco; Dr. 

Karen Chad, vice-president of research at the University of 

Saskatchewan, and Jerome Konecsni, CEO of Innovation 

Saskatchewan are all participating, Mr. Speaker. And former 

Lieutenant Governor, Dr. Gordon Barnhart will serve as an 

interim Chair of the board to make sure that this new centre of 

excellence can get up and running as quickly as possible. This 

inaugural board under the leadership of Dr. Barnhart will work 

to expand the board of directors, recruit an executive director, 

and launch the institute’s programming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is Canada’s hottest mining 

jurisdiction. What we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, are billions of 

dollars invested in recent years. And when we look out over the 

course of the next 20 years, we anticipate that that will be close 

to $40 billion in additional investment over the course of the 

next 20 years. 

 

Saskatchewan’s world class mineral reserves however, they do 

come with some major technological challenges. These 

technological challenges require research, innovation, new areas 

of development that are going to need to be conducted by 

increasing collaboration in areas of applied research. In addition 

the mining sector is also facing a major human resource 

challenge or what I call talent challenge. Mr. Speaker, we 

anticipate that over the course of the next decade this sector 

alone is going to require an additional 21,000 new entrants with 

specialized training across a broad array of programs. That’s a 

staggering number — more than 21,000 in the course of nine 

years. 

 

That being said, since 2009 a steering committee has been 

exploring the need for an industry-driven Saskatchewan mining 

and minerals innovation centre to address industry-specific 

human resource needs as well as important research 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2012 

requirements. This steering committee undertook a feasibility 

study and business plan and consulted broadly with industry, 

educational institutions, as well as other research institutions, 

not simply here in the province, but across the country. 

 

The need is obvious and present, and certainly the business plan 

calls for increased investment. And that’s where we’re very 

pleased, Mr. Speaker, where industry has already stepped up 

with a commitment of more than $4 million over the course of 

the next five years, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we can help 

meet this talent challenge of 21,000 people over the course of 

the next nine years, as well as to ensure that the billions of 

dollars in research and investment that are going to be coming 

forward are going to actually be applied to increasing the 

productivity and ultimately adding value to our natural 

resources within the mining sector. 

 

I’d like to thank specifically some key companies — Cameco, 

BHP, the Potash Corporation, as well as Mosaic, Mr. Speaker 

— in coming to the table and pledging these dollars in advance 

of the institute being formally established. Now that it is, Mr. 

Speaker, we can make sure that we are operating as quickly as 

possible. 

 

I’d like to also thank the member for Saskatoon Northwest for 

playing an important role in engaging industry leaders and 

encouraging this kind of investment. Our government is pleased 

to play a catalytic role in bringing the mining industry together 

with the educational and research community right here in 

Saskatchewan to create this new and innovative institute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s announcement is important news for our 

province’s already strong mining sector and by extension for 

our economy. It will continue to position Saskatchewan as a 

world-class centre of excellence and innovation and build on 

the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thanks to the minister for the announcement. We agree it is 

great news for a strong mining industry, and those types of 

investments and innovation and research are always welcome in 

this province. Certainly research and investment that meets the 

needs of industries is important. 

 

The focus in this particular announcement is on the mining 

industry, and we can only ask the government to consider to 

focus on other industries as well, perhaps in renewable 

resources, renewable energy, and in the cultural industries like 

the film industry which could also use this kind of support and 

investment to ensure that their industries are viable as well. 

 

So while this is a great announcement for the mining industry, 

it’s important that they have those kinds of supports. Thank 

you. We would hope that this government continues to look 

beyond the boundaries of mining in its innovation approach. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to question 398. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled the answer 

to question 398. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question, I would like to 

remind members that there will be a CPA [Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association] meeting here in the Chamber 

immediately after adjournment of the House. The Government 

House Leader has moved adjournment of the House. Is the 

House in agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Tuesday. CPA, I’m told, is tomorrow now. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:35.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1501 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1501 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1501 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1501 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1501 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1502 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1502 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1502 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1502 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1502 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1503 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1503 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1503 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1503 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1504 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Fashion Week 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1504 

  “Made In Saskatchewan” Film Appreciation Night 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 

 Employment Statistics 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 

 Grandmothers 4 Grandmothers Present Jabula 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 

 Remembering Huma Morrison 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1506 

 Radville Citizen Named Man of Influence 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1506 

 Souls Harbour Banquet and Graduation Ceremony 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1506 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1506 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1507 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1507 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1508 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1508 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 

 Review of Labour Legislation and Minimum Wage 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 

 Surgical Wait Times 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1510 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 International Minerals Innovation Institute 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1512 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1512 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


