




















































Hansard: May 09, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 43A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 9, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1453 

 May 9, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, I have the honour today of introducing 20 

of our public service employees that are seated in your gallery 

today. They are here to take part in the parliamentary program 

for the public service. We have participants today from the 

ministries of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, from 

Environment, from the Public Service Commission, and from 

Social Services, as well as the Legislative Assembly Service. 

 

The program that they’re going to be involved in today is going 

to be an in-depth history and a tour of our building, the 

Legislative Building, briefings by the Legislative Library, the 

Office of the Clerk, and Executive Council. And they are going 

to be sitting in the House to watch the proceedings today, and 

they’ll be meeting with members. And I have the honour of 

meeting with them after question period today. 

 

So I’m asking all the members in the House to please help me 

welcome these public service employees to their Legislative 

Building. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming these public servants to 

their Legislative Assembly. Certainly the job of public service 

is one that takes a lot of work, a lot of commitment, and a lot of 

passion. And it’s good to see that these public servants are 

coming to their Legislative Assembly to see how, to gain a 

better understanding of the political side or the legislative side 

of this process, including some individuals from our very own 

Legislative Assembly along for the seminar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I wish the public servants this to be a time of learning and 

greater insight. And I know that my colleague, the Whip on the 

opposition side, the member from Cumberland House, is going 

to be meeting with the individuals later. But I’d ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming these public servants to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce again this week just a great looking grade 10 school 

group from the Yorkton Regional High School in Yorkton, 

accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Perry Ostapowich and Mr. 

Grant Bjornerud who I think will be getting a more lengthy 

introduction later. 

 

There’s 38 of them, Mr. Speaker. But of honourable mention a 

few of them I’d like to point out. Levi Morin who is . . . His dad 

is a friend of mine, very active in the community. His aunt 

actually sat in this Assembly for a number of years representing 

Walsh Acres. Give us a wave there, Levi. Hayley Lepowick I 

know from singing and stuff throughout the years, and as well I 

met up with her last week at the Kalyna dance competitions. 

Jenika McArthur, very involved in Boys & Girls Club and 

looking to get more involved in volunteering. Jenika, give us a 

wave. 

 

Braden Oystrick, his dad is a good friend of mine. His mom is 

very involved in the community as well — Braden. Ben 

Nussbaumer, he’s a son of a friend of mine from Kinsmen but 

he’s also the nephew of a very active community member, 

Dave Nussbaumer, who told me to give Ben a really hard time 

in the Assembly today because he always does. One other of 

notable mention, Mr. Speaker, pretty much like my niece — 

Andrea Landstad. I’ve known her since she was but a baby, and 

she’s up there too. Andrea, give us a wave. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome these students 

from Yorkton Regional High School to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 15 grade 5 

and 6 students from Englefeld School, the home of the Eagles. 

This unique — and it is, it’s a unique — separate, Protestant 

school was named the number one school in Saskatchewan by 

the Frontier Centre for Public Policy, and is a great example of 

a community coming together for a common cause. 

 

The students are accompanied today by Ms. Jolene Gullacher, 

and seven, seven chaperones. Now I don’t think that’s to keep 

them in line here in the Assembly; I think that was for the rock 

climbing earlier in the day. I would ask that all members join 

me in welcoming these Englefeld students to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly it is 

my privilege to introduce Roy Ludwig from Estevan. Roy, give 

us a wave. 

 

Roy is a councillor for the city of Estevan, and he’s very 

involved in that community. And he also sits on my executive 

and was instrumental in my re-election last fall. So I’d ask 

everyone to help me in welcoming Roy to his Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and the rest of the Assembly, seated in your 

gallery, I’m proud to introduce Todd Blyth. 

 

Todd is currently the new president of the Regina Coronation 

Park Community Association. He just finished his first year at 

the U of R [University of Regina] studying business admin. 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

He’s also just finished his term as deputy premier with the 

youth parliament and currently is a city of Regina committee 

assistant. He’s working on seven different committees so he 

doesn’t have a lot of time. And each year he and his brother 

coach Germany in the World Class Players Cup soccer 

tournament. And I look forward to working with Todd in the 

community and would ask all members in joining me in 

welcoming Todd to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce Roy and Phyllis Thurm to the Assembly here today. 

Roy is my grandfather’s youngest and much younger brother 

and it’s a pleasure to have them here today from Calgary. 

 

Roy graduated with engineering from the University of 

Saskatchewan, worked with SaskPower, but then embarked on 

a career all around the world working in Saudi Arabia, in Iran, 

Turkey, many other countries in the oil and gas industry, and he 

locates himself back in Calgary at this point in time in his life. 

Phyllis worked throughout those countries as well. They raised 

their family in these countries, providing a really unique 

experience for their boys. So I ask all members to join with me 

in welcoming Roy and Phyllis Thurm to our Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to join with the member from Yorkton in 

introducing the school group from Yorkton, and to start with, 

Mr. Ostapowich who many in this Assembly will remember for 

years has been very faithful about bringing classes into this 

legislature. And we thank him for that. And he used to be a 

teacher in Melville and then of course moved over to Yorkton. 

And their gain is our loss and we miss him very much in our 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the opportunity to introduce my 

daughter. She was with the school group from Eston. So I’d be 

remiss today if I didn’t take this opportunity to introduce my 

son, Grant, at the very back in the west gallery. Give us a wave, 

Grant. You may come to the conclusion that tall, dark, and 

handsome runs in our family, or you may not. So anyway I 

would ask all the members to welcome my son here today. 

Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot and died from his injuries. He was working at a 

gas station in Yorkton alone and unprotected from intruders. 

But we know that from positive statistics that show 

convenience store and gas station robberies are down by 

one-third since 1999 largely due to increased safety practices, 

including two people working together on late-night shifts. 

 

We know other provinces have brought several safety 

precautions through laws requiring a requirement that workers 

cannot be alone during late-night, early morning hours. And if 

they are required to work, there must be protective barriers such 

as locked doors and protective glass. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition in support of 

improving Highway 165. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

To undertake to upgrade a section of Highway 165 

between Beauval and the English River First Nation by 

adding proper lighting for pedestrian traffic, by adding 

space for pedestrians on the highway and its bridges, and 

by properly surfacing the road with the material needed 

for a busy heavy-haul road. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Beauval. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the accounting and management of 

our provincial finances. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the 

fair, true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Cabri and Swift Current. I so submit. 

 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan people who are 

calling on the Sask Party government to support the 

Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights, which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to recognize that the experience 

gained through practical experience be valued, and in so 

doing to cause the government to review the current 

legislation and regulations with respect to trapping 

regulations and firearm use in consultation with 

traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Signed by many good people of Stanley Mission. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Golf Tournament to Support Special Olympics 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 

House to talk about an exciting event that took place this 

morning over at Wascana Centre. The Special Olympics 

movement of Saskatchewan announced their third annual 

George Reed Golf Tournament which is to be held at Wascana 

Country Club on June 25th. This morning I had the pleasure of 

attending, along with the hon. member from Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, the announcement ceremony held at Wascana Place 

where Casino Regina, Casino Moose Jaw committed $15,000 to 

support this important event. 

The Special Olympic movement does great work in 

Saskatchewan and our community, providing people who have 

physical and intellectual disabilities the opportunity to 

participate in sports. Since the first tournament three years ago, 

this fundraiser has continued to gain momentum each year, 

growing to one of Saskatchewan’s most anticipated 

tournaments. Thanks to the celebrities and the entertainers who 

generously gave their time, the incredible support of organizing 

committee, and of course, the generosity of the people of 

Saskatchewan, $70,000 was raised last year. 

 

Legendary Roughrider fullback George Reed has worked for 

the Special Olympics for 45 years. He has seen first-hand how 

being involved with sports can help the individuals grow and 

achieve. 

 

Through their great work, the organizers, volunteers at Special 

Olympics are addressing real needs on a daily basis, helping 

those with disabilities realize their full potential. And now I’d 

like to ask all members to join me wishing those involved much 

success in this year’s fundraiser. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — We’re having a problem with the clock right 

now, so it’ll be reset. We’re ready to go? You’re done. 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mental Health Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s Mental Health 

Awareness Week, an opportunity to recommit ourselves as 

legislators to make mental health care a greater priority. 

 

As I’ve said in question periods during the session, mental 

health care is a huge concern to Saskatchewan residents. Far too 

many people suffer from depression, anxiety, eating disorders, 

attention deficit disorders, schizophrenia, and other mental 

illness. And we know that mental illness is compounded when 

it is experienced by those who are poor and homeless. We also 

know that Saskatchewan has a higher rate of attempted suicide 

than any other province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I call on the provincial government to make 

mental health care more of a priority. That includes developing 

a comprehensive mental health care strategy, increasing mental 

health care spaces in communities throughout the province, and 

greatly improving mental health care services in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And for anyone who is listening who is struggling with mental 

illness, know that you’re not alone. Many others have walked 

similar paths, and many others have found tremendous healing 

and strength by reaching out to their doctors, other health care 

professionals, friends, and families. So please do that because 

no matter how dark the tunnel may seem right now, I assure 

you there is light around the bend. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

Recognition of Food Bank Leader 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today in the House to recognize the hard work 

and fantastic contributions of Wayne Hellquist. Mr. Hellquist 

has been the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina Food 

Bank for nine very successful years and has decided to step 

down when his contract comes due at the end of June this year. 

 

The Regina Food Bank is a charitable, community-based 

organization working to eliminate hunger through nutritious 

food distribution, education, and advocacy, and it is located in 

my constituency of Regina Northeast. Mr. Hellquist’s 

leadership has resulted in strong growth for the organization as 

well as many successful and innovative initiatives. 

 

A multi-faceted organization, the Regina Food Bank ensures 

that those that need food get it, as well as employment-related 

educational programming, nutritional training, and personal 

development. This diverse programming was introduced during 

Mr. Hellquist’s tenure and aimed to help citizens become 

independent, improve their employment skills, and improve 

their overall health and well-being. 

 

In addition to his hard work for the Regina Food Bank, Mr. 

Hellquist has his own consulting company, is the current Chair 

of the Member Council of Food Banks Canada, and serves as 

the lone Canadian member on the board of the Global 

Foodbanking Network. I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to join me in applauding Mr. Wayne Hellquist and 

his fantastic work and dedication to the Regina Food Bank. And 

we wish him well in his future endeavours. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Beauval Youth Scores in Hockey and Academics 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to recognize a fantastic 

hockey player and a role model from the town of Beauval, Mr. 

Eric Roy. Mr. Speaker, when it comes to hockey and 

academics, Eric Roy is definitely at the top of his game. The 

17-year-old defenceman was recently named the most improved 

player in 2011 and 2012 for the Brandon Wheat Kings. A 

former first round bantam draft choice, Eric finished the season 

amongst the highest scoring blue-liners in the WHL [Western 

Hockey League]. 

 

In addition to being recognized as the most improved player for 

the Wheat Kings, Eric also received the honour of being 

acknowledged as the Maggie Janz Scholastic Player of the 

Year. It was Eric’s goal to graduate in 2012, and through his 

hard work and scholastic commitment, he was able to complete 

18 credits over the past two years. It takes a lot of energy and 

discipline to balance a full course load and the countless hours 

of home study with a busy hockey and travel schedule. And that 

is why, Mr. Speaker, I’m asking all my colleagues to join me in 

recognizing and congratulating Eric and his family on his great 

achievements. 

 

As his MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], I’m very 

happy for him. Eric is a wonderful role model, and he continues 

to do his family and the town of Beauval proud. Eric has a great 

dad and a wonderful mom plus a loving, supportive family. 

And I pray for his continued success because in northwestern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we need heroes like Eric Roy. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Operation Burrowing Owl Celebrates 25 Years 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to join 

in the celebration of 25 years of Operation Burrowing Owl. A 

random wildlife survey conducted in 1986 identified a dramatic 

decrease in the owl population, thus the need to raise awareness 

about burrowing owls and conserve their habitat. 

 

As a result of that survey, Operation Burrowing Owl was 

launched in 1987 as a joint venture between Nature 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, World 

Wildlife Fund Canada, Wildlife Habitat Canada, and 

Saskatchewan Environment. On the heels of the wildlife 

survey, public awareness of the burrowing owl was increased 

by Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, who was the president of 

the World Wildlife Fund at the time and helped to draw 

attention and much needed publicity to the plight of the owls. 

 

The main factors that cause burrowing owl deaths include 

habitat loss, decreased prey availability, and collisions with 

vehicles. Increased public concern for the protection of the 

species has resulted in Operation Burrowing Owl. Landowners 

voluntarily agreed to conserve grassland, the burrowing owls’ 

natural habitat: 154,000 acres has been saved, helping to curb 

the major cause of the owls’ mortality. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, Operation Burrowing Owl is the longest 

running voluntary stewardship program in Canada. I’d like to 

take this opportunity to recognize all the work that has gone 

into the conservation of this beautiful species — especially my 

daughter, Lacey Weekes, who is the habitat stewardship 

coordinator for the Operation Burrowing Owl program. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mental Health Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Parent: — Mr. Speaker, this week marks Mental Health 

Awareness Week. Annually this national campaign takes place 

during the first week in May to encourage people to learn and 

to talk about the reality of mental illness and the importance of 

mental health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, mental illness is a serious problem that affects 

approximately 20 per cent of the Canadian population. 

Worldwide, of the 10 leading causes of disability, five are 

mental disorders. These include major depression, 

schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, substance abuse disorder, and 

obsessive-compulsive disorder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, living with a mental illness is not easy, not for 

those individuals who have a mental illness nor for their family 

and friends who support them. Mr. Speaker, our government 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

has invested an estimated $238 million in mental health this 

year. Meanwhile we are working closely with 

community-based organizations to promote mental health, 

prevent mental illness, and educate the public about mental 

health issues. Mr. Speaker, work continues on the replacement 

of the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, as our 

government is committed to making sure this new psychiatric 

rehabilitation facility will provide a better, more effective 

environment to best suit patients’ unique needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite my colleagues here and the 

public to join us this week to learn, to talk about, and to engage 

with others on issues related to mental health. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Book Awards Winners Read in Legislative Library 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier 

today in the Legislative Library, a number of people had the 

pleasure of listening to readings from three Saskatchewan Book 

Awards winners, one of them being a very talented Wood River 

constituent and a friend of mine, Ms. Thelma Poirier. She was 

reading her book, Rock Creek Blues. Two other authors, Darren 

Prefontaine and Anne McDonald, also shared their work. This 

morning’s readings is one of many events held across the 

province throughout the year generating interest, excitement, 

and pride for the authors and publishers of the province, as well 

as providing authors with the unique opportunity to meet their 

readers face to face. 

 

These three winners were recognized at the 19th Saskatchewan 

Book Awards Gala on April 28th, 2012. As the only 

provincially focused book awards program in Saskatchewan, 

the Saskatchewan Book Awards presents over a dozen awards 

yearly to celebrate the achievements of our province’s authors 

and publishers. Award galas such as this helps to expose the 

diverse talent within the Saskatchewan literary community 

while encouraging and promoting an understanding of our own 

place in the history of the province, country, and world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, encouraging people to read and become engaged 

with stories, the narratives, and the histories of a place fosters 

literacy and lifelong learning. I ask all members of the 

Assembly to join me in congratulating all of this year’s 

winners, with a special mention to Thelma Poirier, Darren 

Prefontaine, and Anne McDonald. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Post-Secondary Students 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fallout from the 

Sask Party government’s short-sighted budget continues to rain 

down on post-secondary institutions here in Saskatchewan. At 

the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 

nearly $100 million of debt being added to the university as the 

minister has maxed out their borrowing capacity, pushing the 

number off the province’s books. We’ve seen no funding 

devoted to ongoing expenses for the Health Sciences building, 

and we’ve seen significant hikes, Mr. Speaker, for tuition at the 

U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. 

 

While it’s a similar situation that is concerning at the University 

of Regina, Mr. Speaker, with a $4 million funding gap, the 

University of Regina board of governors has responded with 

major cuts as well as major tuition hikes. We know 25 faculty 

and staff will be eliminated, Mr. Speaker, and there’s 3 per cent 

cuts across the board. 

 

My question to the minister: the Sask Party government has 

millions and millions to spend on more politicians. Why can’t 

this minister provide more money for faculty at the U of R? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to provide an update to people right across 

the province. Since being elected in 2007, we’ve invested more 

than $3.5 billion in post-secondary education. That’s an all-time 

record. At the University of Regina specifically, what we’ve 

seen since 2007 is a 39 per cent increase in operating funding. 

In fact this past year, this past budget, Mr. Speaker, the only 

balanced budget in the country, Mr. Speaker, saw a 7.3 per cent 

increase at the University of Regina. 

 

It included some important initiatives, Mr. Speaker. About a 

year ago, we were asked to look at a new student residence with 

a child care facility. What we’ve been able to do, in less than a 

year, do some due diligence, work with the university partners, 

and in the budget made the announcement subsequently that we 

are indeed moving forward with a new student residence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as a brief summary, it’s simply to say, we’ve 

invested an additional 3,000 per cent in student residence across 

the province, Mr. Speaker. That’s the kind of support that 

students are getting from this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday’s 

announcement by the U of R shows that students will be paying 

more in order to make up for the minister’s shortchanging of 

the universities. 

 

Once upon a time, Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about a 

so-called tuition management system. Now he just talks about 

increasing tuition year after year after year. We know at the U 

of R, Mr. Speaker, there will be an average increase of 4 per 

cent for students, with some students, such as those in business 

admin and graduate students, paying 9 per cent more. 

 

My question to the minister: the Sask Party government has 

millions and millions to spend on more politicians, Mr. 

Speaker, but they insist on making post-secondary education 

less and less affordable for Saskatchewan students. Why are the 

minister’s priorities so mixed up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite and 

the way they treated students at the University of Regina, under 

the NDP [New Democratic Party], tuition went up by 88 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker — 88 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are putting a priority on our students. That’s 

one of the reasons that we’re moving forward with the 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, making sure that there are 

dollars available, millions of dollars available for students 

coming out of high school into post-secondary education. 

We’ve also just rolled out the new Saskatchewan innovation 

and opportunity scholarship, $3 million per year, Mr. Speaker, 

to make sure that students already enrolled in post-secondary 

education have additional support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve also moved forward with the graduate retention 

program, the most aggressive youth retention program in the 

country that’s already helping more than 30,000 graduates, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those graduates are contributing to our 

record population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only did the members opposite underfund 

post-secondary education and students, they then sent them 

packing to Alberta. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in 2005 tuition was frozen by the 

NDP government. Since that time in 2005, we’ve seen revenues 

to the province increase 61 per cent. And we’ve seen, Mr. 

Speaker, spending in the province increase 71 per cent. But 

students aren’t feeling the benefits of those spending and 

revenue increases. At the U of R, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 

total average increase of 15 per cent in tuition under this 

minister’s watch. 

 

My question to the minister: with spending up 71 per cent since 

the tuition freeze was put in place, how can he justify to U of R 

students that their education should be less affordable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is to reiterate: with the only balanced budget in the 

country, Mr. Speaker, we’ve still been able to make record 

investments in post-secondary education. In fact at the 

University of Regina, this year in the budget there was an 

increase of more than 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s a far cry 

from what the members opposite did when tuition went up by 

88 per cent at the University of Regina. 

 

We have the most aggressive youth retention program, Mr. 

Speaker, in the country with 30,000 graduates benefiting from 

it. We’ve put new dollars in student financial assistance. We 

have new scholarship dollars through the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship that we’re announcing here shortly. We 

also have the Saskatchewan innovation and opportunity 

scholarship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the most aggressive and progressive 

continuum of support for students across the country, Mr. 

Speaker, making sure that we’re focusing on post-secondary 

education that’s affordable and accessible but also allowing our 

institutions to focus on excellence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When tuition 

increased in the ’90s, the government was facing a massive 

deficit, thanks to the previous conservative government. I’m 

sure there are members on the front bench, Mr. Speaker, who’d 

be happy to speak with the minister and share some information 

on that. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, we heard from the Premier that he was 

worried about young people having to pay union dues. So 

worried, Mr. Speaker, that he’s prepared to overhaul labour 

legislation, ripping it apart in order to save young people a few 

dollars in not paying union dues. Yet at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, the members on the front bench of the Sask Party 

government is more than happy to increase tuition up to 9 per 

cent in one year alone at the U of R, costing young people 

hundreds of more dollars per year. 

 

My question to the minister: why is the Sask Party government 

so desperately urgent to prevent young people from paying 

union dues, but at the exact same time they are prepared to turn 

around and demand that young people pay more through 

increased tuition? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite had a 

bit of a convoluted question, but I think it goes something like 

this, Mr. Speaker. Young people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

are being supported by record proportions in post-secondary 

education investments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than that, they can see that this province has 

the only balanced budget in the country, Mr. Speaker. More 

than that, they have the graduate retention program as they 

finish, Mr. Speaker. That’s up to $20,000 back, Mr. Speaker. 

And with about 530,000 people working in the province today, 

with about 425,000 people working full-time, with the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country, Mr. Speaker, they can 

succeed in their studies. And, Mr. Speaker, then they can roll up 

their sleeves and get right to work while having the benefits of 

the graduate retention program, Mr. Speaker. That’s a far cry 

from what the members opposite used to do, Mr. Speaker, as 

graduates used to simply get in the car and leave the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those who work in 

the film and television industry have worked hard to keep this 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

sector alive in our province. The people working hard to do the 

opposite are on that side of the House. The minister said this is 

a “transient industry.” The minister continues to attack the 

entire industry through poor policy decisions. Now he has 

resorted to insulting those who earn a living right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Will the minister apologize to all those in the film and 

television industry who are proud to call this and no other 

province home? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in each and every one of our discussions with the film 

industry, we have been very clear that the old refundable tax 

credit wasn’t viable and wasn’t even effective. It obviously 

wasn’t helping the industry to grow, since two-thirds of the 

industry has disappeared in the last five years alone. It came at 

a high cost to taxpayers and was unfair to other industries that 

don’t get this kind of benefit. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, over 98 per cent of the $100 million paid 

out through the old program was really just to grant to 

companies that don’t even pay corporate income tax here in 

Saskatchewan. And that has to change. Every industry creates 

economic activity, as we have acknowledged. Every industry 

creates employment as well, but only the film industry benefits 

from provincial programs without paying income tax here. It’s 

time for a new approach, Mr. Speaker, one that is focused on 

growing Saskatchewan-based businesses, focused on 

sustainability, and focused on fairness. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

exactly what our new plan is doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The industry did 

propose an incentive for the sound stage, but it did not involve 

it being repurposed as the minister wants. SMPIA 

[Saskatchewan Motion Picture Industry Association] asked 

digital technology companies about their interest in using the 

sound stage and they’ve said they would not be able to make 

effective use of the building. They recommended it stay as a 

tool for film production. But the minister pushes ahead with his 

own ideas. After all, the minister knows best, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a plan to support the industry. It is a plan 

to ditch the sound stage. To the minister: why would he forge 

ahead with a plan on the sound stage that again does not have 

industry support? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, in all of her questions on this important issue, I 

don’t think the member has ever acknowledged the film 

industry’s request to create an innovative new tax credit that is 

expanded to include all production costs. We have. It’s in our 

three-point plan. And I don’t think she’s ever acknowledged the 

industry’s interest in digital technology — clearly the way of 

the future. Mr. Speaker, we have. It’s in our plan as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t ever recall that she’s acknowledged the 

power of bringing all of Saskatchewan’s creative industries 

together in a centre of excellence and the leadership role that 

this hub of innovation could produce in our country. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve done that too because that as well is in our plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, simply put, the NDP are stuck in the past, clinging 

desperately to old solutions that don’t work. We’re bringing 

this industry and Saskatchewan into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Finance’s own numbers show that just over half of the 

companies active in this sector here in 2009 would be eligible 

for even a small slice of the government’s weak proposal. 

Rather than creating jobs and fostering investment in our 

economy, this government is ignoring all the expert advice that 

the minister’s proposal will not work for Saskatchewan. Why 

does this minister think he is the expert? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the member 

forgets we have the strongest economy with the highest 

employment in the entire country. That’s an advantage that she 

needs to keep in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last November 7th our party was given a strong 

mandate from the people of Saskatchewan based on our 

platform of continued fiscal prudence. The provincial 

government has provided over $100 million to the 

Saskatchewan film industry through the old film employment 

tax credit since its inception in 1998, support which we know 

was intended to help the industry grow and prosper. 

Unfortunately, despite this very significant investment and the 

best, best work put on by the film industry and our government, 

it hasn’t worked. 

 

Two-thirds of that economic activity has disappeared in five 

years alone. Many of the contributing factors are beyond our 

control. We understand that. Our Canadian dollar has risen to 

par with the US [United States] dollar. The Canadian film 

industry is concentrating in Vancouver and Toronto. And 

attracting investment capital is getting tougher and tougher all 

the time. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made the difficult but 

fiscally prudent choice to withdraw the program and provided 

in its place an innovative new three-point plan to grow a 

Saskatchewan-based industry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Contrary to what 

this minister has said, he has not implemented what the industry 

has proposed. After researching and consulting on other 

models, including non-refundable tax credits, SMPIA offered 

the minister a media production program for discussion — they 

wanted some discussion on this, Mr. Speaker — that they 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

believe would sustain and grow the industry. SMPIA’s research 

told them a refundable tax credit would be the only workable 

incentive because it’s bankable, it’s competitive, and it’s easy 

to understand. The minister’s proposal is none of the above. 

 

Why did the minister ignore the heart of the film and television 

industry’s proposal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the non-refundable tax credit is simply one of the three 

points in our new plan. The first point, as we had mentioned 

before, is the creation of a new film tax credit that now includes 

all production costs, not labour. This is exactly what the 

industry has asked for. 

 

The second point is consultation with our friends in the creative 

industries to develop a strategy for greater use of digital 

technology, helping our creative sector compete both here in 

Canada and around the world. 

 

The third — and this is very important, Mr. Speaker — the 

third point involves repurposing the sound stage as an incubator 

for film and other related creative industries, a creative hub 

where new technologies and new companies are born. This is 

an innovative plan. No one else in the country, to our 

knowledge, is doing this. This is the way forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Sale of Community Pastures 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we know, the 

livestock sector is doing well in the province, and it’s important 

to work with the sector to ensure that it continues to grow. Over 

the course of the next few years, 60 federally controlled 

community pastures are going to be turned back to the 

province. These pastures cover 1.6 million acres of well-tended 

native prairie. 

 

The minister has said the government has no plans to operate 

the pastures and will put the lands up for sale. Although these 

pastures are vital to the operations of these producers, many 

will not have access to the financing necessary to purchase 

these lands. To the minister: how will the government structure 

the sales to ensure these producers are not put out of business? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as the member knows, I think and is fully aware of, 

that there are no pastures that will be taken out of the system 

this year from the federal cuts. Next year, there will be five 

pastures that will be selected; in the following year, five; and 

then the balance over the next three or four years. So I think the 

member is fully aware of that. 

 

One thing that we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is we’re putting 

together a panel of five producers from across the province to 

have their input of how that divestiture of the federal pastures 

could happen. And we’ve also talked to the federal minister to 

try and find ways for financing of these pastures with patrons 

who would like to either form an association or something of 

that sort to purchase the pastures that they’re utilizing now. And 

as I made the commitment in the past, Mr. Speaker, we 

certainly want the patrons to have the first opportunity to 

purchase that land. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

certainly am aware of the program and how the divestitures will 

happen. It’s good to hear the producers are being consulted, and 

I would ask the minister if perhaps those names could be shared 

with this House. 

 

The PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration] 

community pastures provide good jobs to many Saskatchewan 

people. For the pasture managers and range riders, it’s a way of 

life. Some of them are third- and fourth-generation stewards of 

the lands. Many jobs could be lost as result of the sale of the 

community pastures. 

 

To the minister: will the sale of the community pastures include 

employment protection for these valued pasture mangers and 

range riders? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the pastures are 

moved over to the patrons across the province right now — five 

next year will be the first movement of these pastures over — 

these pastures will still utilize, I’m sure, the same people that 

are working there today, or the same number of people. We still 

have to have pasture managers out there to run the pastures. We 

have to have people in place to look after the fences and to 

maintain the pastures as they are today. So that won’t change. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have had inquiries from a number of 

producers out there who are quite interested in finding ways to 

acquire the pastures to either lease to own or purchase the 

pastures. And those are just some of the things that we’re 

looking at so that this can be a smooth transition over to the 

farmers and ranchers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to thank 

the minister for the answer. The careful management and 

stewardship of these pastures has made them an important 

stronghold of grassland diversity in Saskatchewan. These 

pastures represent some of the largest contiguous blocks of 

natural habitat land left in the world and are the home to more 

than 20 endangered species. And there’s concern that if sold 

without a plan to protect the good work to date, these natural 

habitat lands will be lost. 

 

Alberta has created the concept of heritage rangelands to 

protect their native prairie, and now’s the time, Mr. Speaker, for 

making plans for the future of these lands. Will the minister 

take steps to protect this irreplaceable habitat once the lands are 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

sold? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly I can inform the House that the Ministry of 

Environment is working with colleagues in the Ministry of 

Agriculture on the federal government’s decision to divest of 

the federal pastures. And certainly we know that the federal 

pasture land is an important part of our representative area 

network, and that’s why Ministry of Environment will continue 

to take part in those discussions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Review of Labour Legislation and Workplace Safety 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this minister has been incredibly inconsistent when it 

comes to his government labour consultation document. The 

people of Saskatchewan deserve to know how this will impact 

future labour legislation the minister plans to introduce this fall. 

Mr. Speaker, simply put, this exercise is a sham. Some of these 

items are so out of line, and this government’s already ruling 

out items from their own document, items which they 

sometimes claim are both on and sometimes off the table. 

 

My question to the minister: is there anything else that he 

wishes to dismiss from this review, or will there be some things 

that will go missing in the fall? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we have sent out some 657 letters to a variety of different 

stakeholders looking for input on this particular discussion 

paper. Mr. Speaker, we’re expecting that that is going to happen 

over the next three months. We look forward to receiving that 

input. We are not ruling in or out things at this point in time. If 

a question arises that requires clarification, we’ll provide it, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re not afraid to do that, and we’ll continue to do 

that as is required. And we look forward to a full and complete 

process. 

 

And I would like to urge the members opposite to participate in 

it. They’ve certainly had a large number of comments in the 

Chamber. And, Mr. Speaker, if they’ve got something that is 

productive and beneficial, I would urge them to make a 

submission. And I would be pleased to meet with any of them 

at their convenience to discuss the things that they think should 

or should not be included in the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

learned that the minister has met with some labour officials in 

March. He explained the purpose for having the discussion was 

to elicit opinions and to ensure that the laws are responsive and 

relevant to the people of the province and that concerns had 

been raised on the election doorstep. However, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister at the same time also mentioned to the union leaders 

that there was draft legislation prepared a couple of years ago 

that could serve as a potential model. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does he have a draft set of 

legislation already in his back pocket ready to go? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is no 

draft legislation in existence. No draft legislation has been 

prepared. Mr. Speaker, I have a quote that I would like to read 

to the members, and I will read it. This is a quote: 

 

The federal government has an employment code. We 

should consider doing that as well. I consulted with folks 

in Justice as well. I went back and asked them what their 

opinion was on it and some of the officials said that while 

several years ago — and I’m not sure whether it was 

under our administration or the previous one — indicated 

that they had done some prep work on a consolidated 

piece several years ago, and nothing had been done with 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that quote is from me on May 3rd in an interview 

with Stefani Langenegger. There’s nothing hidden. I’m talking 

about it to the media. The people in the ministry did do some 

prep work. There is no draft Bill prepared, nor will there be, 

Mr. Speaker, until we are well assured where we want to be as a 

result of the consultation. Mr. Speaker, I’m quite willing to 

quote myself when it’s the right thing to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the answer. I’m 

looking forward to seeing this legislation that will be done in 

record time in the fall. This will be very interesting stuff that he 

brings forward. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, on Monday evening in the 

committees, we found that there’s still plenty of business that 

this department, this minister has to do. The minister has yet to 

fully implement the Fast report on recommendations to improve 

occupational health and safety, or the auditor’s 

recommendations calling for better compliance for the 

minister’s Acts and regulations. And, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

has received the Workers’ Compensation committee of review 

report and that needs attention immediately. Clearly this 

minister should be focused on getting the work done that he 

needs to get done and not on this so-called sham of a 

consultation.  

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister do the right thing? Will he get 

back to work on the real issues of safety in our workplaces? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate 

the question from the member opposite. We had a thorough 

discussion in committee the other day, and I want to advise the 

members opposite who were not in committee that there was a 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

lot of progress made on a lot of things that were there. There 

was a variety of things that came forward as a result of the 

committee of review. We answered a number of questions 

regarding that. A lot of the things that are in the committee of 

review recommendations have been implemented already. 

Some of them are going to require legislative changes. 

 

We’ve indicated that we’d put a marker in the fall agenda so 

that we can deal with those things as we progress through them. 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve got OH & S [occupational health and 

safety] recommendations. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things, 

for the benefit of the members opposite, is to substantially 

increase the fines and penalties under occupational health and 

safety. And that’s one of the Bills that’s before the House, and 

that’s one of the Bills that will be coming back and we will be 

voting on it for third reading later today, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 

like to ask the members opposite to support that and vote in 

favour of that and get some of those things done and concluded. 

We need their support on those things so that they can be done 

quickly. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report as 

considered certain estimates, to present its first report. I so 

move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has moved by the chairman of the Crown 

and Central Agencies Committee: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairman of Crown 

and Central Agencies commission. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

43, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 

43, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 and that the Bill now 

be read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 43 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 43, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report Bill No. 23, The Occupational Health and Safety 

Amendment Act, 2011 with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Thank you for your indulgence since this is the first time I’ve 

had the opportunity. 

 

It has been moved by the Minister of . . . It has been moved by 

the Chair. No, just wait here. 

 

When shall the amendment be read for the first time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and that 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 23, The Occupational Health and Safety 

Amendment Act, 2011 with amendment, and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. 

 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that the amendments be now read a first 

and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

readings of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with . . . move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 23, The Occupational 

Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 with amendments be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 42, The 

Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole on this Bill, and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration has requested leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 42, The 

Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012 and that 

the Bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Graduate Retention Program 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration that Bill 

No. 42, The Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 

2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report that it has considered certain estimates and to 

present its first report. I move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now be 

concurred. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 5, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — And when shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole for Bill No. 5, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

and that the Bill now be read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

[14:30] 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — This Bill be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 5, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am again 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 11, The Court Officials 

Act, 2011. This is a bilingual Bill without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 11, 

The Court Officials Act, 2011 and that the Bill now be read a 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Court Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur 

les fonctionnaires de justice 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice, 

Attorney General that Bill No. 11, The Court Officials Act, 

2011 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m further 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 12, The Court Officials 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole for Bill No. 12, 

The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 with 

amendment, and that the Bill and its amendments be now read a 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that the amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 12, The Court Officials Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 with amendment be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 13, The Constitutional Questions Act, 

2011, a bilingual Bill, without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole for Bill No. 13, 

The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011, and that the Bill now 

be read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 

2011 sur les questions constitutionnelles 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 13, The Constitutional 

Questions Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am again 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 14, The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 14, 

The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill now be 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 14, The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 21, The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and the 

Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 21, 

The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 and that the Bill now 

be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21 — The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General, that Bill No. 21, The Commissioners for 

Oaths Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 22, The Commissioners for Oaths 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2011. This is a bilingual Bill, 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 22, 

The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 

2011 and that the Bill now be read a third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 22 — The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 portant 

modification corrélative à la loi intitulée 

The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 22, The Commissioners for 

Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am further 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 24, The Advocate for 

Children and Youth Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 24, 

The Advocate for Children and Youth Act and that the Bill now 

be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 24, The Advocate for 

Children and Youth Act be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

Justice to report Bill No. 25, The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 25, 

The Ombudsman Act, 2011 and that the Bill now be read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 25, The Ombudsman Act, 2011 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 29, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2011, this is a bilingual Bill, with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 29, 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

and that the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that the amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 29, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I am further 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 30, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration of 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole for Bill No. 30, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 and that the Bill 

now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 30, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 31, The Enforcement of Canadian 

Judgments Amendment Act, 2011, a bilingual Bill, without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered for 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 31, 

The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 

and that the Bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed by moving third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 

sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 31, The Enforcement of 

Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 32, The Inter-jurisdictional Support 

Orders Amendment Act, 2011, a bilingual Bill, without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill proceed to Committee of 

the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 32, 

The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

and that the Bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed by moving third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les 

ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 32, The Inter-jurisdictional 

Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m again 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 39, The Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration of 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 39, 

The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act and that the Bill now be read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 39 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 39, The Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m further instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 40, The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 

2012. This is a bilingual Bill without amendment. 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration of 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 40, 

The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012 and the Bill 

now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 

2012/Loi de 2012 portant modification corrélative à la loi 

intitulée The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 40, The Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration of 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and the Bill be now read 

for a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 26, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 and that the Bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 35, The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011, a bilingual Bill, 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2012 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 35, 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 

Act, 2011 and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi 

de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 35, The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am again 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 33, The Residential 

Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 33, 

The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 and that the 

Bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 33, The Residential 

Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am finally 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 4, The Pension Benefits 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 4, 

The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 



May 9, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

Bill No. 4 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 4, The Pension Benefits 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 385 through 393. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 385 to 393. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of a committee this afternoon, I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 

a.m. Thursday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:50.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1453 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1453 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1454 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1455 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Golf Tournament to Support Special Olympics 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1455 

 Mental Health Awareness Week 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 

 Recognition of Food Bank Leader 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 

 Beauval Youth Scores in Hockey and Academics 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 

 Operation Burrowing Owl Celebrates 25 Years 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 

 Mental Health Awareness Week 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 

 Book Awards Winners Read in Legislative Library 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1457 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Post-Secondary Students 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1459 

 Sale of Community Pastures 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1460 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1461 

 Review of Labour Legislation and Workplace Safety 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1461 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1461 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1464 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1463 

 Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1465 

 Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 43 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 



 

 Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1463 

 Bill No. 42 — The Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1463 

 Bill No. 5 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1464 

 Bill No. 11 — The Court Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de justice 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1464 

 Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1465 

 Bill No. 13 — The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les questions constitutionnelles 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1465 

 Bill No. 14 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1466 

 Bill No. 21 — The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1466 

 Bill No. 22 — The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 

 Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 

 Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

 Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

 Bill No. 30 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1469 

 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1469 

 Bill No. 32 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1470 

 Bill No. 39 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1470 

 Bill No. 40 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012 
 Loi de 2012 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1471 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1471 

 Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1472 

 Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1472 

 Bill No. 4 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1473 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1473 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 




