




















































Hansard: March 06, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 10B TUESDAY, MARCH 6, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 355 

 March 6, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I will call the 

House back to order. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 25 — The 

Ombudsman Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s good to rise this evening to join in the debate on Bill No. 

25, The Ombudsman Act, on this snowy eve in March, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Certainly the Ombudsman’s one of those key institutions in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I believe Saskatchewan, in the 

introduction of the Ombudsman in and of itself a number of 

decades ago, it was a fairly trail-blazing measure. Ombud’s 

functions have been embraced across the country in many 

different ways, and it’s good to see the government paying 

attention to trying to keep step with the times and modernize 

the legislation that governs the Ombudsman. 

 

It’s interesting to look through the legislation and see how it 

represents the changing of the times. Certainly we have just this 

very day had debates on the Children’s Advocate, again another 

trail-blazing effort on the part of the people of Saskatchewan 

introducing this function, that general sort of advocacy function 

separate and apart from government, an independent officer of 

the legislature but specifically geared towards children and 

youth, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But the Ombudsman of course is quite encompassing in terms 

of providing that advocacy and in some cases mediation, 

problem-solving role for people as they approach the affairs of 

the government. And certainly for, I am sure, many MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], that’s one of the things 

we try to do, and certainly in our office in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, is to work in that advocacy role to make 

sure that people are getting a fair shake from their government 

and that they are getting their due from the government, that 

they have got someone there alongside them to try and navigate 

some of the twists and turns of dealing with government which, 

for many people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can be quite a daunting 

thing. It can be quite a complex undertaking, so we know this in 

our legislative offices and our constituency offices in terms of 

working with our constituents.  

 

And I am sure that you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and many 

members from this House have encountered the Ombudsman in 

that role, not just the institution of the Ombudsman, but I 

believe the current Ombudsman is actually a constituent of Mr. 

Deputy Speaker’s out in that Balcarres country. So I’m sure, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you are aware with not just the general 

good work that the Ombudsman does but what a good 

neighbour he is and the kind of dignity and character that he 

brings to the job. 

 

It’s good to see this legislation come forward and the kind of 

evolution that has been taking place certainly in advance of the 

2007 election. Members opposite campaigned on bringing in an 

independent health ombud’s function in government. After 

some consideration on their part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or on the 

part of the government, it was decided to roll that function into 

the Office of the Ombudsman and to accelerate or enhance the 

work already under way but also the powers that were available 

to that. So again in terms of the additional capacity under the 

expanded role as regards health matters, The Ombudsman Act 

that we’re considering here today under Bill No. 25 plays a 

certain role in that. 

 

It’s also interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the existing 

Ombudsman is acting as the final commissioner for the 

complaints process as regards public service whistle-blowers or 

public disclosure commissioner. Again a pretty key function as 

regards the relationship of people to their government and 

making sure that there’s that balance between the needs for 

confidentiality but also the ability of people to step forward and 

blow the whistle if need be when they’ve witnessed 

wrongdoing, and to not have fear of reprisal from that. That 

we’ve got the existing Ombudsman acting in an acting fashion 

for that, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the 

province would be well served by the individual currently 

serving as Ombudsman in that function. 

 

But that particular piece of legislation, the way it was 

proclaimed and the way that there were certain question marks 

hanging over it, certainly underlines for us in the opposition the 

need to hold the deeds and the legislative measures brought 

forward by this government up to as much scrutiny as can be 

brought to bear, and the need to hold that government to 

account. Certainly that was one instance of legislation being 

proclaimed where perhaps all the measures weren’t fully in 

place, and we’ll see how that plays out in the days to come, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But Bill No. 25, in and of itself, not just enhancing or bolstering 

the powers as it relates to the health duties with which it’s now 

been tasked but also differentiating it from the legislation 

governing the Children’s Advocate position. In and of itself, 

this is a worthwhile piece of legislation. The particulars again, 

we’ll see how they play out over time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But 

in principal, I think this is a worthwhile piece of legislation in 

really bringing up to date not just the duties of the Ombudsman 

but the additional tasks that have been provided to that office, 

and the fact that the Children’s Advocate has evolved as it has 

and that they have their own separate child and youth advocate 

Act, again, I think is a piece of legislation that its time has 

come. 

 

In communication with the Ombudsman about the legislation, 

the Ombudsman states a number of things about or provides a 

number of pieces or a number of observations about the 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

measures contained in the legislation. And I’d like to provide a 

consideration of those in my remarks tonight, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Of course one of the things that it does right off the 

top is to update the language around general neutral language 

and to bring it into compliance with new legislative drafting 

conventions. But substantively one of the things it does right 

off the top is to expand the definition of agency of government, 

wherein the expansion of the definition of agency of 

government to include a publicly funded health entity better 

enables the Office of the Ombudsman to fulfill an expanded 

role in the health field. 

 

Another, further to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it clarifies the 

ability of the office to conduct investigations where requested 

by non-governmental bodies. The Ombudsman Saskatchewan is 

now given the ability and the authority to conduct 

investigations under certain circumstances where expertise, 

availability of resources, and fee agreement allow. I’d note 

parenthetically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in the consideration 

of the good work of the Ombudsman, under the Board of 

Internal Economy in the consideration of the budget attached to 

this independent officer of the legislature, I’d be interested to 

see what funds are anticipated to be generated in that fee 

agreement and just how much of the . . . proportionately how 

much of the business of the Ombudsman that kind of work will 

be constituting. 

 

But again they’ve got a certain expertise, and there is enabling 

the Ombudsman of Saskatchewan to respond to requests from 

non-governmental agencies and enabling other organizations, 

municipal and rural governments, school boards, 

community-based organizations to work with them on a 

fairness expertise in complaint handling. 

 

Again the Ombudsman Saskatchewan has not just established a 

good name for itself within Saskatchewan, but certainly I think 

there’s a case to be made that that recognition is national for the 

work that the Ombudsman in this province does. But some of 

those innovations in the way that they have done a good job of 

getting out and doing education around fairness handling of 

complaints and the expertise they’ve built up, again, is borne 

out in this legislation and is now more fully, fully authorized or 

fully anticipated by the legislative authority under which the 

Ombudsman in Saskatchewan does its business. 

 

Another aspect is that it expands the way that privileged 

communication is handled in the legislation. To quote from the 

letter that we had received from the Ombudsman: 

 

Privileged communication to Ombudsman Saskatchewan 

will now include letters written on behalf of persons in 

custody or confined to an institution. Those institutions 

that confine persons will now have to establish procedures 

that permit a restricted complainant to communicate with 

the Ombudsman and inform the person that they have a 

right to communicate with the Ombudsman. 

 

Again one of the great things that the Ombudsman does is make 

sure that people are given a fair shake in their dealings with the 

government, and that extends into many spheres of our society 

and to people in all kinds of different circumstances. So again 

that that has been made clear in the Office of the Ombudsman, 

we think is worthy of consideration certainly, and we look 

forward to see how that plays out on the ground, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Another point the Ombudsman raises concerns the ability to 

obtain information from government agencies on a voluntary 

basis. Continuing on in the quote, he says: 

 

While government has co-operated with this office in 

terms of providing information, there was no legislative 

authority in the Ombudsman Act that allowed this process. 

This has now been legislatively recognized. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly there is a moral weight that 

comes with the Office of the Ombudsman and certainly many 

of the different reports that have been done by the 

Ombudsman’s office over the years; I think, in particular, a 

fairly significant body of work that was done around the 

corrections system and the way that it’s led to, helped to inform 

the considerations around renovating and restoring parts of the 

Regina Correctional Centre. It was then headed by a then 

ombudsperson, Barb Tomkins. I think of that as one instance in 

particular where I am very familiar with the kind of good work 

that was done on the part of the ombudsperson in terms of 

shining a particular light on activity of government and making 

sure that that work was done properly and that a game plan was 

set out by which government’s actions could be measured in 

terms of problems identified by the Ombudsman and then 

remedies sought. 

 

Certainly since the appointment of the current ombudsperson 

and his subsequent reappointment not too long ago, that kind of 

good work in the way that it informs action of government I 

think has only continued, and if not been accelerated, on the 

proactive side of the equation, where problem solving and not 

coming out with the report that slaps a government down or is 

meant to be incendiary or inflammatory. Our Ombudsman has 

established a good name in terms of being a problem solver, in 

terms of drawing on a great number of years of mediation, and 

the work that has been taken forward in the Ombudsman’s 

office. 

 

[19:15] 

 

It’s interesting to see that this gets, this kind of educational 

work and this kind of problem-solving work that has been done 

in past by the Ombudsman, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will only be 

enhanced in the days to come. 

 

One of the things of the Ombudsman’s access, and access to 

reports that are produced by health quality review committees, 

there’s an amendment that . . . Again this legislation was 

constructed, and I compliment the government on this in doing 

so, it was done in consultation with the existing Children’s 

Advocate and with the existing Ombudsman. And the way that 

health quality review committees are handled under the 

legislation, I guess that would be one place or role. We’ll wait 

to see how that works out. 

 

Again critical incident reports are not necessarily commonplace 

under the Act, but I think the more the education is done in 

terms of acquainting people with the powers of the Office of the 

Ombudsman and the ability of people to seek out redress to 

problems as they present under the processes provided by the 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

Ombudsman, I think this is something that we’ll only see more 

of, and again as it gets more fully into the health care work it 

has been tasked with. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think a 

sign of the good work of the Ombudsman is the fact that it was 

called upon by the Minister of Health yesterday in terms of 

looking into the situation around the seniors’ care home in 

Humboldt and being an independent, honest broker, well-suited 

to looking into that situation, seeing what had gone wrong, and 

seeing what should not go on again. 

 

So we certainly look forward to the work of the Ombudsman in 

that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we anticipate that that 

track record of problem solving and being an honest broker and 

not afraid to speak truth to power, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll 

see how that comes forward in the work in the days ahead. 

 

I guess I’d pretty much draw my remarks to a close there, Mr. 

Speaker. But we think about all the ways that that notion of 

independent officers of the legislature has evolved over time, 

and certainly in the Ombudsman function, having been one of 

the early goings, sort of means by which you have that 

independent advocate there to work with citizens as they try to 

make sure that they got their fair shake from the government 

and to make sure that they got their due from the government. 

Certainly different sort of functions as it regarded the Provincial 

Auditor were earlier on in the situation. 

 

But the way that the Ombudsman came to power, came into 

being, the way that the Children’s Advocate has come into 

being, the way that we now see the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner and that whole avenue of making sure there is 

that advocacy function, that educational function but at the 

same that independence from government and making sure that 

there is an independent, objective, authoritative ally that 

citizens can turn to, we think that it will obviously only 

continue to evolve and expand. 

 

Certainly if you look at the different sort of functions that have 

been brought to bear federally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 

way that that function has evolved around the Privacy 

Commissioner, the Ethics Commissioner, there is perhaps a 

profusion of independent officers like that. But you know, 

perhaps if they had started out with a better ombudsman, or if 

they had gone that route to begin with, maybe we wouldn’t be 

seeing all these independent offices. But I know in 

Saskatchewan, I think we’ve been historically well served by 

the function of the Ombudsman of Saskatchewan and we want 

to make sure that in this legislation it is giving that office its 

due and strengthening what has been a very valuable institution 

for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But most importantly, the people of Saskatchewan as citizens 

seek to get a fair shake from their government and seek out 

allies in bringing that about. 

 

So I guess with that being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 

bring my remarks on Bill No. 25 to a close and move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 25. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member of Elphinstone has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 25, The Ombudsman Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 26 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 

pleasure to see you in the Chair there as well. Nice to join in on 

debate here this evening as it relates to Bill No. 26, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. 

 

This Bill sets to repeal five statutes that apparently are no 

longer necessary as it relates to changes that have occurred by 

way of different Acts or changes that have been made by this 

government or another level of government. So it relates and 

makes five different, I guess repeals five different statutes that 

had existed previously. The government’s contention is that the 

value in the legislation that was there has been spent or that it’s 

now obsolete. And so I think we’ll certainly take some 

thoughtful time to analyze the pieces of legislation that are 

being repealed, the statutes that are being repealed, and to as 

well conduct some consultation to make sure that in fact they 

are no longer needed or that they are obsolete. 

 

I found the first repeal interesting. It’s The Collective 

Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act. Now this 

was passed in 2005. It looks as though, and as I understand, this 

was passed for one agreement in the province between a union, 

between a local and between an employer, or it’s actually two 

collective agreements between IPSCO and between some 

United Steelworkers. Now what I understand the reason that 

this Act is no longer required is in fact connected to the changes 

that have been made to The Trade Union Act, which would 

have been Bill 6 in 2008 by this government. And so this is 

because of the amendments that were brought forward for The 

Trade Union Act, this piece of, this statute or this Act is no 

longer needed as contended by government. 

 

I guess just as a general comment, certainly Bill 5 and Bill 6 

were brought forward as first orders of business by this 

government, the Sask Party government. They were done so 

without any consultation with the people of the province or 

with labour. And in fact in one of those pieces of legislation, 

they erred so significantly in drafting that legislation and 

creating such a heavy hand with the shift to employers that in 

fact the piece of legislation, Bill 5, has in fact been found to be 

unconstitutional. And of course this is a shameful spotlight to 

be placed on a province that’s had a proud record of providing 

balanced labour legislation. 

 

So this speaks to Bill 6, a piece of legislation that, intended by 

this government to reduce labour organization or trade union 

organization within the province, and this stems from those 

activities. We’ve had long debates on these fronts in this 

Assembly, and we are going to have debates moving forward as 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

it relates to Bill 5, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I did find it 

interesting that this Bill in some ways connects to a time where 

that government moved in sort of a roughshod sort of approach, 

unilateral, certainly shifted the balance far, far away from 

working people and certainly well over to the ledger to that of 

the employer, and well beyond anything that exists anywhere 

else in Canada as it related to those two changes. 

 

So two interesting pieces of legislation — certainly important 

debate for Saskatchewan people as we move forward, and 

making sure we can find an appropriate balance to respect and 

protect proper labour law in this province. 

 

As I moved along through and looked at some of the other 

statutes that are being repealed, one of those is The 

Communications Network Corporation Act. Now this Act was 

the Act that established the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network corporation, or otherwise known as SCN, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And certainly as viewers watching here tonight will be aware 

and certainly those in the Assembly will be aware, is that the 

Sask Party government sold SCN, privatized SCN just a couple 

of years ago. And certainly the member from Northeast is 

hitting the table here in support of that privatization of SCN, 

Mr. Speaker, at a fire sale price, I might say, Mr. Speaker. So 

not only did they sell off an asset that provided value to 

Saskatchewan people but it was sort of the traditional story that 

we see when Tories go to sell off assets, is they can’t even 

reclaim the value for Saskatchewan taxpayers that they deserve. 

 

So not only are they ideological in their pursuit of policy but 

they lack the common sense and respect for Saskatchewan 

people to even retain proper value on this. And I think that this 

is going to be, this is highlighted in what’s gone on with this 

sale since then. Or I guess we’ll maybe see this transpire a bit. 

But what we’ve seen is of course this government, ideologically 

driven to sell off this asset — something that brought value to 

our economy here in Saskatchewan — and sold it off at a fire 

sale price to a company called Bluepoint. And in fact, so this 

government then sells it . . . Well here’s the business major 

from Moose Jaw North weighing in on this discussion, saying 

he didn’t believe it was to be a fire sale. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

certainly know independent industry experts have some 

different opinions on this front. 

 

Now what’s interesting as well is that this asset has now been 

. . . There’s a purchase of agreement, I believe. I don’t know 

this file incredibly well but there’s a purchase of agreement to 

Citytv, I believe, from Bluepoint. Pretty interesting that, you 

know, at one point we had control over some Saskatchewan 

content and some purpose back into our economy and our film 

industry by way of SCN. This government, driven ideologically 

and certainly not reflecting any level of common sense, sold 

that asset for a fire sale for which now another company is 

likely profiting in a significant circumstance by selling that 

asset to another corporation. 

 

What’s at risk as well here is the Saskatchewan content aspect 

of that arrangement that may or may not have been made with 

Bluepoint. Certainly I didn’t trust this government from the 

moment they sold it, that they somehow would have some sort 

or ironclad agreement with Bluepoint to fulfill Saskatchewan 

content criteria. And certainly that seems evident here now 

when we see Bluepoint now selling that and making a profit, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with a loss back to . . . Now I hear the 

member from Silver Springs say something about a dirty word 

being profit. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can certainly say profit is a very 

important word in the economy of Saskatchewan. It’s important 

to business people in this province. And it’s important to 

entrepreneurs across this province. 

 

Where we need to question the profit that’s being made is when 

it’s off of a fire sale of an asset that’s been driven by an 

ideological decision of this government. And that’s where the 

member from Silver Springs should be able to apply a little bit 

more business acumen to the decisions of this government so 

that even if they’re going to do something that we disagree with 

and that I disagree with, which was to sell SCN, a Crown asset 

that fulfilled a greater good as it related to our economy and as 

it related to our film industry and our cultural presence to the 

world, if we will, Mr. Speaker, but at least if they’re going to 

push in their ideological pursuit to sell off that asset, you would 

think that they would at least have the business sense or acumen 

to make sure that they received the appropriate return for the 

shareholders that they represent, the Saskatchewan people. 

 

And they’ve certainly failed to do that. Instead they sell this 

thing off. Instead this thing gets sold off on a fire sale price to a 

company that’s now just months later, Mr. Speaker, months 

later seen through the weak agreement that was put forward by 

this crackpot team of Justice officials over here who . . . crack 

Justice officials over there, Mr. Speaker, to correct my record 

there. And then ends up having this sold, Mr. Speaker, with a 

profit. And this is the people’s asset and loss. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And I guess when we look at this here too, we have to 

recognize . . . And I found it rather interesting that the member 

from Regina Northeast would hit his table and provide support 

for the sale of SCN. At one point, Mr. Speaker, we had a 

thriving film industry that was growing significantly in this 

province and specifically in this region. We had an industry 

that’s . . . We have an industry now that’s just a fraction, a mere 

fraction of what it was, in fact almost about one-eighth of what 

it was. And you know, we’re talking about an industry that was 

a 60 and 70 and $80 million industry here in our province that’s 

now a paltry $10 million. 

 

Not only have we lost that economic activity in this province; 

we’ve lost jobs with many young, skilled, creative individuals, 

and individuals skilled and creative right across demographics, 

Mr. Speaker, who were earning a living here in Saskatchewan 

and in Regina, contributing back to our community and 

certainly to our economy. So that’s certainly an economic loss 

for our city, being Regina, and for our province, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’m really surprised that the member from Northeast would 

be in support of something that’s been so detrimental to the 

economy of our city. 

 

Not only am I disappointed on the front of the lost economic 

activity and the jobs and these creative young minds and 

professionals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m certainly also 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

concerned by what we’ve lost as far as being able to tell the 

Saskatchewan story in a proud way to our neighbours, to 

ourselves, and to the world. And we see significant change on 

this front. And that’s too bad. And this fits into some of your 

cultural and social well-being as a province, and I don’t know 

how you place an exact value on that. But certainly just from 

the raw, hard data and economic analysis, this has been an 

ideological decision that hasn’t been in the best interest of 

Saskatchewan people. So a disappointing decision by 

government. 

 

And I know even when we look at the film industry suffering 

under this government with a government that had a, I believe, 

some sort of a task force that came together, put forward 

recommendations, and acted on not a single one of them — sits 

on it to this day. Meanwhile other jurisdictions have refined 

how they relate to the film industry, and we’ve seen that 

industry thrive in other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at the destruction of or sell-off of SCN and 

we try to connect that to some of the lack of activity in the 

industry, what we need to recognize is that SCN itself was often 

the first dollar in as it relates to financing into films in this 

province that were being produced in this province. And that 

question of financing within the film industry, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, isn’t a small one. It’s a significant barrier for many 

productions and a significant enabler for us to have had a tool 

such as SCN to play that role in production and as in 

co-financier and often first dollar into those operations. 

 

So what do we see from this? Well we’ve seen a reduction in 

economic activity in our film industry. We’ve seen many young 

people lose employment, many people leave this province as a 

result to go work in other industries. This is a creative industry 

that adds to our cultural and social well-being. And it’s a 

disappointing story, and of course the other one being that this 

was sold off at a fire sale price for which now some other 

private corporation’s seeing some sort of a benefit.  

 

Now the member for Moose Jaw North says he doesn’t know 

what I’m talking about and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that doesn’t 

surprise me one bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Anyways we are 

disappointed with the sell-off of SCN. And we’ve been on the 

record on this, and certainly we opposed and fought it in every 

way that we could. 

 

If I look through the rest of this, some of the changes and some 

of the statutes that are being repealed by the way of this Bill, 

there are some changes here. The On-farm Quality Assurance 

Programs Act, and I understand that this is changing as a result 

of a federal program that takes responsibility for those 

responsibilities replaced by a federal agency, that being the 

Canadian Food Inspection Agency, who has taken over that 

role. I guess the only question I may have on that is that that 

federal agency is now fulfilling that role. The question is, are 

they covering all aspects that were being covered by this 

previous provincial function? And is there any abilities to 

strengthen legislation on this front, or are we in an optimal 

environment, as we speak, with these changes? 

 

If I look further into some of these other changes, I notice the 

soil drifting Act that, as I understand, is likely no longer 

required with many of the changes and practice in agricultural 

practice — minimum till or zero till which is a common 

practice across the province and likely continuing to, continuing 

to grow. I think that right now we have 80 per cent across the 

province that’s covered. But I think what’s interesting is while 

this is a change that is likely, likely reflects change in 

agricultural practice, it takes us back to another point in time in 

the province. 

 

And it’s just sort of interesting on that front that of course we 

were at a different point in time in the droughts, and in this 

case, this was brought in actually in 1941 but likely in response 

to what had been a severe and difficult time in this province. It 

takes us back to that view of things. But I think it allows us to 

also question where we are going in the future, not so much as 

it relates to this piece of legislation specifically but maybe more 

so from an environmental perspective or that of soil . . . Well 

soil conservation is being addressed in many ways through 

changes in practice. But questions of climate change, question 

of drought, question of watersheds, adequacy of watersheds and 

how will we fare in a period of climate change? What are the 

potential cycles that exist in this province? And what is our, 

what is our . . . the planning around our watersheds? 

 

Right now we’re very dependent, very dependent on South 

Saskatchewan River, the South Saskatchewan River for our 

water in southern Saskatchewan. And of course the South 

Saskatchewan River is very much dependent on glacial melt but 

also rains and as well, in some ways, what Alberta is utilizing 

as a province. So it calls for an area certainly of long-term 

planning and making sure that we’re understanding potential 

cycles in weather but also making sure we’re planning for of 

course residents and for industry here in Saskatchewan and 

protecting and planning for adequate watersheds into the future. 

 

I know there’s debates and questions on right now in some 

ways about making sure that we have some of that planning in 

place and decisions being driven by evidence. And we have a 

lot of activity going on in the province as it relates to potential 

development of mines in the industry, activity that is 

encouraged on a whole host of many fronts. But we need to 

make sure we are also doing a bit of check and balance on the 

environmental scorecard as it relates to water usage. And 

significantly right now, that would be the potash industry that’s 

expanding significantly and certainly should be part of our 

fulsome discussion and planning because these aren’t plans that 

should be made over a three- or four- or five-year plan or a 

one-year plan. We really do need to be planning out generations 

forward and understanding water usage and watersheds as we 

move forward and into the future. So it certainly speaks to 

collecting the proper data, putting forward plans and 

understanding the challenges that may exist and the 

opportunities that exist on these fronts. 

 

And I have no confidence with the government that we have 

that that sort of thoughtful, evidence-based, research-driven 

approach will be employed. I would, you know, tend to believe 

it would be more like the way this government constructs 

labour law, specifically Bill 5 that was found to be 

unconstitutional or running roughshod in certain ways with 

refuting, I think, a lot of evidence that exists. And we see this 

now in education as well where best practices is being refuted 

and a different course of action being taken by this government. 

 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

So it is interesting to look at the soil drifting legislation and 

allow us to examine I think part of our history as well and then 

examine where we’re going into the future, not just from a 

perspective of agricultural practice but also from a perspective 

of environmental protection and planning and making sure that 

we’re understanding the whole piece as we move forward and 

not living in a real short-term sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Just looking through a little bit, I guess some of the other 

components of this piece of legislation, there is changes to or 

repealing of The Special Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act. 

And this is I believe a piece of legislation that related to 

compensation of benefits for a spouse. But the circumstances 

that, and I’ll quote from the minister here, that “given the 

limitation on application of the benefits, there is no further need 

for the legislation. Furthermore two court challenges to the Act 

have been dismissed.” So by taking the minister’s quote at face 

value, this Bill is no longer relevant. We’ll certainly ask some 

questions on that front, seek some input and engage in 

consultation, but those points seem to have been put on the 

table. 

 

So here we have five pieces of legislation that are being 

repealed or statutes that are being repealed, and that’s certainly 

reflective of changes from a legislative perspective or by 

change of practice in the case of the agricultural side. But it also 

highlights a couple of points that are of concern to 

Saskatchewan people, and that being specifically the sell-off of 

SCN, losing control of being able to play an important role in 

the film industry and to foster that sort of important economic 

development. And really that was just the start of what could 

have been with the film industry. And really we can get this 

back on track, but it’s going to take some work after being 

relegated to the role that it has by this government, by choices 

of this government. 

 

The film industry here in Regina, and in Saskatchewan, fulfills 

great importance to our economy, to our cultural and social 

well-being, and we’d really like to see some actions on that 

front other than, other than actions that have harmed the 

industry and harmed our economy, our film economy on these 

fronts. Lost employment as I have said, Mr. Speaker, and, in the 

case of where this fire sale went on of an asset that was owned 

by the people of Saskatchewan, where even, where that was 

sold, where certainly fair value wasn’t extracted, and a 

complete loss of control of this important tool as it related to 

cultural development or economic development, social 

development, so many different fronts. And I would suspect 

that every member in this province should stand opposed to that 

in being able to tell the Saskatchewan story, but at the very least 

every single Regina member that has seen the loss of that film 

industry economy in our city should be urging that government 

to get a plan together with the film industry and to certainly 

recognize the error in its ways to date. 

 

The other piece of legislation, as I mentioned, was the labour 

legislation that related to two specific collective bargaining 

agreements and those changes . . . or that is no longer required 

because of amendments made to Bill 6. Bill 6 of course again is 

reflective of a government that was elected in 2007 and then 

rammed forward two pieces of legislation that shifted the entire 

balance of respectful labour law, taking away rights of workers, 

eliminating opportunities for unions to operate in a fair and 

balanced way, and shifted that way over to the opposite side of 

the spectrum and into the hands of employers in a very unfair 

fashion — and of course one of those pieces of legislation now 

being found unconstitutional by Justice Ball. 

 

So it highlights some significant errors in direction by this 

government. These repeals of some of these pieces of 

legislation and others reflect change in practice or another level 

of government taking control of certain aspects that would be 

specific to the change to the Canadian Food Inspection Agency 

that’s fulfilling a role that was being provided prior to by a 

provincial mechanism. 

 

We’ll continue to do our due diligence on these files, to do our 

consultation and to ask our questions. But certainly we oppose 

the sale of SCN, the loss to our economy, the loss of those jobs, 

the loss of those creative people. Certainly we oppose the 

approach of this government in running roughshod over fair and 

balanced labour legislation. And certainly we urge this 

government, as it relates to watershed planning and 

understanding climate change and the impacts on 

Saskatchewan, we urge this government to get a handle on the 

evidence on this front, the research on this front, and then to 

have some meaningful planning that balances off those 

responsibilities to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s been my pleasure to weigh in on discussion here this 

evening. And at this point in time, I would move adjournment 

of Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Rosemont has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 27 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise this evening to talk about The Education Act 

and an amendment to that particular legislation. But I think it’s 

important to remember that The Education Act and all its 

predecessor legislation has been a key building block for this 

province. And there are many ways to go at what the particular 

amendments are in this legislation, but I think we have to 

remember some of the points in the history of Saskatchewan 

where the school legislation made a big difference in how the 

province developed. 

 

I’ll just make a couple of highlights about that. It’s almost 100 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

years ago that there was legislation passed around 1916 that 

brought in public school legislation which effectively created 

some standards for schools across the province. And it came out 

at a time during the Great War, the First World War where 

there was concern about the province of Saskatchewan, where 

our provincial motto was “from many peoples, strength.” And 

so there was a sense that there should be some uniformity in the 

school education of all of the young people in the province of 

Saskatchewan as part of a way to unify or bring together the 

people of the province. And it’s quite interesting that one of the 

people involved in looking at much of this legislation and 

working in that legislation at that time was a teacher named 

J.T.M. Anderson who later became a premier of the province. 

And I think in many ways a lot of the work that he did in those 

years taught him about the province and about the importance 

of education. 

 

I know from my own family history that that particular 

legislation ended up transforming quite a number of Norwegian 

language Lutheran schools to become part of the public school 

system. I know it happened with many German language 

schools as well. 

 

But there were also people who were surprised by the 

legislation, and one of the biggest groups were certain parts of 

the German-speaking Mennonite people who ended up 

objecting to having some kind of a standardized system across 

the province. And one of the results of that rejection of the 

legislation was that there were trainloads of people who left our 

province, left Manitoba — was going through a similar 

situation — lesser numbers in Alberta, and they went to Mexico 

and they went to Paraguay. And they ended up living in those 

places for many decades. And some came back to Canada and 

some didn’t, but all the people who have a Mennonite heritage 

know about this, once again, immigration or emigration I guess 

I should say, people leaving our province because of legislation 

as it relates to education. 

 

I point that out, which is about some of that history about a 

hundred years ago, because what we have now in our Education 

Act builds on some of those same kind of themes about, how do 

we provide good quality education for our students right across 

the province? And I know that we have contacted different 

groups in response to the changes in particular legislation, the 

questions always come back. What are the best choices made in 

the 21st century, this first part of the 21st century for the 

education of children? So that becomes the standard that needs 

to be raised and that comes from school boards. It comes from 

school administrators. It comes from teachers. It comes from 

the public. 

 

The question is also asked, how much consultation, how much 

work do we need to do together before we make changes in 

legislation like The Education Act? I think the answer is always, 

as much as possible. And so when we look at this legislation as 

opposition, one of our questions becomes, what kind of 

consultation has there been and where and how has that been 

done? 

 

Now the minister, when she was presenting this legislation, she 

set out some of the things that she had done around 

consultation, and frankly there were some parts that were 

missing. And all I will say is that it’s absolutely important that 

as this legislation proceeds through this session and through 

this legislature and, more importantly, as the regulations are 

developed with respect to this legislation, it’s absolutely crucial 

that communities are part of the discussion, that teachers are 

part of the discussion, school boards are part of the discussion, 

that the senior administration within the school system is part of 

the discussion. And most importantly, that parents and children, 

the families of the province, understand what is happening. 

 

Now there are quite a number of amendments that are being 

made to The Education Act in this Bill No. 27 and I think the 

one that ends up getting some of the most attention relates to 

the start of the school year on the Tuesday after Labour Day 

each year. And that’s a proposal that reflects a relatively 

common way of starting a school year right across Canada. But 

there are questions about how this was done. 

 

I know that over the decades there have been quite a number of 

days when school starts. And I know from reading the local 

histories of Saskatchewan that there were often school dates 

start that were the Monday after the end of harvest for example 

because so many of the young people of a community were 

needed in the harvest. So it wasn’t even a fixed date when 

school would start, but it would start after harvest was to begin. 

 

Now in this particular legislation, we have this suggestion of a 

start date which I think has quite broad support, but also it’s 

something that is subject to discussion. But I think practically 

that it does have quite wide support. 

 

But then we go into the other questions of how the whole 

school year is structured. And one of the aspects of this 

particular amendment Bill is that it actually puts a lot of that 

discussion outside of this legislature but into the regulations. 

And that’s not necessarily a bad thing, but it depends once 

again on the processes that are used to establish these school 

years across the province. 

 

And so this is going to be an ongoing process, an ongoing 

timeline over the coming years as this is sorted out after this 

type of legislation has been passed. And we will be watching 

carefully how that’s done because it does obviously have a 

direct effect on the education of the young people of this 

province. And as we know, that education is crucial in the 

long-term economic prosperity of our province. 

 

Now there are some other changes in this legislation other than 

the ones around the length of the school year and holidays and 

things like that. There are also some changes that relate to I 

guess what I would say the financing of education, and they are, 

as a result of some of the changes that have been, are in the 

process of being implemented by this government. We’re 

actually looking forward to hearing what’s in the budget in a 

few weeks because it will be once again absolutely crucial for 

communities to know what kind of resources they have 

available to them when they do the job that they are supposed 

to do. 

 

Now what we know is that the provincial government in 2009 

took away the ability of school boards to set the taxation rates 

in their communities and have ended up basically saying that 

they’re using the funds from the provincial government to fund 

education. We’ve heard rumours. We are waiting to hear what 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

happens with this budget, but we’ve heard rumours that there 

will be some adjustments and changes between the different 

parts and areas of the province as it relates to funding for 

education. And they have, the government has some 

opportunity here to do it in a way that is supportive of 

education. They also have an opportunity to cause a great deal 

of stress and a great deal of difficulty. Right now, I would say 

this is an area where people are fearful about what the 

government’s going to do. And so we are once again watching 

that carefully. But how that’s done is set out in this particular 

legislation. 

 

Another aspect of this which we have a great deal of difficulty 

with relates to the method that the Finance minister and the 

Premier use for accounting for the finances of the province. 

This particular legislation eliminates the ability or the process 

that we’ve had for many, many years for school boards and 

school divisions — whatever the title we’re going to use here is 

— can borrow money. And effectively what they’ve done, and 

you can read the sections in here, they’ve eliminated the use of 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board borrowing rules and how 

that was done, which basically uses the interest rates of the 

province, which as we know, we have good financial standing 

for borrowing in this province. So there’s some of the lowest 

rates anywhere in Canada. 

 

What this legislation does is for building new schools or for 

building facilities or purchasing equipment within the school 

system, this Bill pushes that borrowing out to commercial 

lenders which are at a higher cost. And so we know that, given 

the amount of money that the whole school system as a whole 

needs to borrow, that this is going to involve millions of dollars 

in extra money that’s required to do the same thing that’s being 

done now. We haven’t had an explanation from the minister. 

We haven’t had an explanation from the government of why 

this makes sense because it doesn’t make sense. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are wondering what is the motivation 

for this. Why would we, as a relatively sparsely populated place 

on this Earth — we’ve got just over 1 million people — why 

would we set up a system that forces people to borrow money 

at a higher rate to educate our children? It doesn’t make any 

sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This question has been asked of the 

minister. It’s been asked of the Premier again and again and 

again. There’s no answer. One practical suggestion that I have 

on reviewing this legislation, and we will be making this 

suggestion again as we go into committee, is why not drop this 

proposal in here? Forget about this proposal. Leave the old 

rules. Allow the school boards to borrow money at the very 

preferential provincial government rates and continue to do that 

because it’s costing us all money. And who is the money going 

to? If you borrow it from a national bank, it’s going where? 

Toronto, you know, some other place. It just doesn’t make 

sense. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And so I’m not sure if this is the brilliant idea, the brilliant idea 

of the Minister of Health, or it may be the brilliant idea of the 

member of Moose Jaw North. He has a long record of this . . . 

well not long, but a record of being here with lots of great ideas. 

But this point is one that I would ask even the members of the 

government caucus: you have a role, even a greater role than 

you did last year in the fact there’s so many more of you. And I 

have respect for the ability for you as a caucus to ask questions. 

Why aren’t there questions about this? We all represent 

communities where education money is important. Why would 

we set up a system where you have to pay more money in 

interest? It just doesn’t make any sense. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I say to all of the members 

opposite, why don’t you sit down in your caucus? Why don’t 

you ask some questions of the minister and her deputies and 

others? What’s the purpose of this? And if you have a good 

reason for it, well tell us here in this legislature. Tell the people 

out in Lloydminster. Tell them in Swift Current. Tell them 

across the province because the Premier talks out of one side of 

his mouth and he says hey, everything’s booming; the other 

side of his mouth, expect cuts, watch out. Well here’s a 

situation where there’s a boneheaded decision to spend more 

money that has no rationale. If there is a rationale, tell us. It’s 

that simple. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have raised this on a number of 

occasions. I know that our critic for Education has been 

travelling around the province and you have a lot of people who 

are the leaders within the education system asking the same 

question. At a time when you’ve got scarce dollars, why do you 

force us to borrow money at these rates? And there is no 

rationale in the Bill. There is no rationale in the comments from 

the speaker. And so we also, you know, tied in with this is the 

total elimination of local community control over what the 

property taxes will be in a local area because it will be done by 

the minister and her staff, or I guess the Premier in cabinet and 

the minister. So there’s something that’s just out of whack. 

People wonder why we continue to raise the ability to manage 

to make common sense decisions that Saskatchewan people 

expect. 

 

So what have we got here? I challenge some of these members 

opposite. You’ve got a whole bunch of teachers that have been 

elected. You’ve got a whole bunch of people that actually know 

how to count money who have been elected. You’ve got people 

who have served on school boards who have fought for every 

dollar to make sure that their kids have got the programs and 

facilities are there. 

 

Show us that there is some chance to change this. This doesn’t 

have to go ahead this way. It doesn’t have to go ahead this way. 

And I challenge you. The people here in this province, we had a 

couple of the teachers that went out and looked at math 

curriculum. Well how much is that going to cost us? You know, 

maybe some new textbooks or something like that. Maybe we 

should get a couple of the teachers or school board guys to go 

around and take a look at the financing for education that’s 

being proposed by the minister because there is no rationale for 

it that I have been able to find. And when you go through the 

Act and you see paragraph after paragraph that basically repeals 

an old system that’s worked for a long time, you would like to 

believe that there is some new, smart, better system proposed. 

It’s not here. It’s not here. 

 

Now, I have been looking at this and trying to figure out why, 

why would the Premier do this? Because I’m pinning this one 

on the Premier. He can change the ministers any time, but the 

Premier’s there. The Premier has done this because, in 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

consultation with his Finance minister, he knows that the books 

aren’t balanced. He knows that there’s not enough money 

coming in to pay for all the things that are required to run the 

provincial government. And one of the ways that he can get 

around some of the rules using the old GRF [General Revenue 

Fund] is to push that debt out far away from the provincial 

government. And so you can create this little — I think I can 

use the word phoney — system to have the school boards 

borrow money but you can create this way that costs the school 

boards more money and to cost all of us more money as a way 

to push debt out from the traditional ways of borrowing money. 

But we’ll have people like the KPMGs, the Deloitte & Touche, 

Mr. Gass from the Gass Commission say that this is not an 

appropriate way to do it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite curious that the minister in this 

legislation actually listens to the Provincial Auditor on one 

point, and that point is that it’s an absolute requirement that 

school boards file their reports with this legislature in the same 

way that the regional health authorities do. And so there is a 

clause in here which forces that reporting of financial 

information here in the legislature. Now what that does and 

what that does is eliminates this one reason, the only reason I 

can figure out, that they’re doing this forcing school boards to 

spend more money. It basically says that you have to put all of 

the debt of your health authorities, you have to put all the debt 

of your school boards into the summary financial statements of 

the province. If that’s the case, any smart manager, whether 

you’re running a farm or a business or your own household, 

you will borrow the money if you need to borrow money for 

capital or equipment, you will borrow it at the most efficient 

and the best place you can borrow it. So what’s the explanation, 

Madam Minister? What’s the explanation for this, for this 

particular legislation because it doesn’t make sense? 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I encourage you members in this 

caucus of the government that it’s your job to pre-screen this 

kind of stuff and make sure it doesn’t show up in the legislature 

so that we have to spend all this time talking about it because 

practically this is a crazy idea. It’s an idea that costs 

communities across the province money. So you end up to 

build some facilities in your community. And you end up 

having to borrow money, and you get an interest rate that’s a 

per cent or per cent and a half higher than all the other 

borrowing that’s done in the government. Where does the 

money come from? It comes out from that local school board’s 

budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have no explanation from the minister. 

We have no explanation from the Finance minister. We have no 

explanation from the Premier as to what the purpose of this is. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s our job as the opposition to raise the 

questions because practically many of the people who are trying 

to work in this field and get the budgets that they need to do the 

job of educating our children, they’re afraid of what kind of 

response they will get from the minister, the Finance minister 

and the Premier if they raise this kind of question. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing our job as an opposition to say, 

tell us. Tell us what’s going on. Tell us why that you’re doing 

this particular thing. And there will be plenty of opportunity for 

the minister to do that and for the Premier to do that. 

 

But I say once again, this is a very good example of why people 

across the province are wondering what’s going on with the 

management of this government. This legislation and this 

proposal showed up after the election and surprised a lot of 

people by how silly it was and how this particular point has no 

explanation. 

 

So anyway I challenge the members opposite, especially the 

teachers, especially the former school board members, 

especially the business people, especially the good farmers who 

know how to make sure every dollar counts. I challenge you to 

look at this, get your minister in the caucus room, and tell her to 

explain what’s going on here because it doesn’t make any sense 

for the education of the children here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of other things that are 

done in this legislation around changes that relate to 

consolidation of teacher education certificates and some of 

those things. I think they’re added in there because the Act is 

being opened, and that’s maybe an appropriate way to do it, and 

there does seem to be some explanation for that. There are also 

some amendments related to some ways that we used to 

organize our education system that are no longer in place. But 

they’re all brought forward in a way that I think can make some 

sense. Added some appeals for teacher certification and 

classification — I think that some of those things make sense. 

 

But it still doesn’t cover up the fact that there’s a major hole 

here, and it’s costing all of us money that doesn’t need to be 

paid. But more importantly, it’s taking away money that could 

be used for the extra equipment in the chemistry lab, for the 

athletic equipment in the gym, for some of the educational 

assistant jobs that have been eliminated. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that we all deserve an explanation about why this has 

been done. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So I look forward to receiving a letter. Maybe the minister can 

write a letter explaining the rationale or I guess maybe the 

Premier might be the guy that should be sending us an 

explanation for this so that we can share it with the people of 

Saskatchewan as to why this is being done. And so I think that 

it’s very curious that the minister especially has brought this 

forth without much of an explanation at all. And so I know that 

education is absolutely crucial for the future economic 

well-being of the province, and it needs to be done in a way that 

builds the economy of the province. And I state it this way 

because I know the Premier has one of his goals is to build the 

economy of the province. But when you do it in a way that 

doesn’t make sense, when you do it a way that’s not 

explainable to ordinary common sense Saskatchewan people, 

then we’ve got a problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation had some surprises 

in it when it was introduced, and they related to how the school 

year is organized. But the bigger surprises are around this rather 

strange method of financing that’s going to cost us all more 

money. Now maybe, maybe another rationale — you’ve kind of 

got to really grasp to figure out why they might do it — but, 

you know, maybe at some point the borrowing ability of the 

province will be substantially less than the school boards. And 

so maybe we’re getting ready for that, but I hope not. We had a 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

situation like that about 20 years ago or so, and so you maybe 

wanted the school boards to be in a position to borrow. But my 

goal, I know our goal as an opposition is to keep asking the 

questions to make sure that we get the best value for every 

dollar that we spend through the provincial government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think I may have some more things to say 

about this particular Bill another time, and I know my 

colleagues have quite a few questions to continue to ask about 

this Bill. And I think it would help us if the minister and her 

officials would gather some information and provide it to us 

before this is put on the order paper again, but we’ll see 

whether that happens. But at this point, I will move that we 

adjourn the debate on this particular Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition and 

member from Regina Lakeview has moved to adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 27, The Education Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 28 — The 

Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I may 

echo the words of the minister on this particular one, where she 

says, “Thank you. I rise again to speak on Bill No. 28.” These 

amendments to The Municipal Board Act are consequential to 

the changes to The Education Amendment Act, 2011, Bill 27 

that we were just looking at. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a continuation of some of these changes 

that don’t appear to be very logical, if I can put it kindly, that 

actually increase the costs for providing education for the 

young people of our province. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

consequential amendments are . . . I guess they’re not very long 

in one sense but — but— they once again go to the financial 

supervision of this and basically transfer the ability for this 

borrowing to local authorities at the approval of the minister. 

 

So this is something that is clearly foreseen by the minister. The 

minister basically says, well you can go and borrow money 

from these commercial entities at a higher rate, as long as I 

approve that higher rate. Now that’s a bit strange in and of 

itself, but that’s the way this legislation is worded. And so it 

moves it away from the traditional way and the people who 

have done this kind of borrowing on behalf of the school boards 

for many years and puts it at the discretion of the minister. And 

once again that may be something that the members of the 

government caucus might want talk to her about as to what the 

reason is for that. 

 

But more importantly, the fundamental question is, why do we 

set up a system that’s going to cost us more to do the same 

thing? And I still do not see anything in here that gives an 

explanation for that. The comments of the minister don’t give 

any explanation for that. And one thing she does say in her 

comments that she made on December 14 — and once again, 

maybe it goes to the heart of this budget we’re going to be 

seeing soon — is that she said, basically this borrowing that’s 

done outside of the provincial government borrowing system, it 

says, “Instead the cost of servicing capital . . . will be funded by 

a dollar-for-dollar increase in the operating grant paid to boards 

of education.” 

 

So they’re saying, well right now to borrow money, you’re 

paying it at the provincial rate and you’re going to pay now 1 

per cent more or 2 per cent or whatever that extra amount is, 

but don’t worry. We’ll just pay it out of the provincial 

Education budget. Well whose budget is that? That’s the budget 

of the people of Saskatchewan. It’s not the minister’s budget. 

It’s not the Minister of Education’s budget. It’s not the Minister 

of Finance’s budget. It’s not the Premier’s budget. So is there 

some arrangement around this kind of borrowing in other places 

that we don’t know about? I ask the members of the 

government caucus to spend some time with your Minister of 

Education and the Minister of Finance and get an explanation 

for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. Because 

practically this does not make any sense. 

 

And I know that most of the time this kind of a Bill was 

brought forward with information that would actually provide 

an explanation so that we wouldn’t be given such an 

opportunity to ask all of these questions. But I think practically 

on this one, they’ve either missed something or there’s some 

other purpose that is secret that they don’t want people to know 

about. Or it may just be bungling. It may just be straight, 

ordinary bungling of the Education budget. 

 

Well that’s not good for anybody, but it’s especially for the 

children who are getting an education. It’s not good for the 

teachers. It’s not good for the school administrators. It’s not 

good for anybody in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill 28 furthers this project as it 

relates to moving the borrowing to some other place at a higher 

cost. Most of the time governments that operate on a smart 

basis or a lean basis or something like that, they do it in a way 

that’s going to do the same job and save money. Here we have 

a proposal. Maybe it’s called the more enhanced or some sort of 

bigger method that ends up costing us more with no 

explanation. And I think that we all deserve an explanation of 

what is going on in this particular legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the comments of the minister talk about fair 

balance of resources allocated to school divisions and basically 

dealing with education property taxes, but somehow this money 

is going to have to be paid from the taxpayers of the province, 

and we do not have an explanation for that. Now we know, we 

know that the government has been using the Crown 

corporations and other places as sources for funding when 

things get a bit tight. We had the Finance minister saying that 

both in the House yesterday and out in the rotunda that the 

flooding costs were taken out of some of the Crowns. And it 

may be that that’s the goal here as well, but we don’t know that, 

and we need to have an explanation. 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

Mr. Speaker, when legislation is not explained in this House 

and it maybe has some other purpose which the government is 

not willing to tell us, that is a direct affront to the people of the 

province. It’s a direct affront to democracy and what the 

democratic principles are. So I encourage all the members of 

the caucus, we’ll let the executive members who brought this 

thing forward explain it to you, and then maybe we can get an 

explanation from some of the backbenchers across the way in 

terms that will either pull this part of the legislation and put 

something that makes more sense or give us an explanation. 

But, Mr. Speaker, at this point we don’t have that and I think 

that we all deserve it. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill No. 28, The Education 

Consequential Amendments Act together with Bill No. 27, both 

of them need a better explanation as it relates to the finance 

portion, and we look forward to the Premier and the Finance 

minister and the Minister of Education providing that 

information for the people of Saskatchewan. And we’ll be 

happy to look at it too, but I think it’s the people of 

Saskatchewan that deserve a better explanation as to what is up 

with this particular Bill and the previous Bill. So, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I move to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 28. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28, The Education 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 29 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 29 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 

great pleasure that I arise this evening to speak to Bill No. 29 

which is The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment 

Act 2011. 

 

To begin tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to address 

the comments of the minister as he introduced this Bill in the 

House on March 5th just this week. He said his goal here is to 

modernize some of the provisions of the 1997 enforcement and 

maintenance orders Act, which governs the operation of the 

maintenance enforcements office. 

 

Before I get into the actual provisions of the Bill, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it may be useful — particularly seeing as how this is 

the month for rural women and the International Women’s Day 

is coming up this week — is to review a little bit of the history 

of the divorce law in Saskatchewan as it came about. 

 

And certainly I think one of the seminal points for 

Saskatchewan women, and particularly rural women, was the 

separation of matrimonial . . . The Matrimonial Property Act in 

the 1970s. And I recall someone telling me once that the 

anticipation there was that many young women would start 

filing for divorce once that Bill was introduced. And in fact it 

was the opposite. The majority of women who took advantage 

of The Matrimonial Property Act were women who had been in 

marriages for many, many, many years but couldn’t get out 

because of economic need. And this was the only way they 

could get out of a marriage that was not good for them, was to 

be able to access some of the matrimonial property that had 

accrued during the period of the marriage. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So that’s one of the turning points, I think, for rural women in 

Saskatchewan in terms of economic freedom based on being 

part of the farming economy. And certainly following that, the 

establishment of maintenance enforcement offices and means 

and ways for women to obtain child support in the event of a 

divorce are very important factors in, I think, women’s rights in 

this province, and certainly the rights of the children. 

 

The notion of child support or child maintenance is one that’s 

quite common around the world now, and it is, I guess, a fairly 

new phenomenon in the last 100 years or so. And certainly it’s 

been recognized even internationally in the Convention on the 

Rights of the Child, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And particularly it’s 

article 18 of the international convention that speaks to the 

international community’s view of the role of parents in the 

event of a separation. And it reads this: 

 

Article 18 

 

1. States Parties shall use their best efforts to ensure 

recognition of the principle that both parents have 

common responsibilities for the upbringing and 

development of the child. Parents or, as the case may be, 

legal guardians, have the primary responsibility for the 

upbringing and development of the child. The best 

interests of the child will be their basic concern. 

 

So the focus is definitely on the child. 

 

2. For the purpose of guaranteeing and promoting the 

rights set forth in the present Convention, States Parties 

[and Canada is one of the signatories; there’s only two 

countries that haven’t signed, and that’s the United States 

and, I think, Zimbabwe] shall render appropriate 

assistance to parents and legal guardians in the 

performance of their child-rearing responsibilities and 

shall ensure the development of institutions, facilities and 

services for the care of children.” 

 

And finally, the article says: 

 

“States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to 

ensure that children of working parents have the right to 

benefit from child-care services and facilities for which 

they are eligible.” 

 

So not only does it speak to support, but that for working 

parents there should be adequate child care as well. On that 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

side, I’m not sure that we as a society have been as successful 

as we have been maybe on the enforcement of maintenance, but 

that’s something else that me and my colleagues will be 

speaking about in the days to come. 

 

Anyway, in that context we can take a look at what child 

support is. There’s a number of key features to child support, 

and the legal theory is that both parents are obliged. And we see 

that in the international Convention as well as in domestic law. 

One of the interesting things to think about, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that when there is no divorce, there are no legal 

obligations. It’s only once the parents are separated that legal 

obligations arise in terms of how the children are cared for — 

outside of neglect, I guess. So that’s one thing that was 

presented. 

 

The other thing is that child support is not the same as contact. 

Those are two very different issues, and quite often they get 

confused. So parents need to understand that despite you may 

or may not be seeing your child if the other parent has custody, 

that child support is still a legal obligation and must be paid. I 

think there’s better education required in that area because I 

think that’s one of the most constant sources of confusion for 

couples who have separated where one parent is not able to 

have contact either through distance reasons or simply the 

acrimonious state of the divorce. 

 

There’s a requirement that the payments be used for the child’s 

expenses, and I think that’s pretty clear as well. Parents who are 

unable to come to an agreement amongst themselves do have 

the option of going through the court process, and in 

Saskatchewan we have a fairly strong history in that case as 

well because in Saskatoon was one of the first family courts in 

Canada where there was a specific court designed for the needs 

of people going through this difficult time of their life. And 

divorces are very emotional and draining times and certainly 

the establishment of this court, I think, has gone a long ways to 

making that transition from marriage to divorce more civil and 

more meaningful and certainly more healthy for the children. 

 

Sometimes the courts are used for calculating the amount if the 

couples cannot come to an agreement on the amount of 

maintenance that’s to be paid, and courts can also vary the 

circumstances. If there’s a change in circumstances for the 

parent who is making the payment, courts will look at that, and 

certainly this Bill is looking to deal with that as well. Courts are 

also responsible and the law is responsible once the order is 

issued for maintenance to ensure the distribution of payments 

are made and also the duration of the support order. 

 

This isn’t a straightforward issue by any means in our society, 

and we often hear the phrase deadbeat dads. That’s kind of 

perhaps not a fair assessment of all situations. I think there is a 

number of situations where it happens to be the father, and it 

happens to be a father who has no inclination or desire to make 

payments, but in many instances it’s a situation where either 

parent, whoever is not the custodial parent, simply does not 

have the funds to meet what would be expected as the proper 

level of support. And in those cases it becomes a very difficult 

issue, but courts make the best effort to ensure that it’s fair for 

both parents and for the child of course who is the ultimate 

beneficiary. 

 

In the case of an unwilling parent who simply just has no 

interest in looking after their own children and they’re not the 

custodial parent, there are ways to ensure payment of support. 

It’s called enforcement proceedings, and it may involve taking 

their driver’s license or seizing or garnishing their bank 

accounts or whatever means necessary the court has, and 

there’s a number of means available to the court to ensure 

enforcement. That obviously is a situation of last resort, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and it’s not one that anyone really wants to get 

to, including the parent who owes because the law is a fairly 

heavy stick in this instance. 

 

So with that background in mind, it’s time now maybe to take a 

look at what the minister said yesterday about this office and 

why this Bill is necessary in the view of the government. So the 

Bill itself basically sets up the operation of the maintenance 

enforcement, and he refers to it as the MEO [maintenance 

enforcement office] as we acronymize things. It was established 

in 1986, and this office is responsible for recording and 

enforcing support orders registered with the office. Sounds 

pretty straightforward. 

 

I think there’s something to be proud of here for us is that over 

91 per cent of the payments due were collected last year for a 

total of $35 million in collections. That seems like a high 

number, but I think it’s really only the surface because many, 

many, many, many divorces occur without maintenance 

enforcement orders. So it just tells you the level of the status of 

child support in our province. 

 

So this Act is designed to provide the MEO with enforcement 

mechanisms to help ensure that support payments pursuant to 

orders and agreements are complied with. Now that’s what the 

minister has stated is the goal. 

 

I guess there’s a routine inspection of the legislation and this is 

just another routine inspection. And in this case, there’s a 

couple of new provisions that are being added. One is the 

calculation, collection, and enforcement of interest on 

outstanding arrears. This is something that’s new. And also the 

office is implementing a new, customized computer system to 

keep track of maintenance orders and payments owing and 

received, and I’m glad to see the office is taking those steps 

again. I think that’s something perhaps we could even hope the 

Legislative Assembly would be able to take advantage of, is 

better computerized systems for tracking payments and 

financial items. The amendment will allow them to charge 

interest once the new computer system is in this summer. So 

we’ll be watching that as it comes through, if the Bill gets 

passed. 

 

I guess the other and the critical feature of this Bill is the ability 

of the court to order suspension of certain enforcement actions 

for a period of up to six months. Now that’s something of 

concern because although the order of the suspension is only in 

certain circumstances where the payer cannot for whatever 

reason meet their obligation, it does strike me as something of 

concern, Madam Deputy Speaker, because this is a way for 

people to get out of their obligations. And I know a lot of 

people who are resenting the obligations, despite the fact that 

there’s a court order against them, may use this to their 

advantage. And I think the court is going to have to be ever 

vigilant on these types of suspension orders to make sure that 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

it’s not abusive of the system. 

 

[20:45] 

 

And I think that’s something that we need to . . . It will be extra 

work for the court. This is going to be an additional layer of 

orders that the court is not providing at these times. And I think 

this is something that may create a whole host of administrative 

work and concern and liabilities for the maintenance 

enforcement office. So I’m not sure what the minister has in 

mind in order to deal with the kind of additional work and the 

additional administration that will be required, plus the 

additional court time that will be required to get these orders in 

place. He doesn’t speak to that at all in his comments here and 

I’m somewhat disappointed that we don’t have his thoughts on 

that area — how he intends to pay for it and how he intends to 

add the additional workload on to the courts. 

 

So he describes these suspensions in this way. He says the 

support order can be changed upon application, through 

agreement or a new court order. And that’s the ordinary 

variance case. But in some cases the payer might be unable to 

meet his obligations so this provision will give them time to 

resume regular payments. And once the suspension order is 

ordered, it won’t affect enforcement already in place and those 

are the things I’ve talked about earlier, like getting their driver’s 

licence suspension removed, or the federal garnishment, any 

federal garnishment that’s happening, licence suspension, or 

any registrations in the personal property registry or in the land 

titles system. So those are clearly not affected by these new 

orders for suspension. 

 

The other salient provision of this Bill is one that allows the 

office to enforce a maintenance order against assets located in 

Saskatchewan in cases where the payer lives elsewhere, and 

even if the maintenance order is being enforced in another 

jurisdiction. So I think this is sort of a reciprocity provision to 

ensure that provincial boundaries are not barriers to successful 

maintenance enforcement orders and proper payment of child 

support. 

 

So if an order is received from another province for 

enforcement, the MEO at this point in time would take over all 

enforcement against the payer, but in some cases they just may 

want the MEO to take over enforcement in a specific action. So 

in that case, if the payer lives in another jurisdiction but works 

or owns property here, it would allow for a garnishment to be 

placed in Saskatchewan at the request of another jurisdiction. 

And I think that’s a positive move on behalf of the MEO 

because we know people are transient and often people work in 

different provinces, so to be able to hide behind that in order to 

avoid maintenance and support payments for children is not 

something that’s desired, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Bill also clarifies the confidentiality provision in respect to 

the release of information. And I will be looking at that in a 

moment to look more closely at the details of that particular 

provision. And they also revise the garnishment provisions to 

incorporate the new language for seizure of accounts. So 

basically it appears that every time garnishment showed up in 

the current Act, they’re now changing it with the phrase seizure 

of accounts. Kind of like potato, potato, tomato, tomato, in my 

view, but it is a word and it has a meaning, and they’re using 

the new updated language which is called seizure of accounts. 

So words like garnishment apparently are going out of vogue, 

and this is attempting to keep up with the language of other 

jurisdictions. I guess the other thing the minister indicated is 

that the language will ensure consistency for both debtors and 

creditors. 

 

Another aspect of this Bill is an allowance for the director of 

the maintenance enforcement office to complete a demand for 

information with respect to a recipient. That gives them access 

to more information on that particular recipient. There’s a few 

other housekeeping items in dealing with the attachment for 

RRSPs [registered retirement savings plan], timelines for 

service, and agreements that are filed have to amend an existing 

order. There’s a clarification, section 7.1. 

 

So at this point I just want to take a quick look at some of the 

provisions in the Act and highlight the changes that are being 

contemplated. As I said earlier, the word garnishee has gone out 

of vogue and we are now looking at a word, seizure of account, 

and so that language has been changed throughout the Bill. 

There’s a new definition for account debtor, and that shows up 

later on in the Act in terms of the context for that one. 

 

This will be probably some debate, an issue of debate is the 

section 11.1(1). And it’s a new section, and what it does is it 

requires the payer, which is the person in debt, to also pay 

simple interest calculated from the prescribed date in the 

prescribed manner on arrears. So payers now are going to have 

to also pay interest on their maintenance ordered arrears, and 

my concern is that as people get further into arrears, the interest 

becomes a further burden. So it’s not certain how that’s going 

to be managed, and I know in other collection actions quite 

often the interest is, becomes larger than the actual amount 

owing on the principal. So we will see how that plays out as the 

Bill is implemented and these interest amounts start accruing. 

 

I talked earlier about the ability of the director to disclose 

information. That has been widened somewhat in the Bill under 

subsection 14. Sub (2) is repealed and the new section allows 

the director to disclose information to the extent necessary. 

Those are words that can cause concern as well because it’s a 

quite a wide open determination and it’s not clear who gets to 

decide what the extent necessary is. It seems to be implied that 

the director him or herself may decide what the extent 

necessary is. There are issues in relation to privacy that could 

be of concern here and I would hope that the minister’s legal 

advisers have made an assessment of that and are comfortable 

that this doesn’t infringe on privacy rights of the payers. So 

that’s one issue of concern, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

There’s a number of other housekeeping items where headlines 

have been changed and the changing of the words from 

garnishment are throughout to seizure of account. The one other 

new section of interest is section 26.1(1) which seems to talk 

about the right of set-off against the claim and the payer. So it’s 

a technical clause in relation to set-off and is added to the Bill. 

This was not discussed by the minister in his comments 

yesterday and I’m not sure why it was left out but it seems to be 

creating a right of set-off. And that’s, I think, something that’s 

common in other debtor/creditor-type legislations, so it may 

just be intended to bring it in line with other types of 

debtor/creditor legislation. But it’s not clear to me and we don’t 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

have any comment from the minister on that particular clause 

that’s been changed. Even the explanatory notes that were 

provided basically say this is added but it doesn’t provide us 

with any direction. 

 

So I think at this point, Madam Deputy Speaker, just the notion 

that divorce is a difficult time in anybody’s life and certainly in 

the lives of children, and that the system that we have in our 

legal system in Saskatchewan is one that’s been at the forefront 

of ensuring that legal aspects of the divorce can be as smooth as 

possible given the trauma of such a breakup, and that the goal is 

always on the support of children. And so even from deadbeat 

dads to parents who are responsible, there is legal mechanisms 

in place and that the maintenance enforcement office is one 

that’s well placed to assist parents where there’s difficulties in 

these kinds of arrangements, particularly when there is 

acrimony and emotions are running high. 

 

So this type of Bill to clean up the language and modernize the 

language to allow for a suspension, temporary suspension, in 

those brief moments when the payer is unable to make his or 

her obligations, provides them some relief. It will cause a 

hardship certainly for the parent that’s receiving the payments 

and is relying on them, and I think it will cause hardship for the 

system in terms of administering them but hopefully the new 

computer system that’s being designed to be put in place this 

summer will assist the office with the extra administration 

that’s involved in these. Again the minister was silent as to the 

effect on the court and how that’s going to happen. Perhaps this 

is something that can be done more through the office itself and 

the legal aspect will be minimal, but we will watch and see. 

 

We are certainly concerned for, as I said, given that this is the 

month to celebrate rural woman and also given that Thursday is 

International Women’s Day, we know that most often it is 

women who end up with the custody of children in divorce 

proceedings, and certainly this is an issue for many women in 

the province. As I said earlier, women are often isolated in rural 

areas and this type of consistent support is essential for them to 

continue leading successful and productive lives and to be good 

parents for their children. So at this point I think other of my 

colleagues may have some comments on this Bill as well, and I 

look forward to hearing what they have to say. 

 

We certainly want to ensure that we’ve talked to people in 

Saskatchewan who are affected by it and want to understand 

better the effect on the office itself, and whether this 

government is prepared to fund it properly, given that we’re 

getting signals that there are cuts coming in the budget and 

we’re not sure where they’re going to be. I certainly hope that 

they’re not going to be in the maintenance enforcement office, 

particularly when new obligations are being imposed on the 

public servants that are working there. So we’re not sure where 

the cuts are coming. We haven’t heard. And we just have this 

warning that they may be here. So it’s something that we need 

to be sure that doesn’t affect children. 

 

And certainly, as I said earlier, you know, other things in the 

international convention on the rights of children, in terms of 

the access to daycare and all those other human rights 

obligations that we have for keeping our children healthy and 

well looked after, are important things that this opposition will 

be looking for in the next few weeks and months to come. 

So with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m now prepared to 

move to adjourn this Bill for other debate on the Bill. Thank 

you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 29, 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. Next Bill. 

 

Bill No. 30 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 30 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This is 

one of the inconsequential consequential Bills that we’ve seen 

coming through — inconsequential in such that they’re just 

further housekeeping and just clarification and direction for 

other Bills to make sure that there’s a continuity across the 

panoply of laws that apply to divorce and maintenance. 

 

In this case, this is The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. The various Bills that 

are being amended to come into line with the changes in this 

Bill, we have The Automobile Accident Insurance Act amended 

— and they strike out the word garnishment, again garnishment 

being out of favour — and also The Enforcement of Money 

Judgments Act is being amended with a new section on 

prohibition against discharging employees for seizure 

proceedings. So this prohibits employers to fire someone in the 

event that they get a notice of seizure on an account or a notice 

of garnishment. So that is being updated. 

 

Also section 81 of The Labour Standards Act, same thing, 

updating the language on garnishment, and updating section 53 

of The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act with updating the 

language. And The Pension Benefits Act is also being updated 

in terms of the language there. We have The Provincial Court 

Act, public employees pension Act, The Saskatchewan Income 

Plan Act, and The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act, 

superannuation Act, and The Workers’ Compensation Act all 

being amended to strike out garnishment and substitute seizure. 

 

So on that basis, Madam Speaker, I think — I’m just referring 

to the minister’s notes from yesterday — it’s a consequential 

amendment that affects the English-only side of the 

garnishments because that’s the only place they’re changing the 

word from garnishment to seizure. The French remains the 

same. 

 

Given that, Madam Deputy Speaker, there is little further to be 

said on my part on this particular Bill, so at this point I would 

like to move to adjourn debate on Bill 30. 

 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 30, 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. Next Bill. 

 

Bill No. 31 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 31 — The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des 

jugements canadiens be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Madam 

Speaker. I appreciate the opportunity to rise and speak to this 

Bill No. 31, An Act to amend The Enforcement of Canadian 

Judgments Act, 2002 and to make related amendments to The 

Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act. And it seems like a 

good Bill at first glance, and it’s one that is worthy of 

consideration. That’s why we’re here, to really comb through 

this and think about what does this really mean and what are the 

potential unintended consequences. We hear from the other side 

that it’s good piece of legislation, and I’m glad they’re 

enthusiastic about it. 

 

I do have some questions about it. And it’s one that builds on 

earlier work from 2002. And any piece of legislation that you 

have that’s amended and brought up to date and made better is 

obviously a good idea. And so clearly the Ministry of Justice is 

keeping an eye on this. 

 

And that’s sort of leads me to my first question, you know. And 

I look through and I review the minister’s remarks just from 

yesterday. This seems to be a critical piece that he’s very happy 

to bring forward. He talks about being the first province to 

introduce this Bill as recommended by the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada. And of course the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada is well-established, has a lot of good 

credentials, and a well-respected authority. So it seems like it’s 

a good thing to be doing. 

 

But you know, we always get mixed messages from this 

government when it comes to being the first or the last. They 

don’t want to do it because nobody else is doing it. Now they 

seem to be in a hurry to do this one. And I don’t know if it’s 

going to be happening across Canada. Is it part of a uniform 

move across the provinces that this kind of a piece of legislation 

is being introduced and we’re part of that movement? Or is this 

going to happen over the next 10 years? We don’t know. The 

minister is vague at best about this other than saying that we’re 

going to be the first to do this and that it’s somehow important 

to do this. 

 

I am curious, you know. He talks about the amendments also 

extend good faith liability protection to law enforcement 

agencies that take steps to enforce an order. The ease of 

international cross-border travel combined with the severe risk 

to an individual who cannot obtain immediate recognition 

enforcement of a foreign protection order by policing agencies 

makes the extension of this approach to foreign protection 

orders a priority. So my question is around priority. Why is it a 

priority? Is this something that’s been happening a lot in 

Canada and they’re trying to make a national move here? Is this 

something that’s happening a lot in Saskatchewan? 

 

And we know, and as my colleague from Athabasca spoke quite 

eloquently yesterday, about how we are happy and very thrilled 

to see the growth particularly in immigrants here in 

Saskatchewan. This is an exciting time for Saskatchewan. But 

is this an issue that they’re having? Is this something that that 

community has brought forward and said, listen we need to 

have foreign protection orders respected here in Saskatchewan; 

it’s a problem. I don’t know if that’s the case or not, and I’d 

sure be interested to know if that’s the case. 

 

There’s several other reasons too. Maybe it’s about tourism. 

People would feel free, much more at ease to come to 

Saskatchewan if they knew that their protection order that they 

had in, say, New York state or California would be respected 

here in Saskatchewan. Is that the case? I have no idea. And it 

would be an interesting thing because for sure we rely a lot on 

tourism. I know with the American dollar as the situation is 

now, tourism is taking a bit of a hit in that area. But again we 

don’t know why the minister calls it a priority. Why does he 

call it a priority? We know of other issues of priorities. 

 

The other one, you know, the other scenario that might be at 

hand is one relying to family custody issues and that with the 

ease of cross-border traffic . . . which is interesting because 

we’re actually since 9/11 working very hard to reduce how easy 

that is. It’s not very easy, not like it used to be to cross the 

border. What impact has that had? And so when we say foreign, 

are we really talking about American? Are we talking about 

recent immigrants? Are we talking about foreign workers that 

are coming in on a temporary basis, that somehow there are 

issues coming along with that? I would really like to know 

more about this. 

 

I would like to know a lot more about this because clearly if 

we’re going to be the first province to do it, it would make 

sense that we’re the province that would gain the most or have 

some of the biggest issues with this. Because if we’re just 

experimenting with the law, I can think of a lot better ways to 

spend our time, for the Ministry of Justice to do things other 

than say, we’re first yet again. So I do have to ask, why the 

need? 

 

[21:00] 

 

You know, a couple of years ago I asked about foreign 

mail-order brides. And you know, the minister didn’t know 

quite to know what to make of it. But actually it was something 

that was happening in Saskatchewan a fair bit, and they didn’t 

seem really prepared to work on that. But there were issues 

about that because you know it is an issue, and it’s an issue 

actually right across Western Canada, that women were coming 

to Canada under the idea that they were going to be married and 

it was going to be a happy situation. But they got here and they 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

found out that it was actually an abusive situation. And it was 

not a good scenario, but there was very little for them, very 

little support for them, and that’s a real priority. And so I don’t 

know if this is that same sort of scenario that the minister talks 

about, priority. 

 

So I do have some questions about this. And of course it sounds 

like that they’re working to make this work a lot easier, you 

know, if you, you know . . . And I don’t know how the scenario 

plays out, Madam Speaker. Does somebody come into 

Saskatchewan, into the Regina airport, head down to the police 

station, say, listen, I’ve got this restraining order. I’m thinking 

that someone’s followed me on the plane. And I’m only here 

for a week, and I want to make sure I’m resting easy. I don’t 

have to worry about this guy following me or stalking me. 

What’s the scenario here? I don’t know. And so I feel like 

somehow I need to know more about this, and I am sure that 

there’s good reasons here. But is this a problem in 

Saskatchewan that would cause the minister to say this is a 

priority? 

 

We have lots of priorities in Saskatchewan, and I’ve got to tell 

you that with the new immigrants, we have priorities to make 

sure that they fit into the communities and that things are going 

well for them. And maybe this is one of them, maybe this is 

one, but I’ve not heard this too much. And I think that . . . And 

he doesn’t actually talk about recent immigrants. He almost 

gives the sense that it could be either a tourism issue, you 

know. Or the other one I think about is particularly around 

movies or film stars, who happen to fly into work for a month 

or two, and they are worried about protection when they get 

into Saskatchewan if they are part of a film project. Maybe 

that’s the scenario we are talking about. I don’t know. 

 

I don’t want to get too far out there, but I do want to let the . . . I 

think that when the minister comes for the committee for 

second reading that he should be prepared, should be prepared 

for questions on his comments. And you know, with that, 

Madam Speaker, that I think that it seems relatively 

straightforward. And as I said, it builds on work from 2002 and, 

you know, and it comes from the Uniform Law Conference of 

Canada, which just makes a lot of sense. But like as I say, I’m 

curious about why the minister says this is a priority. 

 

And I do want to just say, you know, as we scan and we read 

Hansard — we want to make sure Hansard is accurate — I just 

have a quote that I think we’re going to have to ask the minister 

about in committee. This is what he says, Mr. Speaker, and I 

quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my view the balance of interests 

protecting an individual at risk and the possibility of 

violence arising from failure to act strongly tilts towards 

expedited recognition and enforcement of foreign 

protection orders. Therefore I will invite all members of 

this Assembly to protect groups for this conclusion and 

this Bill. 

 

I don’t know what that meant. What was he saying — to protect 

groups, to protect groups for this conclusion. So I hope the 

minister comes and says what does he mean by that. Maybe he 

meant consult groups. You know, this happens to me the odd 

time, where I am misquoted, and it’s just the way I’ve got the 

words out. I can’t blame Hansard, but I will be asking for some 

clarification around that because these comments are very, very 

important. Because I know that for example in Bill 5 the 

Minister of Labour’s comments were taken to court and are 

forming a very important part of an appeal that this government 

has decided to move forward with. And I don’t want to get into 

that, but I do feel it’s import that we have clarity with this. 

 

So with that, Madam Speaker, I think that, as my colleague 

from Athabasca says, we’re very happy to see that the 

immigrant community is here and that we have a lot of work to 

do to make sure we have the best services for them.  

 

And this seems like an odd one because today even in question 

period we’re talking about how services may be cut. Is this one 

that’s in addition to Justice or just another layer? Or is it 

nothing they really do very much at all? And so there’s not 

going to be really any cost but somehow it’s a priority. Some 

question marks here. 

 

So with that, Madam Speaker, I’m going to move Bill No. 31, 

The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 

2011, I would like to move that be adjourned. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from 

Saskatoon Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 31, 

The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. Next Bill. 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 32 — The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011/Loi 

de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires 

interterritoriales be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 

Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise in the debate for Bill No. 32, The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

We’re on a bit of a run here, Madam Speaker, in terms of the 

different judgments amendments Acts that have been brought 

forward and the enforcement of amendments. We just had a 

fine speech from my colleague from Saskatoon Centre. 

Considering the number of Bills that come from the Department 

of Justice, Madam Deputy Speaker, it bears to reason that’s 

certainly where they keep the most lawyers in government, and 

certainly got to keep them busy. And so we have a fairly . . . a 

deluge of updates to the different sort of proceedings around 

interprovincial, international, interjurisdictional support orders, 

proceedings related to support-providing arising from divorces. 

 

So, Madam Deputy Speaker, on the Bill itself as referenced in 

the Minister of Justice’s second reading speech of yesterday — 

so this one’s hot off the press, Madam Deputy Speaker — the 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

Act establishes the procedure for registration of a foreign 

support order for enforcement in Saskatchewan. 

 

To further quote, “It also establishes the procedure for 

obtaining or varying a provincial support order where one party 

resides in Saskatchewan and the other party lives in another 

jurisdiction.” The minister goes on to talk about how “This Act 

is based on a model of legislation adopted in all provinces 

except Quebec.” Quebec of course possessed of the Napoleonic 

code and the particular, sort of unique legal traditions in that 

province. 

 

Apparently there has been a fair amount of work done on a 

national interjurisdictional support subcommittee which 

monitors the operation of the process in each jurisdiction. I’m 

not sure if this, you know, how often they meet or if they 

provide reports or if this is something that lawyers and AGs 

[Attorney General] like to talk about when they get together, 

but this is one of the bodies that has seen this process going 

forward.  

 

The minister reported to the House, June 2010, the 

subcommittee recommended amendments to improve the model 

legislation and that Saskatchewan will be the third province to 

introduce amendments to its legislation, following Alberta and 

Manitoba. Again, Madam Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan 

coming in in third place, fair enough. At least we’re in the top 

half of the pack, but that we’re following after Alberta and 

Manitoba. At least we are keeping up with the neighbours. 

 

In terms of the amendments provided, there will be a 

requirement of the court to apply the law of Saskatchewan first 

when considering an application. Presently the Saskatchewan 

court receives an application pursuant to the Act for support of 

a child, the court first determining if the child is entitled to 

support under the law of the jurisdiction where the child lives. 

If not, then the court will apply the law of Saskatchewan. 

Apparently it’s always easier for a court to apply its own laws 

first, and in most cases the child will be entitled to support 

under Saskatchewan law. 

 

So again, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is about clarifying the 

process, keeping up Saskatchewan to other jurisdictions and 

ensuring that support orders or interjurisdictional support orders 

are enforceable and that the process around them is clear. 

 

According to the minister’s second reading speech wherein he 

states that “. . . sometimes it is unclear from the order itself or 

the court file if an order was made pursuant to federal or 

provincial jurisdiction,” which he attributes to be important 

because if the original order was made under federal legislation, 

the interjurisdictional support order process under this Act is 

not available. Obviously important to know, Madam Deputy 

Speaker, if the Act itself is applicable. So again a good thing to 

clarify in terms of what the application of the legislation is. 

 

The minister stated that “In some circumstances, an applicant 

may start a variation application and find out several months 

later that their application should have proceeded under the 

Divorce Act, which is of course a federal Act.” Continuing the 

quote, “Requiring the court to state in the order the legislation 

under which the order was made will go a long way towards 

eliminating the need for multiple applications to be made or 

filed with the court.” 

 

Now you’ll forgive me, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m obviously 

not a lawyer; I’m just a humble legislator. But it’s interesting 

reading the legislation itself and then, you know, hearing it 

described by the minister. But it makes plain why you’d need to 

retain a lawyer in a divorce proceeding in the first place, 

particularly as it relates to interjurisdictional actions and the 

kind of complication involved therein. 

 

This is fairly complex, and even where this attempts to make 

some simplification, some clarification, it’s still — I don’t think 

it’s unfair to say, Madam Deputy Speaker — a fairly complex 

set of proceedings. But lawyers, it’s the coin of the realm. And I 

shouldn’t complain about it, what with this being legislation 

coming out of the Department of Justice. And it’s not that I’m 

bitter about a divorce or anything about that, Madam Deputy 

Speaker, but should we all be so lucky to have amicable 

divorces in our lives, should that happen to you. 

 

The minster went on to say that: 

 

During an ISO application, the court in the reciprocating 

jurisdiction may request additional information from the 

applicant, and this information must be provided within 

the time period set out in the Act. The amendments will 

reduce the time period for providing information from 18 

to 12 months. Eighteen months is a long time and can 

substantially [possibly] delay resolution of the ISO 

application, which, depending on the jurisdiction, can take 

anywhere from 3 to 12 months to be heard by the court. 

 

Again, Madam Deputy Speaker, it reminds me of the old adage: 

sin in haste, repent at leisure. Or you know, maybe you can get 

married quickly but divorce maybe not so much, and if there 

are support orders flowing from the divorce, certainly there’s 

some complication that arises from that. 

 

The speaker or the minister in the debate talked about 

amendments adding a new provision to establish location 

services in order to allow other jurisdictions to request a search 

for a person in Saskatchewan prior to sending an application to 

the ISO [interjurisdictional support order] unit. Again this 

makes sense in that if you’re going to have an 

interjurisdictional support order placed, it helps to have a 

person that you can put that order upon. So Saskatchewan’s 

ISO unit, while it regularly receives applications from 

jurisdictions that have reason to believe but, according to the 

minister, cannot confirm a respondent as living in 

Saskatchewan, this will aid in the attempts to locate the 

individuals involved. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Other amendments in the legislation being brought forward 

requiring foreign jurisdictions to provide proof of their law 

governing duration of support. Again, Madam Deputy Speaker, 

reading through the minister’s speech, it’s hard to imagine why 

you’d need a lawyer to get through a divorce, but it’s 

interesting to see the process laid out in the minister’s speech. 

 

The final thing that I talk about in this connection, Madam 

Deputy Speaker, one of the phrases that recurs throughout the 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

legislation as presently stated is “ordinarily resident” and that 

will be replaced by “habitually resident” to be consistent, 

according to the minister, with the Hague Convention on the 

International Recovery of Child Support and Other Forms of 

Family Maintenance, again the Hague Convention being the 

gold standard when it comes to the international recovery of 

child support and other forms of family maintenance. I see 

counsel nod in agreement, very good. So Saskatchewan is 

keeping up in this regard and we’ve got legal drafters hard at 

work in the Department of Justice backing up the 

interjurisdictional support order unit in the Department of 

Justice. Obviously they want to keep their legal tools and where 

they get their mandate from current and up to date and meeting 

international standards, so great to see that in the legislation 

here, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

So if this helps that support orders made in other jurisdictions 

can be registered and varied in Saskatchewan with maximum 

efficiency and minimum delays, we think this would be an 

improvement to the current situation. If it will allow, as the 

minister claims, enforcement to begin and support payments to 

be made for those children who require them, if it accomplishes 

that, Madam Deputy Speaker, then I think this will be, this will 

be on some a good piece of work. 

 

Obviously this Bill just being introduced in the House, we’ll be 

taking a closer look at it and its particulars, but it would seem 

on the face of it to be a positive set of primarily housekeeping 

amendments to the current legislation, but meaningful measures 

nonetheless. 

 

So, Madam Deputy Speaker, with that I would conclude my 

remarks on Bill No. 32, The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011, and as such I would move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 32, The 

Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. Next Bill. 

 

Bill No. 33 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 33 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 

pleased to enter the debate tonight on Bill No. 33, The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act. I want to . . . just 

referring to the minister’s remarks here, the minister does know 

that the Act was designed to assist tenants in a tight housing 

market. I have to say that I’m glad that this government has 

acknowledged that we’ve got a tight housing market here in 

Saskatchewan. 

It’s funny looking back about a year ago at budget time, the 

government presented its budget, and there was very little to do 

with housing and support of housing and ensuring that we’re 

addressing the housing crisis. And then just about a week later, 

actually at the time the government was supposed to be in the 

middle of consultations and had a plan to have a housing forum 

in April. So we had a budget with very little on housing. We 

had a planned forum and consultations. And right smack in the 

middle of it, the government, a week after budget, decided that 

there was the Saskatchewan advantage housing plan that they 

just pulled out of nowhere, actually while they were in the 

middle of consultation. So I am very, very glad to hear that they 

do recognize that there is a tight housing market. But I would 

say it was far too late, Madam Deputy Speaker. We’ve been in 

the midst of a housing crisis for several years now. 

 

So what does Bill No. 33, The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act do? Well right now, Madam Deputy Speaker, 

landlords are able to increase rents every six months. They give 

notice and can increase rents every six months. So what will 

this Bill do? It will add to the amount of time between rent 

increases for tenants if a landlord does not belong to an 

approved landlords association. So if a landlord does not belong 

to one of these approved associations they will only be able to 

raise rent every 12 months, but if a landlord does belong to one 

of these associations it’s still basically business as usual, being 

able to raise rents every six months. I know the minister in his 

remarks talked a little bit about the goal of the legislation is to 

encourage landlords to become members of one of these 

approved associations. And with this membership landlords 

will still be able to raise rents, but the goal of the legislation is 

to provide tenants with either access to a mediation program 

offered by the landlord’s association or additional time to find 

another place. 

 

Unfortunately, Madam Deputy Speaker, in a place like Regina 

right now, where we have a point six vacancy rate, it’s more 

time to find nothing. So we heard in the fall that we are at about 

point six per cent here in Regina. And I expect that in the 

spring, when the new numbers come out, that the vacancy rate 

in Regina will in fact be even lower. We had two buildings here 

in December, I believe, that were shuttered. So I suspect that 

vacancy rate will be even lower and even more of a problem 

here in Saskatchewan, and in Regina in particular. 

 

Actually just recently I heard from one woman here in Regina 

where her rent was going up by 41 per cent. So this is someone 

who works full time, single woman who is employed, but this is 

a stressful experience — 41 per cent, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

This individual already works long hours and has no capacity or 

no ability to squeeze any more hours in her day to work. 

There’s not any ability for this woman to find more hours to 

work. So a 41 per cent increase is incredibly onerous on this 

individual and others in her building as well. But she lives here 

in Regina, and she knows that she could leave. But what the 

heck is she going to find? There is nothing out there. There is 

absolutely nothing out there, Madam Deputy Speaker. She was 

mentioning another individual in her building who has decided 

he can’t afford the rent. He actually is the caretaker, and when 

the rent goes up in just a few months from now, the caretaker is 

going to have to leave the building. 

 

So rent increases continue to be a problem. Housing continues 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

to be a problem here in Saskatchewan. And rents will still be 

going up every six months for individuals whose landlords 

choose to belong to this association. 

 

We had a case here in the fall, actually talking about so you 

have a little bit more time, so you have a little bit more time to 

find a place. But more time to find nothing is the reality. We 

had a case here in the fall, that we heard about in this House, 

where we had an individual who’d been on social assistance 

following a car accident. This individual couldn’t find a place 

to live here in Regina that met the requirements, that was less 

than the amount he received for the disability rental 

supplements and the shelter allowance. He couldn’t find 

anything under that particular amount. It was about $724 is the 

amount. And so he was housed in a hotel for months, Madam 

Speaker, because he couldn’t find a place that fell below $724, 

to the tune of about $3,000 a month actually, which is 

incredibly expensive to be housing individuals. But the reality 

is, he couldn’t find any place. 

 

The government is unwilling to raise shelter allowances or 

recognize that perhaps we do need to put a little bit more 

money in that area because we have an incredibly tight housing 

market. So this government instead chose to pay about $3,000 a 

month for someone on social assistance to live in a motel, 

which first of all isn’t a home, and second of all that’s pretty 

onerous on taxpayers. I know this individual didn’t feel very 

good about staying in a hotel when he knew that if he had a 

small bump of even 25 or $50 in the shelter allowances, he 

would have been able to possibly find something. But it is still 

incredibly tight there, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

So another issue that I’d like to raise with respect to Bill 33 is 

again those landlords who join the approved housing 

association. I’d like to ask this government or hear from this 

government if the government itself is willing to join this 

tenants or rental association. Is this government going to also be 

— as one of the largest landlords here in the province — is the 

government, the Saskatchewan Housing Authority going to 

ensure that they’re also part of this housing, one of these 

landlord associations? 

 

Last summer actually many of us, many of my colleagues and I 

started to hear from constituents, from residents in our 

communities who lived in Sask Housing affordable housing, 

that their rents had been going up every six months, every six 

months for pretty much the previous two years. This was 

incredibly stressful for people. 

 

In my own constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale, I’ve got 

Embassy Gardens, which is an affordable housing, Sask 

Housing affordable housing unit. And many, many, many 

people are incredibly stressed. They said the affordable housing 

program was sort of one little reprieve in this crazy housing 

market. People who had accommodations here felt like that 

was, they felt that they had it pretty good for sure, but they 

weren’t also in a position to pay much more than they were 

paying. So the government was not being a particularly, I think, 

thoughtful landlord as rent was going up every six months, 

causing great stress to these individuals. 

 

And you know, the interesting thing the minister here said, well 

you know what the policy of this affordable housing program 

. . . Well first of all she didn’t know the difference between 

social and affordable housing, but when she got that all 

straightened out, she was talking about affordable housing and 

said, well our goal or the policy is that affordable housing 

should be 10 per cent below market rent. That’s the policy for 

the Sask Housing Authority. Well the first point about that is, 

does this take into account that the rents the people are paying 

today are ridiculous, that many, many people can’t afford 

market rents? So that’s the first point, that rents are quite 

outrageous. 

 

The second point, Mr. Speaker, is that perhaps the minister’s 

forgotten she is a minister and she has the capacity to change 

policy and programs. That’s the beauty of being in charge; you 

can do those kinds of things. So if you recognize that, as the 

Minister of Justice has said with this Act, that we’re in a tight 

housing market, that perhaps the government could look at 

amending some of the other policies around this, including 

around the affordable housing program. 

 

I think when it comes to Bill 33, the notion that landlords and 

tenants, if you belong to this association, the association will 

help landlords and work with their tenants through mediation, I 

think that that’s ignoring the obvious, that there’s a bit of a 

power imbalance between a landlord and a tenant. Mediation is 

great, Mr. Speaker, but as the tenant, on a fixed income likely, 

coming to a landlord, you are not in a position of power. And it 

doesn’t matter if you’ve got a mediator with you or not. That is 

a definite power imbalance. 

 

I can tell you about one of my own constituents actually who 

has a landlord who’s a pretty decent guy, and he’s giving her a 

really good deal, but unfortunately it’s a really great deal on a 

really lousy apartment. It has no end of issues. Nothing, I’m 

sure, is up to code. The landlord doesn’t have any desire to fix 

anything. One of the big issues is actually the venting of the 

plumbing, and she has a horrible . . . The sewer gas has come 

up through her plumbing. But you know what? There is a 

power imbalance in that relationship, Mr. Speaker, and she is 

not comfortable with raising the issue with her landlord or with 

the Rentalsman because she knows she’s now staying in 

accommodations that she can afford, and she feels glad in some 

respects to have this apartment. But she also doesn’t have any 

power to say to her landlord, you know, I don’t think it’s such a 

good idea that my apartment smells like sewer gas several days 

a week. So I think we have to acknowledge that with Bill 33 

suggesting that a landlord and a tenant will be in some kind of 

mediation process is naïve and does not acknowledge the huge 

power imbalance that exists. 

 

[21:30] 

 

The other thing that the legislation does is it provides for a 

period of time before the first increase after a tenancy begins. 

So in Bill 33 there is a time, a period of time before the first 

increase begins if the landlord actually belongs to the 

association. So if you’re a member of the association, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s one year before they increase rents, and if not, if 

you don’t belong to the association, it’s 18 months. But the 

reality is even if you’ve been in a place for one year, there’s no 

prescription on how much that rent increase could be. So you 

could find a place to live in and it’s a decent place and you and 

your kids get settled in and you’re living in your apartment and 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

no, your landlord hasn’t increased your rent for the first six 

months, but at one year that landlord can raise the rent to 

whatever rate he or she sees fit. 

 

So I just want to give you an example here. So a family moves 

into a place, has a year’s reprieve, a year of stability, and then 

they get their rent increase or their notice of increase and they 

may or may not be able to afford this, Mr. Speaker. So this 

might mean for them that after just 18 months in a place they 

might have to move. And I know in my own constituency a big 

downside of the housing crisis, or a reality of the housing crisis, 

is families moving frequently. 

 

And I’d want to ask the members opposite if they had, if raising 

their own kids or in their own life, was stable housing 

something that was important to them? I know for myself, Mr. 

Speaker, I lived in the same house until I was 18 years old, till I 

was on my own. I lived across the street from my school. I was 

in the same community for all that time. And as a matter of fact, 

I live five blocks from my childhood home too, so I haven’t 

gone very far. But stability of housing is absolutely imperative 

for so many people. 

 

Stability of housing allows you to be able to work, to know that 

you have a roof over your head so you can go to school, so your 

kids are healthy. There’s nothing better for kids than having 

solid roots in a community where you get to know the 

neighbours, where the neighbours know your kids, where your 

kids are going to the same school. Again with schools in my 

own constituency, you’ve got kids there . . . You talk to 

teachers in some of the schools in my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, and because of the housing crisis, families are moving 

so frequently that kids never have an opportunity to know the 

same teachers, to build a relationship with other kids in the 

neighbourhoods. 

 

Another problem with the housing crisis is the reality that 

people are couch surfing, and not just individuals without kids. 

You’ve got whole families moving from house to house, Mr. 

Speaker. Another downside is the reality that in single-dwelling 

houses, 800-foot, 900-foot wartime houses in Saskatoon 

Riversdale, you’ve got multiple families living in homes meant 

for one family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what does that mean to a child who’s going to school who 

comes home and . . . I’m not a big believer in every child 

needing their own bedroom. I grew up . . . I’m the youngest of 

seven kids. I shared a room with my two sisters for a very long 

time. So this isn’t about every child needing a huge bedroom 

and all their own space, but people do. Adults, we need our own 

space to retreat to. Children need their own space to be able to 

go do homework or have a little bit of downtime, and especially 

if you have a child with a disability who may need some extra 

attention or an opportunity to unwind and deal with the stresses 

of a day that happen in a kid’s school day. 

 

So these are some of the things we see with the housing crisis, 

Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think Bill 33 is doing what it needs to 

do to address what’s been going on here in Saskatchewan. 

 

This afternoon we talked a little bit about spousal violence and 

how the housing crisis has impacted or worsened this situation 

here. From the Provincial Association of Transition Houses of 

Saskatchewan, there was a really great quote in there on the 

impact of moving that I think gives a better perspective of what 

I’ve just been discussing. So I’d like to read this quote. This is 

from a mother talking about her own experiences here. So 

quote: 

 

Yes, for like that whole year it seemed like I kept moving, 

and it was hard on my kids too because, you know, they 

have to change schools, and they’d got used to one place, 

and it’s hard to move again. Like you could tell it was 

stressing my kids out too. 

 

So the reality is, Mr. Speaker, not having a consistent place to 

live has a huge impact not only on parents but on children as 

well. I think housing, if you don’t have a roof over your head, 

you have very little. Family’s ultimately the most important 

thing, I think, but if you don’t have a roof over your head that 

you can afford and that is appropriate, you have huge struggles 

in life. 

 

Today again we talked a little bit about social housing, Mr. 

Speaker. And I don’t have it in front of me here, but in the 

Saskatchewan advantage housing plan, this plan that this 

government put together quite hastily, as I said, just a few days 

after budget — you’d think it would have been in their budget 

speech but it wasn’t — and about a month before they actually 

concluded their consultations, so in the Sask advantage housing 

plan not once does it mention the single word, social housing. 

Not a single word on social housing. 

 

And what is social housing? It’s low-income housing or 

housing . . . It’s defined as low-income housing or housing 

geared towards those fleeing abuse. And it’s income geared, so 

the lower your income, the lower your rent. So that’s very 

important, Mr. Speaker. But nowhere in the Saskatchewan 

advantage housing plan does it talk about social housing despite 

the fact that there are community organizations, there are 

people, well in particular today, people working with women 

who are fleeing from domestic violence, who are saying this 

government needs to invest in social housing. So Bill 33 does 

not do what it needs to do to address the housing crisis, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We talked today a little bit about how, again on the social 

housing side of things, we talked a little bit today about how in 

rural Saskatchewan in particular the housing crisis impacts 

people throughout Saskatchewan, and it has an impact on 

women fleeing domestic violence throughout Saskatchewan. 

But the unique problem in rural Saskatchewan is that there is no 

place to go. If I was fleeing domestic violence in Saskatoon, I 

might move from one community to the other. But if I’m living 

in a small community that I’ve grown up in and it’s my home 

and I finally decide that I’ve had enough, I can go into a 

transition house. But if I want to come back to my community, 

Mr. Speaker — where my parents are, where my support 

networks are, where my job is, where my kids go to school — I 

don’t have that opportunity because housing is so tight in so 

many communities and this government has done nothing on 

the social housing side of things. 

 

And I heard the minister say today that while she had some 

concerns or that oh, she feels bad that women fleeing domestic 

abuse have to leave their communities, but she can’t make the 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

abuser leave, and we have to keep women safe. Well in the 

Provincial Association of Transition Houses’ recent study, or 

study of not too long ago, one of the things they point out about 

women in rural Saskatchewan is that many women from 

smaller cities and towns in this study spoke about a sense of 

connectedness. Leaving their community most often was not 

something they would even consider. This often posed safety 

issues for them, but they said that they were willing to take the 

risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to stay where our support networks are, 

and this is no different for women who are fleeing domestic 

violence but who happen to come from a rural community. So I 

think one thing this government should think about doing is 

substantially invest in social housing. All across this province 

we need to have an investment because the government’s 

leaving it up to the private sector right now. The private sector 

is doing some work, which is wonderful, but it’s not enough. It 

is not enough to address the crisis. And I don’t say the word 

crisis lightly. We really are in dire straits here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the one thing too that I’d like to mention as well is 

consultation. And I’d like to talk a lot about consultation here 

and I know that the members on the opposite side get quite 

worked up on the topic of consultation. But I have to say, when 

the opposition found out about this Bill, we did go out to many 

different groups. We did have some feedback from Boardwalk 

and we did have some feedback from a real estate organization, 

which is great. It’s important and they feel that Bill 33 is good, 

which is . . . It’s important to go out and speak to organizations 

that might not normally be your typical base or be aligned with 

your philosophies. The bottom line is when you’re creating 

policy, Mr. Speaker, you need to speak to a whole host and 

whole range of people who are involved and have some 

knowledge on the ground of the topic that you are seeking input 

on and hope to produce a policy or program on. 

 

It’s important to reach out to people, and I would wonder who 

the government spoke to about Bill 33 because I can tell you 

that the things that we’re hearing, from not just anti-poverty 

organizations but a whole host of individuals, that Bill 33 just 

doesn’t do it for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I’d like to say housing is so important. And this 

government really isn’t doing everything it needs to do to 

ensure families have a secure and affordable roof over their 

heads so they can work, so they can study, and they can live the 

lives, the best possible lives. You need that roof over your head 

so you can do what you need to do to be a contributing citizen, 

Mr. Speaker. This Bill 33, is it better than nothing? Well it’s 

probably better than nothing, but the people of Saskatchewan 

want and deserve and need more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know I have colleagues who also would like to enter the 

debate on Bill 33 at some point, and I’m eager to hear what 

they have to say as well. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like 

to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 33, The Residential 

Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 35 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 35 — The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée 

législative et le Conseil exécutif be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to get up once again tonight and speak on some of the 

legislation that’s before us. As always, it’s important to take a 

look at some of the Bills that come forward and give some 

comments on them and it gives us an opportunity to really 

reflect, to be thoughtful about what’s happening out there. And 

of course with the legislation four years ago about a fixed 

election date, and we were all prepared for that and it seemed to 

work out fairly well. I’m not sure I was a fan of it, but it seemed 

to work out quite well. We knew leading up to it what was 

planned and so there you go. I think that we can live with that 

piece. But now we’ve got a wrinkle in this by Mr. Harper, the 

Prime Minister, potentially throwing a wrench into this by 

having a federal election in the election period four years from 

now. 

 

And so this is what this Bill anticipates, that this may happen 

and that we may have to change the election period to the 

spring of the following year. And while it’s good to be 

prepared, I do see that the Premier has taken the time to write 

the Prime Minister about this concern, and of course it impacts 

a few other provinces. I understand Ontario, Manitoba, to name 

two, are caught in the same bind. And so we’re hoping that 

Prime Minister Harper will see . . . Of course a four-year period 

for him would be May of 2015, and then we could do ours as 

straightforward. 

 

So I’m hoping that we can see this, and I’m hoping that we can 

all work together and try to get this straightened out. I’m not 

sure if the Premier’s got a letter back. It would be interesting to 

know because apparently he wrote some time in December 

about this concern as soon as he became aware after the 

election about what the consequences would be. So if the 

government has any new information about this, it’d be very 

interesting to hear that. But as it looks now, we’re going to have 

to live with this. 

 

I do find it interesting that in reviewing the comments of the 

minister, Minister of Justice, he talks about gamesmanship in 

the choice of election dates, and you can still have 

gamesmanship apparently still even with fixed election dates. 

We’ve seen that at the federal level anyway. You can have that 

legislation and still call it. Right now we seem to be in a good 

spot with our first go at it, and we hope that can continue. 

 

I have to say, from my own point of view, I love November 

elections. I’ve had four of them and I’m still here. So I’m kind 

of a big fan of November elections. So I’m partial to that. But I 

do hope that we can get this sorted out. 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

[21:45] 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot more questions, 

just that we are watching this one carefully. And we’re hoping 

that the federal government can give their signal sooner than 

later about their intentions of what they plan to do with their 

federal, with their election date because it only makes sense 

they go in the spring of 2015 and the rest of the provinces can 

continue as they were. So it’s kind of upheaval into the 

electoral cycle. It’s not helpful. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move adjournment 

on Bill No. 35, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 2011. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 35, The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

not so happy. I find this Bill, Bill No. 36, An Act to amend the 

Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993, probably the most 

egregious Act of this government to date. This one, while only 

one page long, contains some changes that are fundamental to 

who we are as MLAs, and who we represent. And I think this is 

one that I know many on this side will have to say an awful lot 

about. And, Mr. Speaker, I just am shocked and appalled by this 

because I think that while the simplicity of it is straightforward 

— it’s only a page — but the impact is far-ranging, and the 

unintentional consequences of this piece of legislation is huge. 

Huge. 

 

And I wanted to start by saying, just for example, today we 

welcomed students from Balfour. And one of the things we 

usually do when we introduce students, we say welcome to 

your legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, if we continue to do that 

after this Bill is passed, we are all hypocrites because no longer 

will it be their legislature because they are not 18 years old. 

They have to be over 18 and they have to be voters. That’s what 

we say now if we pass this Bill, and I think that’s offensive and 

that is wrong. And the other side can think this is a light . . . It’s 

something light, but this is very serious. 

 

Seven provinces and the Federal government take the total 

population and represent the total population. They don’t just 

represent voters. Kids don’t count to this government. And 

that’s what this Bill says. And if they don’t figure that out, then 

they’d better figure it out right now. Because when they 

introduce kids in this legislature, that’s what this says, because 

you’re not 18 years old and you’re not working for them. 

You’re working for those who vote for you. And I think that’s 

wrong, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s extremely wrong. I work for 

everyone who lives in my riding whether they’re 4 or 40 or 94. 

It doesn’t matter, their age. It doesn’t matter, their age, because 

I represent everyone. Everyone. And this now says that you’re 

going to amend the legislation that you have to be 18 years of 

age or older. 

 

I don’t think people understand how far-ranging this Act is and 

what the implication of this Act is. You don’t need a 500-page 

Act to have something fundamental happen. This is 

fundamental. This is huge. This is huge. 

 

Last week I was part of a panel with young people, recent 

immigrants to this province. And they were all happy to be 

here. And they asked me, so what do you think about this 

robo-call scandal? What do you think about what we should 

think about politicians? What do you think we should do about 

that? And I said, well you know we work hard to have a good 

reputation and make people think that we’re working for 

everyone, no matter whether you voted for us or you didn’t, 

whether you’re a hardcore conservative or a hardcore lefty. It 

doesn’t matter. We represent everybody. But that changes now. 

That changes now. And this is only part of the path this 

government seems bent on. 

 

Last year they introduced legislation about photo ID 

[identification] and that was a big barrier for people — all sorts 

of ID barriers. And now they’re talking about 18 years old. And 

when I told the kids, listen, this government is introducing 

legislation that says you don’t count. You don’t count anymore. 

You simply don’t count because now we’re saying you have to 

be 18 or older to be part of the constituency. Well that’s wrong. 

That’s fundamentally wrong. That’s fundamentally wrong. 

 

We know seven provinces have got it right and the federal 

government’s got it right, and for some reason we think this is 

the direction that we want to take. Now there’s all sorts of other 

arguments that we can . . . But I just want to underline this. And 

I just think every day when these guys get up and introduce 

school groups and say, welcome to your legislature, well I hope 

they think twice about that now because really they all voted. 

And if they vote for this Bill they’re saying, that was a few 

years ago, but not anymore. That was a few years ago. 

 

Now there’s some other issues I have with this, Mr. Speaker, 

that I feel very strongly. You know this government — and 

we’ve seen several examples since the election; we’ve seen 

several examples of this — they say nothing during the 

election, nothing during the election, and then all of a sudden 

you hear about this. We did not hear anything about three new 

MLAs. We all know the population’s growing, and we’re all 

very happy about that. We’re extremely happy about that. But 

they never said anything about three new MLAs, did they? Did 

they over there? I mean, did any one of them say, you know, 

the one thing we’re going to do when we get elected is we’re 

going to get more MLAs? Three more MLAs, that’s what we’re 

going to do. We’re not even going to consult people on that. 

We’re not going to consult. We’re not going to do what other 

provinces do. 

 

Other provinces would go out and say, let’s find out what 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

people think. Let’s find out what people think. Do we need 

more MLAs or do we need more services? There are 60,000 

more people here. Do we want more policing, more community 

safety, or more schools, or do we want three more MLAs? No, 

they didn’t say that at all because they knew what the answer 

would be. They knew what the answer would be. They knew 

what the answer would be. They would say, people would say 

no, we can do quite well the way that we are; we want more 

services because there are more people here. And that’s the 

right thing. So they never ran on that. And they never told their 

volunteers who are younger than 18, you guys don’t count any 

more; you’re not part of this. This is a problem. This is a 

problem with this government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to put one quickly through this. 

We all know, we all know that every 10 years we do boundaries 

over again. We all know that. That doesn’t come as a surprise. 

But to say, oh, by the way, when we do the boundaries, we’re 

going to do two more things, actually three more things: one, 

we’re going to not count anybody who’s younger than 18; 

we’re going to throw in three new MLAs and if you don’t pass 

this piece of legislation in time for the Boundary Commission, 

we’re going to act as if we did do it. This is an amazing piece of 

legislation, amazing piece of legislation. You know what? 

Buckley over here said, he was talking about, if we get services, 

if we get services. And again these guys with their selective 

hearing only hear part of the statements that we make. 

 

But, you know, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk about some of 

the things that this . . . You know, it’s incredible what the 

Minister of Justice had to say last night about this, you know. 

And from his comments about moving from 56 to 59 members, 

when we do . . . And of course the two northern, two northern 

MLAs would bring that up to 60, 61. And he says, and I quote 

this, “Mr. Speaker, it is a fundamental principle in our 

democracy that each vote should be roughly of same value 

throughout the province.” That’s true. We can’t argue with that. 

That’s not the issue here, Mr. Speaker. It’s about representation. 

Who do you represent? And we represent everyone. Now all of 

a sudden we’re saying we’re not going to represent about 

230,000 people in our province — and that probably is higher 

with the new population stats — but over 200,000 people, 

we’re not representing. They’re not part of the formula any 

more. This is the wrong track to go down here, Mr. Speaker. 

This is the wrong track to go down. 

 

And then they also said something: it’s a very interesting 

argument and he goes, and I’ll make sure I read this right, and I 

quote, “By using the most recent census data to determine who 

is of voting age in a constituency, rather than using the voters 

list as has been done in some other jurisdictions, we are using 

the best available data.” Now that’s an interesting statement to 

say because we’ve never used voter lists to establish the riding 

boundaries before. It’s always been the population, the census 

so . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, it hasn’t. Romanow changed it in 

’92. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Okay. There you go. There’s a correction. In 

’93 maybe. I have to verify that. I have to verify that. The 

members opposite are throwing out some data that I want to get 

corrected. 

But almost all other provinces use the census, use the census. 

Now I understand Alberta and Manitoba may use other pieces 

of information if they want to get more accurate information. 

But to throw out this argument that somehow we’ve been using 

the voters list is not accurate, Mr. Speaker. At least for 20 years 

we haven’t used it. At least for 20 years we haven’t used it. And 

so what is this all about? He’s creating a false argument that 

doesn’t really hold water. Now I understand that maybe New 

Brunswick or Prince Edward Island, they might use this. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I have a real problem with how he’s setting this 

up. And he says, and I quote, “While the census data may 

include citizens over 18 years of age who are ineligible to vote, 

it will certainly include far fewer ineligible voters than is 

currently the case.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when he’s talking about currently the case, 

he’s talking about young people, and I just think that’s 

deplorable. And so we have an issue here. He says that’s all 

right if we count the ones who are over 18. And those would be 

the recent immigrants, new immigrants. And that’s quite 

acceptable that we feel we have an obligation to represent those 

folks. I think that comes with being in Canada. That comes with 

being in Canada. Once we have the election, we have to 

represent the views of everyone in our riding, not just those 

ones who are technically the voters, and probably — and I can’t 

wait to see the government come forward with this — voters 

with ID [identification]. That’s what’s going to be the next step 

in terms of determining this. I think this is simply deplorable. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is really, really unfortunate that we 

have a problem with this. And I think that as we go through 

this, and I’ll talk a little bit about some of the data that we’ve 

got, some of the resources that I want to make sure gets on the 

record here because we have some real, real issues, you know, 

and I think that the government and the government 

backbenchers really need to rethink about why they are doing 

this, you know. When we talk about what’s going to happen, 

we’re going to lose about . . . According to the population stats 

of 2006, there were about 233,905 people in Saskatchewan 

under the age of 18. That’s approximately 24 per cent of the 

population that’s under the voting age. And yet they still have 

rights as far as I’m concerned. That’s why we have the 

Children’s Advocate. That’s why we have set up ways to make 

sure that those people count. Young people count. That’s really 

important. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we are a young, a young 

province. 

 

And some of the research I’ve had done takes a look at the 

fertility rate here in Saskatchewan, talking about youth rate 

growth. A fertility rate of 2.1 children per woman is the 

replacement level, and according to 2008 statistics, 

Saskatchewan has the highest fertility rate of 2.05 of the 

provinces, and only Northwest Territories at 2.08 or Nunavut at 

2.98 has higher fertility rates than Saskatchewan. So this is a 

big issue. And one of the groups that in Saskatchewan has a 

high fertility rate of course is the Aboriginal population. And 

while we don’t have the specific stats on the Aboriginal 

population that are younger than 18, we do have it that are 

under 14 or under 20. This is a big issue, particularly for 

making sure this segment . . . And we had questions today 

about this. We had questions today about the education of 

Aboriginal youth. And we understood that that task force is in 

fact actually delayed, and we’re not sure if it’s actually going to 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

happen, but we’re waiting to hear more from the minister about 

this. 

 

[22:00] 

 

But here’s a group of people that feels disconnected from 

mainstream society in a big way. And this government over 

here says, and you know what? You don’t count either. You 

used to count, but now you don’t. And so what are they going 

to do about this? This is a significant issue. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I really have some concerns about the 

unintended consequences. Here we have a group of young 

people, Aboriginal people, who should feel part of 

Saskatchewan, who are an important part of Saskatchewan, 

more working than ever before. But what does this government 

say? What does this government say? What does this 

government say? You don’t count. You’re part of the 240,000 

young people that don’t count in Saskatchewan any more, don’t 

count in Saskatchewan any more. So is it any reason that we 

should think that this government doesn’t really care about this 

education task force that the minister announced amongst much 

fanfare a year or so ago, and we haven’t heard much about it? 

So we have some real problems with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said, we had my colleague talk about how we are gathering 

some data from different experts across the country and across 

the province here, about some of the issues with this piece of 

legislation. And I want to read this into the record that this 

Dennis, Dr. Dennis Pilon, associate professor, department of 

political science, York University, sent to us because he was 

concerned about this Bill. And he says, and I quote: 

 

Still the politics of this should be clear. This Bill will 

advantage the Saskatchewan Party with its rurally based 

electorate and disadvantage the more urban-based NDP. 

Regardless of the questions of partisan advantages, the 

normative arguments against this change is that 

Saskatchewan urban areas have a particular representative 

challenge and rural ridings are often overrepresented in 

terms of population anyway. 

 

And so what he is saying is, it’s hard to get the balance right. 

And sometimes when you have those geographic challenges in 

rural Saskatchewan — which we understand; we understand 

completely — but this is really another issue. That’s another 

issue about how do you have a population that’s sparsely 

around the province and then you see cities more than ever 

have more people in them, but particularly more young people, 

and is that why we’re doing this? It’s because you want to have 

more weight out in the rural areas as opposed to the cities 

where there are more young people. I think this is the wrong 

way of going about this again because you’re avoiding the real 

issue, and that is, what do we do as MLAs in Saskatchewan? 

What do we do here? What’s our job? And it is, as I say and I 

will continue to say, it’s to represent, represent the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to also read this. And this is from Dr. Courtney, and 

the book is Drawing the Maps. And he goes on and he quotes: 

 

Other jurisdictions in Canada have chosen to determine 

their electoral boundaries according to total population. 

This shifts the focus from voters to the legislative or 

parliamentary members and to their responsibilities as 

elected representatives. Redistributions at the federal level, 

in seven provinces, and in two territories [so seven 

provinces who do it according to pop, and then two 

territories] are based on total population figures obtained 

in a general census. The premise underlying this method is 

that in their ombudsman role elected members are 

expected to speak for and to act on behalf of the entire 

population of their respective riding, not simply those who 

are eligible to vote or who may have voted for them. 

Irrespective of their age, citizenship, or political 

preference, residents of a constituency, so MPs believe, 

deserve to be helped. 

 

And I guess that’s the bottom line for me. It’s not about who 

you voted for. It’s not about your age. It’s not about whether 

you’re a citizen. It’s about the fact that you’re living in that 

riding. We do have, every four years, elections, and that’s when 

we go through who can vote and all the requirements of that, 

and I don’t have a problem with that. I do have a problem 

because with some of the regulations that came out last time 

that made it a little too rigorous, but we worked through this. 

But as I say, this is a fundamental, a fundamental shift. And I 

have some real concerns because I know that across the country 

there are ways of tackling this problem, and one way is to have 

consultations. 

 

And I just want to talk a minute about what other provinces 

have in terms of representation. Are we one of the ones who are 

more represented than any others? Because here we say . . . 

And if the argument is true that this government is putting 

forward that with the population going up by 60,000 — and the 

minister seems to think that we need to anticipate much more, 

and I hope we do have many more, many more people moving 

to our province — that we will have obviously stronger ridings. 

But I think there’s a point where we think, what is realistic? 

And we seem to be in the middle of the pack. 

 

You have Ontario with 103 MLAs. Now their population — 

this is 2006 stats, not the most current, but if we just take this 

because this is the best we have tonight — the number of 

MLAs in Ontario is 103; the population of Ontario is 12.16 

million. And the average representation or average constituents 

per MLA is 118,000. In fact that’s bigger . . . I understand 

actually it’s about the same size as the number of constituents 

per MP [Member of Parliament]. And they have congruent 

ridings actually. The same MLAs have the same MP or 

parliamentary ridings. 

 

Then you go all the way down to Nunavut which has a 

population of twenty-nine thousand, four hundred and 

seventy-four thousand people. They have 18 MLAs. And they 

represent about 1,600 people. So somewhere in between there 

has got to be a good number. Quebec, 7.5 million, 125 MLAs. 

They have the most MLAs of any province, and they represent 

those 60,000. 

 

BC [British Columbia] — and this is a paper that I think is very 

interesting — BC had the same issue. They’re wrestling with 

should they increase the number of MLAs they had. And so 

they developed this position paper. The population of BC is 4.1 

million with the number of MLAs 79 and constituents about 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

52,000. 

 

Alberta, with 3.3 million, 83 MLAs, about 39,000 constituents. 

Manitoba, 1.1 million, 57 MLAs, and about 20,000 constituents 

per riding. And Nova Scotia is in there with 937,000 people in 

Nova Scotia, 52 MLAs, 18,000. Then we come in here with 

Saskatchewan. Now this is our old population, about 960,000 

— now, I understand, about 60,000 more — 58 MLAs, and we 

on average represent about 16,700 people. So you see that 

there’s a range here. But even with Nova Scotia, they represent 

more than we do with 18,000. Manitoba’s with 20,000. So 

what’s reasonable? What’s reasonable?  

 

And today we had questions in question period about this 

government. Is it austerity or prosperity? What kind of a 

province, what kind of a province are we living in? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think at this time, this is a time where, 

you know, I think we should actually go out to the people and 

say, how many MLAs should we have? Or actually we should 

have done it before this. It’s a little too late. It’s a little too late 

now because this is a question we should have asked last year 

or the year before because right now we are now in the process 

. . . Any day now, any week now, we’re going to be setting up 

the Boundaries Commission, and their work will be in front of 

them. 

 

And so with this Bill I think this really puts them in a tough 

spot because do they actually believe . . . They will get out . . . I 

can just see this now. I can see this now. They’ll probably go 

out, and they’ll be putting out new maps. And people will say, 

well hey, do we really need three new MLAs? Do we really 

need three new MLAs? 

 

You know, I hear over there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 

if the member opposite would quote my member accurately 

when he was talking about that, he said the question was, the 

60,000 new people want services — get the services first, then 

maybe we could talk about the three new MLAs. So I ask them 

to read that accurately. Clearly my colleague from Athabasca 

was saying the 60,000 new people here are going to come and 

they’re hearing — what are they hearing? — they’re hearing 

that they have to cut services. They have to cut services like 

policing and schools. So what are they going to do? What are 

they going to do? They say we want to . . . you want to cut 

services. Do you want to cut services over here, or do you want 

three new MLAs that you never campaigned on? You never 

campaigned on three MLAs. So why wasn’t it in the platform? I 

just have that question. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a 

real dilemma that we have and, you know, and I can just see 

that there’s . . . And the list goes on for questions I have.  

 

You know, the cities now, and the towns are . . . [inaudible] . . . 

I know in Saskatoon, my hometown, they’ve just redrawn the 

boundaries, and they’re done on the populations. Are these guys 

going to be, is this government going to be putting forward 

legislation to say, listen, you have to now change your 

boundaries yet again because we don’t want you counting those 

young guys. We don’t want you to be counting anybody under 

18. They don’t count any more. Are we going to have sort of a 

dual system here? At the federal level, you count as a young 

person. At the municipal level, you count as a young person. 

But at the provincial level, you don’t count. 

So what are they contemplating over there to make this 

consistent across the province? What’s going to happen here? 

Last year when we saw the changes to The Election Act around 

the ID and all of that, this government took it in their own 

hands to put on some of these new regulations for local 

communities. Are they going to do that too? And so I have 

some real concerns, Mr. Speaker, because as I said that this is 

not . . . Well it’s only one page, and it’s really, it’s actually 

quite amazing actually when you think of what one page can 

mean to a province. 

 

I think that we really need to take a look at this, and we need to 

say is this what we really want to do. And let’s get this right 

because when we’ve got this wrong, the unintended 

consequences can be huge. And what we’re saying to young 

people is a real problem. And I have to, I do have to say . . . 

And you know, across the way they will raise what my 

colleague from Athabasca had to say, and of course he raised 

some real concerns about the issues around services and what 

people come here to expect and what they’ve been told will be 

here, what will be told. And people come expecting that this 

seems like a reasonable place. People do things in a reasonable 

way. And generally by and large they do. But all of a sudden 

this one comes out of left field. Actually right field, let me 

correct that. No way would that have come out of left field. 

This is totally a right field idea. This is one of the . . . It’s just a 

crazy idea that we could slip this by to get three more MLAs. 

 

And I do worry about this because, as the member from 

Athabasca was so clear, that in the same mouth, one side you’re 

talking prosperity. We’ve got the hottest economy in North 

America. Everything is going well. We need less government. 

Why do we need more government? We’re on the right track. 

But on the other side you say austerity and we need more 

government. And you know, I think the mixed messages are 

huge, huge. 

 

And we know that they are on track. They’re well on track, and 

they take a lot of pride in this in terms of lean services in the 

government. They’ve said that they’re on a four-year plan to cut 

4 per cent of the government employees at 16 per cent of 

reduction of government employees. And yet the population’s 

growing. How does that work? And so, Mr. Speaker, this is 

why I think this Bill has a lot of flaws and is not well thought 

out because if you’re cutting government services by 16 per 

cent . . . And we see a real need for government services with 

new people coming. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Earlier tonight I talked about the foreign rulings Bill, and I’m 

thinking, so where is the money coming for that, to enforce 

that? And over here, just before, we talked about the new Bill 

about residential tenancies, and who is going to police that? 

Who is going to ensure that’s actually happening? And we hear 

about Saskatchewan having one of the highest, if not the 

highest, rates of spousal abuse. What are we going to do about 

that? So there are real needs, real needs. And this is a huge 

issue — talking about the crumbling infrastructure for 

municipalities — what are we going to do about that? 

 

And the government seems to think add more MLAs, add more 

MLAs. That’s the thing to do, solve all our problems. I mean I 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

don’t know where this idea came from, where this idea came 

from and why it was under wraps during the election and why 

all of a sudden this is the big deal to do. You know, if this was 

the big deal to do when we saw the population growing in the 

last five years, it should’ve been done two years ago, 

anticipating what the population was going to be. We had 

informal counts. We didn’t have the official census, but we 

kind of had a sense of where the population was going. Why 

didn’t we do it then so this could be all in place and everybody 

can rally behind this and say, yes, this is the right thing — cut 

those services, increase MLAs; you’re on the right track. 

 

But this is not what the Sask Party government said. They said, 

everything is good. Everything is good. Trust us. We’ll be 

okay. And I’ve got to say, it’s not okay. This is not the province 

that many people think, that they think of home, you know. 

And when we talk about our young people, they mean so much 

to us, and because we see how they’re disengaging from the 

political process . . . And yet this government doesn’t seem to 

care about that. They say, you really don’t count, and we’re just 

going to slough this off because, hey, you know, you don’t 

count. You still get counted on the census, and for many years 

we’ve counted you, and you’ve been part of the process. But 

now we’re going back to the old ways. And as members 

opposite would say, this happened during the Devine era when 

17 and younger didn’t seem to count. I have some real 

problems with this. 

 

And so when you think about the choices here that we’re being, 

that municipalities are being forced upon about what to do in 

terms of choices — whether it’s community safety, community 

policing, and having to raise the property taxes — this 

government seems oblivious to that, seems oblivious to this 

because what is the cost for one MLA? What is the cost for one 

MLA? What is the cost for three MLAs? And is that a good 

investment? Is that how we should be spending our money? I 

think this is a real, real challenge. And now they may think it’s 

not. Hey it’s just money, right? And this an issue when we 

have, when we have some real tough choices. People are 

making some very tough choices in Saskatchewan. The price of 

housing, the affordability issues are huge. And this government 

. . . And we’ll see the budget in just a few weeks. 

 

And the Premier’s alluded to cuts and austerity. I think that’s 

what he’s saying. That’s what the message is, is be ready. Be 

ready. We have to tighten up our belts. Except for when it 

comes to the budget, except for when it comes to the MLAs, the 

new MLAs. And I really am worried that, you know, the PR 

[public relations] machine that the government has on hand and 

the press releases and all of that kind of stuff, people need to 

watch what’s happening here. And I’m concerned that this 

government really doesn’t understand the impact of what this 

will mean. 

 

And of course the questions we’ll have for the minister when 

we get to committee on this — and I hope before we get to 

committee that he may withdraw this because I think he really 

needs to rethink this — but if we ever do get to committee on 

this, because I have some real issues about this: has he done a 

cost analysis of this? What are the costs of this? And are people 

thinking about this? Has he looked across Canada to see where 

do we fit in with other provinces? What’s acceptable in terms of 

representation? What do people view as our jobs? Is it just 

about getting elected and we only work for those people who 

elect us or do we represent everybody in our riding? What does 

this really mean here? 

 

And I think that this is a clear issue that we have to take some 

time and think about. And I think that this is completely 

unfortunate, the timeline that this government has gone on, that 

they’ve decided that they would put this in, that after the 

election they would ram this through after the election. I’m 

surprised. This sort of fits up there with Bill No. 5 in terms of 

how well thought out it is. You know, I think that in the years 

ahead we’re going to have some people thinking about this and 

saying, hey, what about us? I can really see that many young 

people will start to say, hey, what about us? I think this will be 

a real, a real issue. And what are the implications when you 

don’t count somebody in the formula? Now you might say, hey, 

it’s just a formula; it doesn’t really mean anything. But as I said 

earlier we have the highest fertility rate in Canada. We have a 

very young Aboriginal population that needs to be connected to 

mainstream society. 

 

There are gains being made in employment, but clearly there’s 

a huge untapped potential here with First Nations and Métis 

people. And if we’re saying to them, particularly the young 

people, you really don’t count, I think we have some real issues 

here, Mr. Speaker. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I think this 

is, as I said, an egregious piece of legislation. I think that the 

minister and cabinet should really rethink this. I think that the 

idea of us saying we want three new MLAs without 

consultation, I don’t know where the number three actually 

came from. The minister’s notes don’t really explain that. He 

tries to create this false argument that we are using now 

electors’ lists, and that’s not true. We’re using accurate census 

data and we’re responding as quickly as we can to that. I think 

this is a real problem, and I really think that this is one that I 

would ask the government, I would urge the government to 

reconsider. 

 

You know, in terms of the work to go ahead, clearly we have a 

lot to be proud of in Saskatchewan in terms of a democracy that 

we value so much. And we think about what has happened in 

the Arab Spring — people fighting for the right to be 

represented. And here we go with this government taking away 

rights of young people. I think that this is not a small matter. 

And while they would like to say, hey, it really doesn’t matter 

— it really does matter. It really matters to young people. It’s 

just a formula? No, it’s not just a formula. And when we go to 

the ballot box, it’s just a checkmark? No, it’s not a checkmark. 

You’re exercising your right, one that is valued, truly valued, 

and one that you know we can get pretty patriotic about in 

terms of the different wars, whatever, fighting for democracy. 

And for us to say to 240,000 people, you don’t matter anymore; 

you don’t count. I think it’s just wrong. It’s just wrong. 

 

And just with a simple one-page Bill, this is not good 

government. This is not good government. This is lazy 

government. This is government that is not thinking forward 

into the future. We have so many things to be thoughtful or 

thankful for in this province, and one of them is young people, 

and the fact that we have so many young people. Twenty-four 

per cent, if not now 25, 26 per cent of our population is young 

— below the age of 18 — and we have to think of ways to 

connect those people to the democratic process here in 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

Saskatchewan. And to say to them, listen, you used to count but 

now you don’t count, I think is wrong. 

 

On that same vein, this government, this party, prior to the 

election did not mention anything about needing three new 

MLAs and the impact that would be. And we’ve seen this many 

times with the different things that they’ve said in the weeks 

just past the election, things that have come up in the . . . that 

they’ve decided that they would want to do. 

 

You know, the funding of independent schools is a good 

example. Not a word about funding independent schools during 

the election, and then shortly after the election it’s the thing. It’s 

the thing. It’s just something that we would do. And we can go 

on and on about these things. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a sign of an arrogant 

government, one that has really lost its way, lost its way. And 

you know, I know the Premier would talk about a moral 

compass. I’d like to know, how’s the moral compass working 

today when you can say to 240,000 young people, you don’t 

count any more, and we’re not going to work for you? We’re 

not going to work for you. You come into our office. I have a 

job. It’s to work for those who are the electors. Now they may 

laugh over there, and I know the government may think this is a 

bit of a lark. What does it really matter? What does it really 

matter? 

 

And I think particularly the Minister of Education will go 

around to schools and talk to the young and say to young 

people, you know what’s really important? It’s that you engage 

in the democratic process. But will she then tell them, will the 

Minister of Education tell them, but I was part of the cabinet 

that disqualified you from part of the formula to figure out your 

riding? All right? Will she do that? Will she do that? And will 

the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs say to young Aboriginal 

people, you know we think a lot of you. We think a lot of you, 

but we don’t think enough of you to include you in the formula. 

We don’t think enough of you to include you in the formula. 

 

So this is a real issue, Mr. Speaker, and I know they think it’s a 

. . . They don’t take it very seriously, and that’s a sign of an 

arrogant government, an arrogant government that’s lost its 

way. And this may be the first step. I think we saw a lot in the 

last four years, but this is appalling to see it now. Because as I 

said, one page but some real key issues on there around young 

people, around young people, and around the idea that they 

didn’t bring this up during the election and the fact that, the fact 

that on one hand you’re telling municipalities be ready for cuts 

and telling citizens be ready for cuts, but you know what? We 

need three more people. We need three more MLAs. 

 

I’ve just not heard that. And I don’t know where these folks 

over here have heard anything like that during the campaign. 

Maybe they did. Maybe they did. Maybe it was all over that 

they said, we just have to have more MLAs. I don’t believe 

that. I just don’t believe that. I never got any letters. If they’ve 

got letters, let them table the letters. Let them table those letters 

or emails about people who said, we need more MLAs. We 

need more MLAs. 

 

Now I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, they, as I said, they seem 

to think there’s a bit of humour in this. I don’t think this is 

humorous at all. And as I said, when kids come into the 

galleries and we make a big deal and say, welcome to your 

legislature, that’s not the case any more. That’s not the case any 

more, Mr. Speaker, because they don’t count any more. That’s 

what this government’s saying, is you don’t count. You don’t 

count — 240,000 young people now don’t count. And I think 

that is shameful. That’s just plain shameful, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think this is a real issue. 

 

We’ve talked about the 60,000 people who have come, and they 

don’t expect to get three more MLAs. I don’t think they came 

here thinking, ah this is the land of good government; we get 

more MLAs. This is the land of good government; we get more 

MLAs, more MLAs. They think, we’ll get more services. We’ll 

get better roads, better roads in our cities and our towns. No, 

that’s not the story. We’ll get safer communities. That’s not the 

story. This government’s intent on having more MLAs. Who 

asked for it? And I think this is a real issue. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that, tomorrow, if there are students here, 

I’m going to be very interested in hearing what those folks over 

there . . . if they actually say, welcome to your legislature. 

Because I think we’re all a bit of hypocrites if this Bill passes 

and we talk to young people to say that it’s their legislature, 

because we’ve thrown off 240,000 young people. And many of 

them are Aboriginal people who we should be reconnecting to 

the political process, and instead we’re cutting them loose. And 

this is an issue, Mr. Speaker, a real issue. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 10:30, this 

House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 355 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 357 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l'éducation 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 360 

 Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 364 

 Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 365 

 Bill No. 30 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 368 

 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 369 

 Bill No. 32 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 370 

 Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 372 

 Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 375 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 376 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


