




















































Hansard: March 05, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 9A  MONDAY, MARCH 5, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 259 

 March 5, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome, to you 

and through you to the members of this honourable Assembly, 

some people who work hard on behalf of those who need it the 

most to put on annual events that we can all be proud of. In 

your gallery are — I‟m just going to get you to stand and give a 

little raise here — Craig McGillivray, Kim Lowe, Heather 

McGillivray, Margaret Manz, Karla Kemaldean. And they‟re 

from the Telemiracle committee. 

 

This year Telemiracle raised a record-setting $5.9 million. This 

committee, along with hundreds of fellow Kinsmen and 

Kinettes, worked throughout the year raising funds, and 

especially this past weekend at Telemiracle 36 down in Regina. 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce you the Telemiracle 

committee from this past year. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I want to also greet the Kinsmen and 

Kinettes who are here as part of Telemiracle and say thank you 

to you on behalf of all of the people of Saskatchewan, and I 

guess I should say from beyond Saskatchewan as well, who are 

very proud of the work that you do and have done over many 

years. So thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it gives me 

great privilege to introduce my sister Tanya. She‟s here from 

Halifax, and she lives out there with her husband and her two 

beautiful children. And it‟s her first time at the Legislative 

Assembly. And I‟m just proud to say that she‟s here and she‟s 

happy to see the proceedings today. 

 

And while I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to 

introduce my wife, Larissa Steinley. We‟ve been married for 

three years, and she is the most patient woman I know. So on 

behalf of the Legislative Assembly, I hope you enjoy your 

proceedings, and welcome here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce two constituents of mine 

that are attending, to you and through you to the rest of the 

members of the Legislative Assembly. Joining us in your 

gallery first, Mr. Speaker, is Judy Buzowetsky. Judy resides 

both . . . splits her time between Weyburn and Blaine Lake. I 

think she‟s fairly well known to members of the legislature as 

she usually attends Throne Speech day and often budget days. 

 

Ms. Buzowetsky, Mr. Speaker, has been a member of the 

University of Saskatchewan senate and board of governors. She 

has been awarded the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal as well as 

the Queen‟s Golden Jubilee Medal, Mr. Speaker, and has been 

very involved in community activities in both communities. So 

I would ask all members to welcome her to her Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

As well, while I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I‟m also very 

pleased to introduce Eileen Tunall. Eileen comes to us today 

from her home community of Pangman where she is very 

involved in her community and was very instrumental in the 

100th anniversary of the town of Pangman and the surrounding 

RMs [rural municipality] last summer which I had the privilege 

of attending. So I would ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these two citizens of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly two 

guests in your gallery, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Lee Elliott and Mr. Kyle Addison. Lee is a prominent 

businessman in town here, Mr. Speaker, who also gives quite a 

bit back to his community. He serves on the Prairie Valley 

school board as well as Vice-Chair of the University of Regina 

board of governors, and is a good friend of ours. And Kyle 

Addison is a former student union president at the University of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, serving two terms there, and I believe is 

still attending university and has given quite a bit back to his 

community as well. So I just wanted to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy‟s law. And we know that in 

the early morning of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe was 

shot twice and died from his injuries. He was working at a gas 

station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from intruders. But 

we know from positive stats that convenience store and gas 

station robberies are down by a third if we do the right thing. 

That‟s by including two people working together or other things 

like barriers. So I‟d read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy‟s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon and Regina. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan residents as it 

relates to the poor management as well as the misleading, 

improper, and inappropriate reporting of our finances by this 

government. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor‟s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents, the constituents 

that live in the neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And it‟s 

about the need for a new elementary school in this 

neighbourhood, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being in force are creating challenges that are a concern to our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued, and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many trappers and community members of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Telemiracle 36 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend, 

another successful Kinsmen Telemiracle was held in Regina, 

and Telemiracle 36 did not disappoint. This year‟s Kinsmen 

Telemiracle raised a record-setting on-air fundraising record of 

over $5.9 million, once again demonstrating the tremendous 

spirit and generosity that exists in our province. 

 

Telemiracle 36 was boosted by the special efforts of the 

Saskatchewan people and companies. Potash Corporation 

started the weekend by announcing they would match donations 

raised for a one-hour period up to $250,000 on both Saturday 

and Sunday, in the end directly contributing $500,000 and 

helping to raise a total of $1 million. 

 

There are also an extraordinary example of individual support 

for Telemiracle, with a record-setting donation of $1.4 million 

made by the late Roy Wudrick of Aberdeen area. 

 

No matter how large or small the donation, all contributions to 

Telemiracle and the Kinsmen Foundation are greatly 

appreciated. These funds go a long way in supporting those that 

require special assistance accessing medical treatment within 

the province, with all the money raised staying in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To quote Joan Steckhan, executive director of the Saskatchewan 

. . . director of the Kinsmen Foundation, “Saskatchewan in the 

old days used to do barn-buildings to help their neighbours. 

Now they do Telemiracle, and it‟s the same sort of thing.” 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Rural Women’s Month 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize the enormous contribution of women to rural life in 

this province. From the dawn-to-dusk labour of the First 

Nations women in the pre-settlement communities to the 

gruelling work of pioneer women and the present-day 

contributions of women on the farm, in the village, and on the 

reserve, we give our thanks. 

 

My grandmother came from Nova Scotia 100 years ago and 

raised a family of 10 on the homestead. Her generation of 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

pioneer women endured many hardships — no medicare for 

them. They were resourceful, however, and built strong families 

and communities through working together. 

 

I grew up on that same farm. I know full well the contribution 

that women made to my community. They often shouldered the 

bulk of parental responsibilities at the same time looking after 

the economics of the household and the farm business, 

preparing meals at harvest time — one of my favourite times of 

the year — driving the tractor, feeding the cows, and 

participating on things like the rink committee or the church 

auxiliary. They also contributed to the culture of the 

communities through music, art, and theatre. 

 

My sister and my sisters-in-law, my friends, our friends are the 

new rural women generation. The challenges they face are 

different than some of the pioneer challenges — shrinking rural 

populations and the changing face of agriculture. Isolation is 

still an issue and can be dangerous when they‟re caught in 

domestic violence. However this generation demonstrates the 

same tough and resilient mettle that the First Nations and 

pioneer women of the last century demonstrated. 

 

I ask members to join me in recognizing the strength, diversity, 

and determination of rural women in Saskatchewan as we 

celebrate Rural Women‟s Month. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Nutrition Month 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I invite all people in 

Saskatchewan to think back to a time when they smelled the 

aroma of freshly baked bread as they walked through the door 

or heard the crunch of a carrot as they took a bite. With these 

memories in mind, I rise in this House to announce that March 

is Nutrition Month in Saskatchewan. The more than 300 

professional dieticians in this province, myself included, like to 

say every month is nutrition month. However in March of every 

year, dieticians take an aspect of nutrition and highlight it. 

 

This year the Saskatchewan Dieticians Association, or SDA, is 

making it easy for people to find the answers to their nutrition 

questions. People can now ask a dietician via a free service 

provided by registered dieticians. Research shows that a 

dietician is the highly specialized and regulated health 

professional that is the most trusted source of nutrition advice 

and nutrition treatment. People will now be able to pick up the 

phone or email this service to find answers for the nutrition 

questions they have from a professional registered dietician. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government supports efforts to promote 

wellness and preventative care through education, nutrition, and 

physical activity. I would like to encourage everyone to ask a 

dietician, to get the nutrition answers you need, and to help 

celebrate Nutrition Month in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Scrabble Tournament 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, later 

this week the member from Saskatoon Nutana and I will be 

taking part in a Speed Scrabble Tournament at the University of 

Saskatchewan. This event is a fundraiser for literacy programs 

in the province, with all funds being directed to READ 

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan Intercultural Association, and the 

Central Urban Métis Federation. Each group does tremendous 

work in providing literacy supports to adults, families, and 

workplaces in our communities. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Luckily, as social democrats, we have a natural advantage at 

Scrabble. Child care, Mr. Speaker, is a 17-point word. That‟s 

especially impressive if you compare it against other words, 

another nine-letter word like austerity, which is only 12 points. 

 

However, the competition will be fierce. Some of our rivals 

include teams from the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

Aboriginal students‟ centre, the Scrabboriginals, and the 

University of Saskatchewan Students‟ Union aboard the USSU 

Enterprise. Our group is Team MLA, the Masters of the 

Lightning Anagram. 

 

Our team will have to be mindful not to play Scrabble like 

politicians though, because acronyms don‟t score many points, 

and in speed Scrabble, if you can create many two-letter words, 

you‟ve got an advantage. Sadly, short and sweet is not always 

how people would describe politicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we enter this fundraiser — this is the important 

part, Mr. Speaker — we ask for the support from our colleagues 

from both sides of the House. The member from Saskatoon 

Nutana and I just happen to have pledge forms with us. Any 

donations to Team MLA will be greatly appreciated. I also want 

to ask all members to join me in offering our thanks to the 

hard-working volunteers and directors of these organizations 

and to the USSU [University of Saskatchewan Students‟ Union] 

and its Learning Commons Partners for hosting the event. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Engineering and Geoscience Week 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

inform you that the week of March 4th to 10th has been 

recognized as Engineering and Geoscience Week across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s economy performs as a result of our highly 

skilled professionals. We are blessed with an abundance of 

resources, and the extraction of these resources requires skill 

and expertise as well as innovation to make processes more 

efficient. Today our province is benefiting from resources such 

as those found in the Bakken oil play. Innovations that allow us 

to recover previously inaccessible deposits can be largely 

attributed to our top-notch engineers and geoscientists. When 

you drive on a new highway, connect to the Internet, or 

fabricate a product, you‟re utilizing fruits of the labours from 

more than 7,000 engineers and geoscientists in our province. 

 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s future looks bright, and the 

professional engineers and geoscientists are a big part of our 

successes. This is a key message of the Association of 

Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan‟s 

2012 awareness campaign. Our government is proud of the 

contributions of our professional engineers and professional 

geoscientists to Saskatchewan‟s economic prosperity, 

environmental sustainability, and quality of life. To the 

engineers and geoscientists throughout the province, we thank 

you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Rural Women’s Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In recognition of 

significant contributions to this great province, we celebrate the 

past and present contributions of Saskatchewan‟s rural women. 

I am pleased to speak today to recognize Rural Women‟s 

Month. 

 

Throughout our province‟s history, rural women have been the 

hearts of our communities, playing valuable roles on the family 

farm and in their municipalities. The contributions of rural 

women are evident in the great work they do at their jobs, their 

contributions to agriculture, the education they provide, and the 

care they give to the young and to the elderly. As well, rural 

women are terrific volunteers in their communities and 

Saskatchewan has prospered due to the pivotal role they play in 

our province‟s success. 

 

Rural women in the province have and will continue to be 

major contributors as Saskatchewan takes its place as leader in 

the new West and our rural areas add strength and vitality to the 

province. I would ask that this Assembly recognize the hard 

work and the leadership of rural women in Saskatchewan. The 

women of our province have been, and will continue to be, 

critical to the progress of our beautiful province, Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Heritage Award 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Each year at the city 

council meeting closest to national Heritage Day, the city of 

Regina recognizes individuals who have enhanced the quality 

of life in Regina through a demonstrated commitment to 

heritage preservation and community stability. 

 

There are nine Municipal Heritage Award categories, and this 

year a Walsh Acres constituent, Charles Pirie, along with 

Naomi and Aaron Lynn, received the award in the Preservation 

category for work done at the Mulligan residence at 2022 

Retallack Street. The Preservation category highlights 

protection, maintenance, or stabilizing the existing form, 

material, and integrity of a historic place, or protecting its 

heritage value. Nominations required submission of a written 

description of the nature and extent of the project, its relevancy 

to the preservation category, and visual documentation of the 

work done. In the case of 2022 Retallack, the brick walls and 

fieldstone foundation were completely repaired, with the 

installation of a cedar roof. 

 

Nominations are reviewed extensively by the Regina municipal 

heritage advisory committee and framed certificates are 

presented to the recipients by the mayor and community 

representatives at city council. These awards have been 

distributed since 1984. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] join me in 

congratulating and recognizing the hard work of Walsh Acres 

constituent Charles Pirie on the Mulligan residence. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Provincial Budget 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the past couple of months the 

Premier has been telling Saskatchewan people to watch out 

because cuts are coming in the budget. To the Premier: he‟s 

telling Saskatchewan families that nothing is off the table and 

that there will be cuts to services in the budget. Is the Premier 

going to do the responsible thing and tell Saskatchewan families 

today what these cuts are? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d be very pleased to take that question on behalf 

of the government and respond to a situation that has been 

under way since November the 7th. We have been working on a 

budget for the province of Saskatchewan, a budget that comes 

very shortly after a provincial election in which the people of 

Saskatchewan sent a very strong message. They sent a message 

that said that the wild spending spree of the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] was just not to be accepted at all, not to be 

accepted. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are going to look at a budget that is going 

to continue with sustainable spending. It‟s going to ensure that 

our economy remains strong. We want to ensure that the 

Saskatchewan advantage continues, that we remain a leader in 

this great country, and the budget on March 21st will continue 

to show that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are 

concerned that the Premier‟s been talking out of both sides of 

his mouth. One minute the Premier is talking about austerity in 

the budget and having to make difficult decisions. He‟s telling 

people to be ready for lots of budget pain. In the next minute, 

the Premier‟s all on about a boom, about investment and 

population growth, and travelling around the world to tell 

people about that. 

 

To the Premier: is he going to level with Saskatchewan families 

and tell them if it‟s a time of prosperity or is it a time of 

austerity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

now is the time for leadership in this great province, Mr. 

Speaker. Now is the time for this province to build, to build on 

what we have been able to succeed. The people of 

Saskatchewan have worked tirelessly to move from a have-not 

province under the NDP to a have province now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People in this province sent a very clear message to the NDP. 

The message was, we are not going on a wild spending spree. 

We are not going to spend three billion or four billion or some 

analysts have said even five billion dollars worth of promises in 

the last election campaign, Mr. Speaker. We‟re not going in that 

direction. 

 

We‟re going to ensure that there is a balanced budget to ensure 

that there is sustainable spending so that, Mr. Speaker, we can 

meet those challenges of the future. Saskatchewan people want 

Saskatchewan to be a leader forever, and this government will 

do everything that it can to plan a budget that is balanced and 

sustainable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province know 

when this province became a have province, and it‟s not the 

revisionist history that those people present across the way. 

They know that there was $2 billion in the bank when they took 

over in 2007, and people are asking, where‟s the money? The 

Premier uses lots of slick words, and he takes part in flashy 

news events about economic growth and prosperity. But 

common sense Saskatchewan people are rightfully seeing these 

as diversions for cuts he‟s made in health care, for cuts in 

education, for cuts in social services. And now the Premier is 

signalling more cuts. 

 

To the Premier: is he going to step out from behind the slick 

words and flashy news events and tell Saskatchewan people 

whose job is going to be cut? What services are going to be 

lost? Mr. Premier, we ask on behalf of all of the Saskatchewan 

people, stop with the fancy words and flashy news reports and 

just tell us what‟s going on here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Since November 7th, Mr. Speaker, 

there was one really, really obvious cut that was made. That 

was made by the NDP: they cut their leader, Mr. Speaker. They 

cut their leader. Because you know, Mr. Speaker, they had an 

election platform that had promises and promises and promises. 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosemont in fact said, you 

know, we have to listen to the voters. We have to listen to the 

voters, and we have to understand that revenue sharing can‟t be 

the way the NDP promised it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, within a short while, a number of hours, that 

member was saying no, sorry. The leader has now spoken, and 

we will continue to say that our plan is one of spend, spend, 

spend, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will present a balanced budget on March 21st. 

It will be a budget that will move Saskatchewan forward. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the member to just stay tuned, stay on board, 

and listen to the budget on March 21. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — A quick fact, Mr. Speaker: one side of 

this Assembly has a record of fiscal balance, prudence, 

responsibility. The other side is the Sask Party. 

 

The Sask Party government‟s third quarter financial report did 

not paint a true picture of our finances. To say the least, it was 

misleading. That government has stripped dollars out of our 

rainy day fund and Crowns, had hidden debt on the books of 

Crowns and school boards to manufacture a phony financial 

outcome. The Premier in one sentence talks about record 

growth and prosperity, and austerity and cuts in the next. 

 

To the minister: how is it that at a time of apparent 

unprecedented opportunity and economic activity that our 

finances have been mismanaged to the point that Saskatchewan 

families are now bracing for cuts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in the first four years of our government, our government made 

significant changes to the personal income tax, saving hundreds 

of millions of dollars for the people of Saskatchewan. We‟ve 

made changes to the education property tax, saving hundreds of 

millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you know the 

last year that the NDP . . . the full fiscal year of 2006-2007, the 

debt of the province of Saskatchewan for Crown corporations 

and the public debt was $10.8 billion. Today, Mr. Speaker, that 

number has fallen to $8.1 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So he wants to know, the member from Rosemont, the member 

from Rosemont wants to know where the money has gone. The 

money has gone into the hands of people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. It‟s started to deal with the infrastructure deficit 

that that government left us. And, Mr. Speaker, it lowered the 

debt by $3 billion, saving the property tax payers millions of 

dollars of interest costs. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Finance minister over there seems 

to be a little on edge here today, Mr. Speaker, and I can 

understand. But as a small reminder, the last time this side of 

the Assembly was in government it left billions in account, a 

red-hot economy, and billions in surplus, Mr. Speaker. That was 

our record. 

 

Two years ago the Premier said he was cutting the civil service 

by 16 per cent over four years. A plan to reduce services, yet 

our population is growing, straining programs and infrastructure 

whether in the classroom, health services, or as it relates to 

housing. 

 

To the minister: be straight. How many Saskatchewan people 

will lose their jobs, and what programs and services relied upon 

by Saskatchewan people are being served up on the chopping 

block? 

 

[14:00] 

 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think the people of Saskatchewan sent a very clear message on 

November 7th. Sixty-four per cent vote said that this is the plan 

that we want to see followed, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite stands and says, you know what? They got it wrong 

again. The people of Saskatchewan got it wrong. We‟re the 

only people to lead this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year, this past fiscal year that still has another 

26 days left, I guess, in it, Mr. Speaker, we encountered mother 

nature that was not as kind as it could have been — 360 million 

more dollars were allocated to deal with the flood conditions in 

this province. Mr. Speaker, we met that challenge. We met that 

challenge of providing additional dollars to ensure that the 

PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] claims were 

met, that ensured that farmers were compensated accurately, 

Mr. Speaker. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We‟re still 

going to end up with a balanced budget and in fact a surplus, 

Mr. Speaker, for „11-12. 

 

We‟re going to do the same in „12-13. It‟s going to be 

sustainable spending that is fully, fully funded. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know how he says 

that kind of stuff with a straight face. Three straight deficit 

budgets as verified by our independent Provincial Auditor, and 

that‟s what our Finance minister tries to project to 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier is cutting jobs for Saskatchewan people. The 

Premier is telling Saskatchewan people to prepare for cuts in 

programs and in services. On the other hand, the Premier‟s 

spending $150,000 to fly to Ireland. He‟s spending $700,000 to 

increase the number of MLAs, and he‟s wasting millions on a 

high interest loan scheme in education. 

 

To the minister: how does he justify this sort of spending at a 

time when he‟s telling Saskatchewan people that they deserve 

less, that program cuts should occur? How does he square that 

circle? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, it‟s still a few 

days to budget day, and we will disclose all of the relative 

material. But you know, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Rosemont makes an interesting comment. His very first 

comment was that the Q3 [third quarter] results showed 

information that was hidden. It was hidden. Mr. Speaker, we 

were very upfront. We said that we were going to take $325 

million from the Growth and Financial Security Fund, and we 

were going to pay down the debt. We did that. The member 

opposite says, stands in this house, and he says we‟ve clouded 

things by taking the money out of the fund to do something, I 

guess pay for the flood damages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a promise in the budget that we would 

lower the debt by $325 million. We said we were going to take 

the money from the Growth and Financial Security Fund. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we did. What we said we were 

going to do, we delivered, Mr. Speaker. We keep our promises. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Accommodation in Seniors’ Facility 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of 

Health: does he think it‟s acceptable to evict senior citizens in 

their 80s and 90s from public facilities with just days notice? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite is referring to St. Mary‟s Villa in 

Humboldt. I‟ve been aware of that situation, Mr. Speaker. The 

Saskatoon Health Region is in charge of that area of the 

province, of course, and has moved in this direction. 

 

I certainly have not been satisfied by the way that that 

procedure has been conducted. The health region, I think too, is 

looking at it retrospectively, saying that it wasn‟t handled 

properly. The CEO [chief executive officer] from the health 

region has apologized to the families. I want to, on behalf of the 

provincial government and the Ministry of Health, apologize to 

those 10 families that were in assisted living housing in 

Humboldt. I want to apologize as to how this has rolled out. It 

simply is unacceptable. We have worked very hard over the last 

three and a half to four years to put patients first in our health 

care system, Mr. Speaker, and this is an example where patients 

weren‟t put first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why I have asked, with the board Chair, 

Jim Rhode, from the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority, to 

call the Ombudsman. We sent a letter to the Ombudsman to 

investigate this and put forward recommendations so this does 

never happen again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we welcome the investigation of 

the Ombudsman, but we question why it has taken so long. If 

there was a sincere feeling, Mr. Speaker, on members opposite 

that what happened was incorrect, why has it taken until now 

for the Ombudsman to be called in to look at this situation? 

 

Let‟s look at the timelines, Mr. Speaker. Family members tell 

me that the seniors who resided at St. Mary‟s Villa in Humboldt 

were given their eviction notices on February 15th. Originally 

families were told that they had until the end of March to move 

from the facilities. However, on very short notice they were told 

that they had to be out by February 21st, given just days to pack 

their belongings and find a new location. 

 

My question to the minister: when was he informed, when was 

the Health minister informed about the evictions, and why did 

he choose not to intervene and ensure that these seniors were 

treated with respect? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said we are not 

happy, our government is not happy with the way this had 

rolled out, the timelines. In fact the CEO of the health region 

also commented on the timeline factor. That‟s something that 

needs to be looked at. 

 

You know, when you have people that have been living in a 

facility and they are up in age, to kind of turn over their world 

in a week is probably not satisfactory at all, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

why we want an independent investigation into this through the 

Ombudsman‟s office that can look at how the whole procedure 

rolled out, Mr. Speaker, and put forward recommendations that 

will help us and guide other health regions into the future, if 

anything like this happens into the future so that proper 

notification is given, so that proper communication is given. 

Just from looking through and being briefed on this issue a 

number of times over the last week or so, I think probably one 

of the biggest faults in this whole process was clear 

communication. And that‟s something that we should be able to 

correct very, very easily, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is unacceptable that it rolled out the way it was. That‟s why 

our government is taking steps to investigate so that we can 

help health regions into the future deal with these situations 

much more timely and professionally. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is correct in his 

statement in saying that the timelines need to be looked at. I did 

not hear in his response any answer as to when he was informed 

about the evictions and why he did not choose to intervene and 

ensure that these seniors were treated with respect. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s common sense here in the province that 

individuals, seniors who built this province, deserve to be 

treated properly. Seniors living in their 80s and 90s on very 

fixed incomes, some with health challenges, deserve to be 

treated better. Here‟s a quote, Mr. Speaker, from one of the 

families in speaking about the situation: 

 

The stress on these elder seniors this week has been 

unbelievable — first being given less than a week to come 

to terms with moving from what they considered their 

final homes, then the stress of a disastrous move. 

 

We have a typical response in the minister here from the Sask 

Party front bench. They‟re always there for the happy press 

release. They‟re always there for the positive story. But when 

there is a problem, it‟s always someone else‟s fault. There 

always needs to be an investigation done on somebody else. It‟s 

never the minister who is responsible. It‟s never a clear 

indication as to what the minister knew and why he did or did 

not act. 

 

Question to the minister: why did he allow this situation to be 

managed so horribly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in case the member 

opposite didn‟t hear, I apologized on behalf of myself, the 

government, and the Ministry of Health. The way this was 

handled was not acceptable. 

 

We are taking responsibility. That‟s why we‟ve called in the 

Ombudsman to have a look at it. Our government had promised 

in an election that we would have a health care ombudsman. 

What we have done is put extra funding into the Ombudsman‟s 

office to look into health issues. This would be one of them. 

This is a classic example why we need an independent officer to 

look into this. The Chair of the health region agrees as well. 

The CEO of the health region has apologized. 

 

It‟s not that anyone is trying to shirk their responsibility here — 

not at all. What we want to do is . . . This has happened. It was 

unacceptable. Most all will agree with that. Let‟s look at how 

we can make sure this never happens again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister is so concerned 

about the well-being of these seniors who were forced out on 

short notice, why does he make news of the Ombudsman doing 

an investigation minutes before question period? Why was 

action not taken earlier? To me it indicates that the minister is 

more concerned about his own political neck as opposed to 

making sure that the residents there are treated well and treated 

with respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the family members had this to say about 

the situation: 

 

They‟re feeling pushed around. They‟re feeling 

manipulated. They‟re feeling that they aren‟t getting 

straight, honest information. The only transparency here is 

the velvet glove covering the iron fist . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are individuals who built this province, the 

individuals living in the facility. My question to the minister: 

can other seniors in the province expect this type of treatment? 

Can other seniors in this province expect the iron fist, or will 

they be treated with respect and dignity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the past four and a 

half years that our government has been in place, we‟ve worked 

with seniors across this province, making sure that they have 

the proper care, the proper facilities to live in, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟ve had, I think, a strong record — more to do, more to 

learn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is an example where that didn‟t go correctly, Mr. Speaker, 

but I can tell the members opposite a little bit about respect, and 

respecting seniors. Just after I became the Minister of Health, I 

toured a number of long-term care facilities like the one in 

Watrous that, under that government, had pails on the front 

floor, Mr. Speaker, whenever it rained because water was 

coming through the roof. That‟s the respect that those members 

opposite had for seniors. I went to Rosetown where people were 

living in a basement, that only . . . The second exit for that place 

was up a spiral staircase, Mr. Speaker. That‟s the respect that 

those members had for seniors. 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

We will not take a lesson from those members opposite on who 

has respect for seniors, Mr. Speaker. We‟re replacing 13 new 

long-term care facilities. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve doubled the senior 

income plan, something that they didn‟t touch for 16 years, Mr. 

Speaker. We won‟t take lessons from the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Essential Services Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today 

we‟re very disappointed to learn that the Sask Party government 

has waited until the 30th day to announce that they‟ll be 

appealing the Court of Queen‟s Bench ruling essential services 

legislation unconstitutional. To the minister: what has changed 

over the last 30 days that today the minister announces the 

government will be appealing the ruling? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We‟d 

indicated when we received the judgment some four weeks ago 

that we were going to be looking at it with a view as to whether 

it was appropriate to appeal it or not appeal the decision. That‟s 

why the courts allow for a 30-day appeal period. And we have 

reviewed the matter carefully. The judgment contains things in 

it that we do not agree with and, Mr. Speaker, we have chosen 

to file a notice of appeal. And for the benefit of the members 

opposite, we are working at the same time to try and improve 

and rectify problems that exist in the essential services 

legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it, this is a 

government that is absolutely committed to essential services 

legislation. The people of this province deserve to have 

legislation in place that ensures their safety and security when 

they travel on highways and when they seek medical help, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are the commitments that we are making to this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has spent 

taxpayers‟ money hiring and consulting with lawyers to draft a 

piece of legislation that the Court of Queen‟s Bench ruled 

unconstitutional. Now the minister says the Sask Party 

government will spend more taxpayers‟ money and tie up more 

of the justice system time appealing the decision. 

 

To the minister: what exactly are the costs that Saskatchewan 

taxpayers will pay? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members 

opposite that the litigation is conducted by staff lawyers within 

the Ministry of Justice. I can advise the members opposite as 

well that those are the most competent lawyers in that area, I 

think, in Canada. They have reviewed the judgment carefully, 

and they are proceeding with the appeal and will deal with it in 

the ordinary and usual course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We feel that the judgment that came down, with great respect to 

Justice Ball, created a new constitutional right, a constitutional 

right to strike. While we support workers right to strike, we do 

not think it should be something that is embodied in the 

constitution of our country and as such, Mr. Speaker, we have 

chosen to appeal that portion of the judgment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are a government that remains absolutely 

committed to essential services legislation. When it comes to 

snowplow operators, when it comes to health care workers, we 

want to ensure that the citizens of our province are 

appropriately and adequately cared for. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that that‟s something that organized labour in our 

province wants to ensure happens as well. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes, as the minister talks about, he‟s concerned 

about this new right to strike that somehow he has a question 

about it being in the constitution, but what I just want to read 

from the ruling is page 128 or page 129, section 280: 

 

I have determined that the rights to bargain collectively 

and to strike are protected by section 2(d) of the Charter. 

The Public Service Essential Services Act infringes on 

those rights . . . 

 

To the minister: can he explain why he is spending yet more 

taxpayer dollars dragging out a legal fight that is driven by pure 

ideology instead of common sense that is clearly in the sense of 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I commend the member 

opposite for his careful reading of the decision. The quote that 

he has made from the decision is exactly the portion of the 

judgment that we have chosen to appeal. It is the portion of the 

judgment that creates a constitutional right to strike. It is 

something that does not exist in Canadian jurisprudence now 

nor has it ever existed in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a number of other provinces that have 

contacted us expressing concern about this new-found 

constitutional right. Mr. Speaker, Justice Ball is well-known 

and is highly regarded in this province, but in this case he has 

created an issue, an area of law that we do not feel existed 

before, and we are concerned with that and how it will impact 

the province as we go forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our intention to appeal this, and also at the 

same time to work with the workers of our province to try and 

ensure that we get an essential services package piece with 

legislation that we can go forward with that protects the public 

and also adequately protects the workers of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. Why 

is the member from Athabasca on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — I would ask for leave to introduce a guest, or 

guests. 

 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With me 

is a friend today that I want to introduce that comes all the way 

from Beauval. I understood he moved to the city here, but Rene 

has been around northern Saskatchewan for years. He is one of 

the famous hitchhikers of northwestern Saskatchewan. I had the 

opportunity to pick up Mr. Lafleur on the road a few times and 

he makes his way throughout Saskatchewan. But I understand 

he is visiting the Assembly today. He has since moved to the 

city, so I am sure the mayor of the city would be very happy to 

have you here, Rene. And with him is his support worker, and 

her name is Tricia Solie, or Solie. I want to make sure I say it 

twice to make sure I get it right. But, Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members of the Assembly to welcome these two very special 

guests, Rene Lafleur and Tricia Solie. Thank you. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I hereby table in accordance with the Board of 

Internal Economy directive #22 the Members‟ Accountability 

and Disclosure Report for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2011. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 25, The Ombudsman Act, 2011. Mr. 

Speaker, the Office of the Ombudsman was created in 1973 to 

facilitate the independent evaluation and resolution of 

complaints about the services provided to the public by 

government ministries and agencies. 

 

The current legislation governs both the Children‟s Advocate 

and the Ombudsman. It has remained substantially unchanged 

since the creation of the Office of the Children‟s Advocate in 

1994. This Act applies only to the Ombudsman and updates this 

important legislation in six important ways. 

 

It clarifies the Ombudsman‟s jurisdiction over health care 

services in this province and expands the Ombudsman‟s 

authority to provide public education, particularly on fairness. 

The Bill further ensures that a complainant may communicate 

with the Ombudsman in private, facilitates the voluntary 

provision of information to the Ombudsman by ministries, 

government agencies, and health entities. It also enables an 

entity to reconsider its decision based on a recommendation 

from the Ombudsman and allows organizations that are not 

within the Ombudsman‟s jurisdiction to request and receive his 

or her assistance. 

 

Each of these changes supports the work of the Ombudsman. 

They provide new ways for Saskatchewan people to resolve 

their concerns about services provided by the government 

through its ministries, agencies, and publicly funded health 

entities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the Ombudsman has always had jurisdiction 

over health care services provided by the government, this 

authority is not clearly stated under the current Act. To 

highlight the Ombudsman authority in this area, the Bill clearly 

defines publicly funded health entities, which include regional 

health authorities, health care organizations, affiliates, and the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. This new definition, combined 

with the efforts of the Ombudsman‟s office to educate the 

public on its role, will help people deal with health care issues. 

The Ombudsman has indicated that he will continue to work 

co-operatively with the publicly funded health entities and 

quality of care coordinators to resolve issues. 

 

For a number of years, the Ombudsman has provided public 

education in his role. To provide the public and the agencies 

within his jurisdiction with a better understanding of how the 

Ombudsman assesses a complaint and determines his 

recommendation, the Ombudsman is interested in providing 

public education on fairness. This new Act provides the 

Ombudsman with the authority to conduct public education on 

fairness in government services. 

 

Some of the most vulnerable citizens in Saskatchewan seek out 

the assistance of the Ombudsman. This Bill contains enhanced 

requirements that will assist these individuals in contacting the 

Ombudsman in a private setting. 

 

The current Ombudsman legislation encourages the resolution 

of complaints through the use of negotiation, conciliation, and 

mediation. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of complaints 

are resolved without the need for the Ombudsman to begin a 

formal investigation. The resolution of complaints through 

non-adversarial methods is further encouraged in this Bill by 

specifically allowing ministries, agencies of government, and 

publicly funded health entities to voluntarily provide 

information to the Ombudsman without needing a formal notice 

of investigation. Voluntary provision of information allows 

complaints to be resolved quickly and with few administrative 

steps. This will benefit the complainant. 

 

In some cases the Ombudsman will recommend that a ministry, 

government agency, or a publicly funded health entity 

reconsider a decision that is the subject of a complaint. Mr. 

Speaker, unfortunately there are instances where, despite the 

desire to follow the Ombudsman‟s recommendation, it is not 

possible because the statutes governing the situation state that 

certain types of decisions are final. This Bill contains specific 

authority for the ministry, agency, or publicly funded health 

entity to reconsider its decision, if appropriate, on the 

recommendation of the Ombudsman. Again, this provision 

assists in resolving complaints more effectively. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman‟s office has earned 

respect both inside and outside of government for its good work 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

investigating, resolving, and reporting complaints about the 

fairness of services provided by the government. As a result of 

this respect and positive reputation for resolving disputes, 

organizations that are not within the Ombudsman‟s jurisdictions 

request his assistance from time to time. In the past, the 

Ombudsman has always had to decline to assist these 

organizations even in circumstances where it is recognized that 

he has much to offer. This Bill enables the Ombudsman to 

provide assistance in appropriate circumstances to organizations 

outside his usual jurisdiction. The government anticipates that 

municipalities, school boards, and self-governing professions 

may contract on a fee-for-service basis with the Ombudsman to 

review their processes and policies and make recommendations 

for improvements. 

 

Our province benefits from a strong and independent 

Ombudsman‟s office to assist Saskatchewan people in resolving 

their disputes with the government. Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

strengthens this role and facilitates the effective operation of the 

Ombudsman‟s office. The Ombudsman and his staff were 

extensively consulted during the preparation of this Bill. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 25, 

The Ombudsman Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved Bill No. 25, 

The Ombudsman Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise on behalf of the official opposition to give our 

perspective on this Bill, the Act in reference to the Ombudsman 

in terms of clarifying his or her role and certainly clarifying the 

role that he or she or the office would play in educating the 

public and also to ensure that there are proper resources and 

staff and support for the Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for those that aren‟t clear about the role of the 

Ombudsman, as many times they certainly have the opportunity 

to investigate arguments and claims against the government 

through its various agencies and departments and so on and so 

forth . . . So those that are listening at home and really are 

trying to understand what the role of the Ombudsman is, it‟s a 

much similar role that the MLA may play, although the MLA 

certainly may bring a more political tone to some of the 

processes. The Ombudsman is supposed to be completely 

neutral and certainly try their very best to assist those people 

that may have a number of concerns with government agencies 

such as social services, housing, health care issues now as the 

minister has alluded to, and so on and so forth. So the role of 

the Ombudsman certainly is there to help and assist people and 

to investigate claims against the government, and they take this 

work very seriously. 

 

I know that the Ombudsman has had some busy, busy couple of 

years under the Sask Party government. And I anticipate, Mr. 

Speaker, that there‟ll be more busier times for the Ombudsman 

as the Saskatchewan Party government starts showing their true 

colours and starts to begin to show exactly how uncaring they 

are to the people, and certainly to the different agencies that are 

supposed to be there to help the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister alluded to the current Act that 

did not really address the Ombudsman role in relation to the 

publicly funded health care agencies. He talked about the health 

district, the cancer services, and so and so forth. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we have to really begin to address the whole matter 

because we all know that the Ombudsman has made many, 

many recommendations over time. 

 

As MLAs and as legislators, we know that the Ombudsman has 

identified some of the weaknesses within government. And as 

the minister alluded to, or made reference to, there are times 

that the Ombudsman could be of incredible value and benefit to 

an issue around health care and some of the lack of delivery 

points that many of our people suffer through. 

 

So I think it‟s important to note that I think the ombudsmans 

have always looked at the notion of trying to make sure that if 

there is an opportunity for them to play a role, that they‟re 

ready, willing, and able to provide that assistance. And this Bill, 

as the minister pointed out, it really clarifies the role that health 

has to play in relation to working with the Ombudsman‟s office. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I want to point out to the public of 

Saskatchewan is that this Sask Party government certainly 

pointed out before the last election that they were going to hire 

a health care ombudsman — that was the general thrust and 

direction that the Sask Party mentioned — and that they had 

done that with great fanfare saying then, at the time, that the 

NDP weren‟t taking care of all the health challenges of the 

people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, they touted having 

this health care ombudsman. And now, several years later, 

they‟re changing their mind again. And that‟s exactly what the 

people of Saskatchewan are beginning to realize with the 

Saskatchewan Party government. They say one thing that is 

intended to sound good in public, but the reality is they do the 

exact opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the minister talks about increasing the role in terms of 

the Ombudsman‟s office and the staff and the resources to 

include health agencies that the province works with, then I 

begin to understand, begin to ask the question . . . Well there‟s 

two questions I have. The first one is, how about the resources 

and how about the powers and how about the ability for the 

Ombudsman to assume the additional duties and additional 

responsibilities for health care that they were talking about 

several years ago? So I would assume that when you‟re talking 

about a health care ombudsman as was touted by them a couple 

of years ago, that I think you need to have a separate 

ombudsman for health care and health care alone, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s what they spoke about and that‟s what they promised the 

people of Saskatchewan. Now what they‟re saying, we‟re going 

to roll into the current Ombudsman that does all the other work 

and all the other agencies, well this Ombudsman is now going 

to take care of the health care matters. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan really don‟t like 

that kind of activity at all because they were promised a 

separate health care ombudsman, Mr. Speaker. And the key 

thing on this front is now we‟re seeing that they‟re not going to 

be doing that. They‟re going to simply roll over the health care 

responsibilities to a current Ombudsman who is overworked 

already and may be overworked very quickly once people begin 

to realize what the Sask Party has planned for the people of 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when he spoke about clarifying the health 

role, the minister was fairly direct when he said, you know, 

investigating publicly funded health agencies, and he made 

reference to the cancer clinic and of course the health districts. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how about the private clinics that these guys 

are bringing en masse to Saskatchewan? We see a lot of private 

clinics popping up all over the place and, Mr. Speaker, we 

ought to begin to ask, is this part of a larger scheme that the 

Saskatchewan Party has in bringing forward their ideology of 

taking away the role of government when it comes to health 

care? And this is kind of concerning to me as well is, if it‟s only 

about the publicly funded health agencies, where does the 

private clinics, where does the private practices, where does the 

private operators in the province of Saskatchewan, where do 

they fit in relation to this additional duties that the provincial 

Ombudsman has? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s all about making sure that the Bill, when 

they get up and make some of these statements, that as the 

official opposition, we have to make them account. We have to 

make them account for some of the things that they said when 

they were in opposition, for some of the things they said after 

they became government. Now we‟re seeing after the election 

that really the true agenda is coming out, that they never did 

have any plan for a health care ombudsman, Mr. Speaker. They 

never did have that plan in place. It sounded good. We‟ll tell the 

people of Saskatchewan we want to do this, that the health care 

ombudsman would be somebody that would fight for the people 

against all these other groups that might, including government, 

that may not have served them well. That was their angle. That 

was what the current Minister of Health was saying, that we 

need a health care ombudsman to fight for our people when 

they‟re not served well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re seeing now, as I mentioned, is a 

watered down version, an incredibly watered down version as 

proposed by the Minister of Justice, and certainly in trying to 

clarify the role of the current Ombudsman by saying, well 

maybe the original deal we had with the health care 

ombudsman, well maybe that was a bit too much. Now we‟re 

going to water this thing down. We‟re going to include the 

health care matters in with the current Ombudsman in addition 

to all the work that the current Ombudsman work. Here‟s 

another big stack of concerns and complaints as it relates to the 

health care field, and this is now part of your new duties. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are a very, very 

intelligent breed and they will begin to realize exactly what is 

happening. It‟s the same old, same old, say one thing and do the 

exact opposite, that the Saskatchewan Party has been known to 

do. And, Mr. Speaker, this is yet another example in Bill 25 of 

how they‟re going to simply roll over health care 

responsibilities and complaints over to the current Ombudsman 

as opposed to creating their own health care ombudsman as 

they promised before the election. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan . . . And you have 

to be very careful in this regard because these health challenges 

are faced all throughout Saskatchewan. I want to make sure that 

people note that issue as well. But in northern Saskatchewan we 

know that the Ombudsman has had many cases where they‟ve 

been engaged, they‟ve been involved in, whether it‟s a social 

services dispute or a child care dispute or whether it‟s even the 

housing concern, that they‟ve been engaged. Now in northern 

Saskatchewan we look at some of the challenges that we have 

in our region, whether it‟s overcrowded housing or youth 

suicide or whether it‟s just the drug challenges that some 

communities face. And you look at all the positive things that 

people want to do. Now if there‟s a concern about the lack of 

service, do they go to this Ombudsman who‟s already 

overworked and under-resourced and understaffed and say, well 

here‟s a problem we have with health, is there are no services? 

What role does the Ombudsman then play in this regard? Does 

this mean that the Ombudsman can now turn around and say, 

okay, Sask Party government, you promised this, you better 

deliver that? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister‟s alluding to the fact that they 

may have this opportunity. And underline the word “may” 

because in the language and the legal context the word “may” is 

radically different than the word “shall” because may is 

obviously an opportunity whether they want to engage 

themselves or not — they have the choice — whereas the word 

“shall” means you have no choice but to engage yourself and to 

be critical of the government where criticism is well deserved. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s really important that we take a 

few moments to tell people out there that it is not something 

that we take lightly. Our role in the opposition is that we want 

to make sure that the government is held to account. We‟re 

going to do this with every Bill they bring forward. We‟re 

going to make sure that we approach the appropriate people and 

the appropriate agencies to make sure, to make sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that they know that they have a role to play as well. 

 

And whether you live in northern Saskatchewan or southeastern 

Saskatchewan or in the middle of the province in the cities or 

western Saskatchewan, we want you to be engaged and 

involved with as many of these Bills as possible because the 

input from people are really, really important. 

 

And this Ombudsman Act, as I mentioned at the outset, when 

the Sask Party was in their election mode, we wanted a 

independent ombudsman for health care, period, because it‟s 

needed for all the health care work and all the challenges with 

our health care system, and Lord knows there are many 

challenges. It‟ll continue being a challenging area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that the ombudsman concept, people of Saskatchewan 

embrace. As I mentioned at the start, they like that concept. 

And they said, yes, that sounds like a good idea. But now, Mr. 

Speaker, fast-forward to after the election. What does the Sask 

Party do? They say, well we‟re not going to create that office. 

We‟re going to simply slide it under the current Ombudsman, 

and this current Ombudsman will have all the additional work 

of dealing with health care. But guess what, Mr. Speaker? None 

of the resources, none of the staff, and certainly none of the 

power. 

 

So once again we‟re seeing how the Sask Party operates, Mr. 

Speaker, and in particular The Ombudsman Act, Bill 25, really 

has a lot of work ahead of it. And people are not happy, Mr. 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

Speaker. They are not happy with the manner in which they‟re 

being dealt with. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, part of the Bill the minister alluded to was 

educating the public in terms of the role of the Ombudsman and 

certainly what their office can or cannot do. And certainly I 

think educating the public on many fronts is really important. 

It‟s really important, as I try to do in trying to deal with some of 

these Bills. I try the education process to the Assembly so 

people know what the Ombudsman is about and know what the 

ombudsmen do and so on and so forth. 

 

Now what I hope happens, Mr. Speaker, in the process of 

educating the public as the minister alluded to in Bill 25, that 

there is no undue influence or pressure from them to tell the 

Ombudsman that you can‟t deal with this particular issue or you 

can‟t deal with this particular client or you can‟t bring forward 

this kind, this kind of concern. I want to re-emphasize that the 

Ombudsman office is an independent office of the Assembly. It 

is not somebody that the Saskatchewan Party government 

should try and muzzle or interfere with — that they have to 

remain independent as possible. 

 

Now in that independence, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the 

question: is that if the minister alludes to the fact that the 

current Act is going to allow the Ombudsman to look at the 

health care challenges and bring forward some of the concerns, 

is the lack of a service, Mr. Speaker, is that considered a 

challenge? Is that something that the Ombudsman can freely 

criticize this government about, Mr. Speaker? And obviously I 

think that‟s only fair that that occur. 

 

And the second point is on the process of educating the public. 

These are some of the questions the public needs to ask. Just 

how independent and how powerful is the Ombudsman in 

correcting two or three things, Mr. Speaker? One is to ensure 

that these complaints are addressed seriously because people‟s 

lives and health are at stake. And number two is to make sure 

that they have the ability to hold this government to account in 

its own forum by way of, by legal means if necessary to make 

sure that these concerns are addressed. And the third point, Mr. 

Speaker, is to make sure that the lack of services is also 

included in the bailiwick of concerns that they can deal with. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not just about a surgery that was held 

up. It‟s not just about an appointment that was not honoured. 

It‟s also about the lack of services out there throughout rural 

Saskatchewan, throughout our cities, throughout our towns and 

villages, and of course throughout our North. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot of questions we have on this Bill, 

a lot of questions: everything from the impartiality of the 

Ombudsman‟s office, the additional duties, and certainly the 

additional strain that the current Ombudsman is now going to 

assume under this Act because health care is now part of his 

job. And we‟ve got to ask all the questions, Mr. Speaker. The 

people out there have to ask all the questions. How many staff 

does the current Ombudsman have? How many staff does he 

have? How many additional staff will the current Ombudsman 

get to ensure that health care is properly addressed? And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can almost guarantee you that when all is said and 

done and the dust has settled, that the Ombudsman will not 

have the proper resources and manpower to adequately address, 

as part of his expanded role, the whole challenge around health 

care in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That‟s why the idea of a health care ombudsman was probably 

not a bad idea, Mr. Speaker. They said it, but guess what, Mr. 

Speaker? They aren‟t going to deliver it. And that‟s the sad 

reality of this particular government, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s 

why as opposition members our job is to hold them to account. 

When they say things during the election, when they make 

misleading statements after the election, our job is to stand up 

and say, hold it; that‟s not what you said. And no matter how 

they twist the words and no matter how they try and recant and 

no matter how they try and deny, and deny that they ever said 

or promised to do this, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan know. The people of Saskatchewan have heard 

what they‟ve said. They know what‟s going on. 

 

And the reality is, is that sooner or later, the people of 

Saskatchewan — and I suggest it‟s going to happen a lot sooner 

than those guys across the way think — that they‟re going to 

realize the fact that the Sask Party says one thing and does 

exactly the opposite. And that stuff, Mr. Speaker, that action, 

that activity catches up to you sooner or later. And, Mr. 

Speaker, on this side of the Assembly, we are just waiting for 

that to occur when people of Saskatchewan do the shift and say 

all of a sudden, well you guys had great promise and hope, but 

guess what? They didn‟t deliver, and they watered down a lot of 

the things that they said that they would deliver, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s kind of contrary too as well when I 

listen to my colleague, the member from Saskatoon, when he 

talked about the whole notion of the essential services Act. Now 

the Ombudsman, in relation to the essential services Act, he 

might not want to offer an opinion on whether this Bill was fair 

or not, but the justice system said it was unfair. It infringed on 

certain rights. 

 

Now how does the essential services Act relate to the 

Ombudsman‟s role on health care, Mr. Speaker, the expanded 

role? So is now the overworked, understaffed Ombudsman is 

now dealing with the overworked and understaffed health care 

workers who are now dealing with the frustrated and angry 

patients who are supposed to be first? And you can kind of see 

the myriad of problems and the whirlpool of challenges that the 

Ombudsman, who I‟m assuming would want to be engaged in 

this, and he‟s got to try and figure out what the situation is now. 

 

And out of respect for the genders, Mr. Speaker, when I say he 

. . . I believe the Ombudsman is a gentleman now, and 

obviously it may be a lady some day, and I hope that day 

comes. But for now I‟m saying he, not out of disrespect to our 

female gender but certainly that it is a he. 

 

So how does he begin to get engaged with this process? And as 

you can see, Mr. Speaker, it becomes more and more confusing, 

more and more challenging, more and more daunting. And yet 

perhaps between the Patient First Review, between increased 

funding for health, between the health care ombudsman, all of a 

sudden we‟re seeing that what is being said across the way, it‟s 

not happening, Mr. Speaker. And like I said before, they say 

one thing and do the exact opposite, and the people of 

Saskatchewan have long, hard memories. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this is yet another Bill that I think is really, really important that 

people pay attention to. 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I noticed the words that the minister spoke 

about negotiations, conciliation, mediation — all these really 

nice fancy words. And he also talks about there‟s fewer steps 

that this Bill will present to the Ombudsman to reconcile or to 

deal with some of the challenges or points that they‟re engaged 

with. So if a patient comes in or a person comes in and has 

some issues with the Ombudsman who wants their help, then 

the minister says there‟s fewer steps that they have to take now. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you‟ve got to be very careful when the 

government says there‟s fewer steps. What people would think 

at the outset, well fewer steps means more efficient; I‟ll get my 

answers sooner. Well not so. Not so, Mr. Speaker. Not under 

this government. Fewer steps for them means there are less 

opportunities for the patient and the complainant to come back 

and appeal any kind of decision that the government makes. 

There are probably less avenues of support for them at the 

immediate front. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there‟s probably less power for the 

Ombudsman because obviously they‟re stressed to the max and 

they have less manpower. Guess what? They can‟t deal with 

some of these issues on top of your issue. So what happens? 

Fewer steps — saying well we looked at your case; nothing can 

happen. Therefore, sorry, the answer‟s no. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now the person might want to say, well I want to appeal that 

decision; I want to keep fighting this case. Well there‟s no 

provision for that because as part of this whole notion of fewer 

steps, Mr. Speaker, it is not meant to protect the complainant 

nor the patient nor the people. It‟s meant that it‟s less 

cumbersome for government to say no to the people under these 

fewer steps than it is, say, if you had layers of protective steps 

that would ensure that the public was actively allowed to pursue 

things like appealing some of the decisions or second round of 

hearings and so on and so forth. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you‟ve got to be very, very careful. And the 

ministers use different words. When he uses the words, “if 

appropriate,” that‟s one of the words I always get a kick out of. 

Because when he makes the reference to the Ombudsman, he 

says, well if appropriate, the Ombudsman shall do this or shall 

do that. But if appropriate for whom? For the province or for 

the Ombudsman or for the patient? Like how does this work? 

Or the complainant? And that‟s where you‟ve got to be very 

careful. 

 

I indicated at the outset, when you look at the words shall and 

will, or shall and may, there‟s two different contexts there from 

a legal perspective, from what I understand. Because when you 

have the word “may,” it means there‟s opportunities, options 

available. But if you have the word “will,” guess what? You 

don‟t have many opportunities. The law has to be followed. 

 

Well in this case when you use the word, “if appropriate,” what 

does that mean? What does that mean? Is there any kind of legal 

action that this individual has after they get told no? The fewer 

steps that are allowed in appealing, guess what? It may be 

they‟re not allowed to go to the court system any more because 

it‟s not considered appropriate by the government. 

 

So all these things, you‟ve got to be very careful because any 

time the Saskatchewan Party meddles in labour laws, any time 

they meddle in things like the Ombudsman‟s Act or any time 

they meddle in things like The Election Act — and the list kind 

of goes on — it‟s not for the good of the people. It‟s simply that 

they‟re providing themselves with more and more insulation, 

more and more protective layers as a government, as they begin 

to cocoon themselves against any problems that the average 

citizen or person may have by using some of these Acts in place 

and using terminology like, if appropriate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just don‟t buy anything that this particular 

minister has presented in terms of some of his Bills because I 

go back to The Election Act where people had to provide ID 

[identification] before they voted, Mr. Speaker. That was 

brought forth by that minister and that government. Now we all 

say, well that‟s kind of their voter suppression tactics. Like they 

must have got a handbook from the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker, because that‟s exactly what occurred. And a good 

example of that, Mr. Speaker, when I walked in to vote, all the 

people in there knew me, and I said, well I come here to vote. 

They said, well you can‟t. I said, why not? I‟m the candidate. 

Well we need your ID. Well, Mr. Speaker, I had to go home and 

get my ID and show it so I could vote. 

 

Now that voter, that voter suppression tactic that that minister 

brought forward didn‟t work with me because I happen to have 

a licence and I happen to have a photo ID. But there were many 

people in our communities and all throughout Saskatchewan, as 

a result of that voter ID issue that there‟s a lot of suppression of 

vote, Mr. Speaker, in key areas. And there‟s no question that as 

long as that minister provides information and brings forward 

Bills and Acts of that sort, then we will judge all future Acts 

that that minister brings forward with the same kind of scrutiny 

and certainly the same kind of attitude that we did under The 

Election Act that he presented to this Assembly as part of his 

work with the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I think is really important is that it‟s totally unfair 

that we do that, but if you‟re bringing forth a Bill with your 

name on it, then guess what? That Bill is yours. And by 

complying with the direction of your political masters to put 

this in place, from the justice perspective, then guess what? You 

ought to have known or should have known the implications of 

The Election Act, and certainly now with The Ombudsman Act, 

that what you are trying to do is overload the Ombudsman just 

to be . . . to dress up what your original plan was, and that was 

to create a health care ombudsman. You didn‟t do it. Now once 

again you‟re trying to slide it under the door, put it under The 

Ombudsman Act, and that‟s simply not fair. 

 

So I‟m thinking, Mr. Speaker, as we go down these . . . go 

down this process, we watch very carefully what this particular 

minister does because, despite the glowing words and the 

promise of some great things to happen, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

finding that there are some underlying themes that is contrary to 

fairness, that is contrary to good judgment, and certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, is contrary to the people of Saskatchewan‟s idea of 

what government should be like. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, The Ombudsman Act is something that we 

watch very carefully. It‟s one of the avenues, or venues if you 

will, that people have. And we will often try and encourage 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

them to go through the processes that are out there, including 

coming to the MLA office or the Ombudsman office. And a lot 

of the times, they do good work. But what you‟ve got to watch 

now, Mr. Speaker, is in the future. We obviously know that 

when they‟re allowed to do the health care stuff that there is 

going to be increased pressure on the Ombudsman‟s office. 

There‟s going to be increased pressure. Now does that increased 

pressure, is there a way that they could address it by staffing? 

This Bill doesn‟t identify that, Mr. Speaker. It does not identify 

it at all. And we need to ask the questions. 

 

And I can remember, Mr. Speaker, that the Ombudsman does 

annual reports to the Assembly, and what they do is they 

identify the casework that they worked on. They obviously 

don‟t have people‟s private names on there — they‟ll use 

fictitious names or they‟ll use initials of some sort — but they 

will present the report to the Assembly every year. And they 

will say, and last year we‟ve had 600 to 700 complaints against 

the government. And next year it could be 400 complaints. The 

following year it could be 1,100 complaints. It just bounces up 

and down, Mr. Speaker, depending on what happens in any 

given year. 

 

And they also identify in this annual report what areas, what 

areas that had the greater amount of concern brought forward to 

the Ombudsman‟s office, Mr. Speaker. And I can remember 

Social Services was quite high up there. Health care I think 

wasn‟t addressed so much there, but I think there‟s a lot of 

pressure on health care from that, you know, from that 

particular office. And as you can see, Mr. Speaker, every year 

the government and the people of Saskatchewan can review the 

Ombudsman report to see whether the arguments and the issues 

that they‟re involved with and the complaints that they‟re trying 

to address, whether it‟s increasing. 

 

Now what‟s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is because the 

Ombudsman is going to be able to . . . or has the additional 

responsibility of health care, and extra staffing is needed. And if 

he doesn‟t get it, then what happens is all the other areas will 

suffer. Whether it‟s housing issues or whether it‟s social 

services issues or whether it‟s child care issues or justice issues, 

these issues won‟t be dealt with. So what I think is going to 

happen, Mr. Speaker, is that as they‟re not dealt with and 

people become frustrated and the Act allows them fewer 

avenues of appeal and less and less opportunity to go to court 

against the government, what‟ll happen is these concerns will 

never be heard. They‟ll be addressed, and they‟ll be shelved and 

be put away. And all of sudden you‟re going to start seeing 

some of the concerns going down — why? — not because 

they‟re not there but because they‟re not being addressed. 

 

And the other factor is if you have health care as part of your 

mandate and your responsibility, then the health care file will 

take more and more of your time. It will take more and more of 

all the resources in your staffing and your focus and less and 

less time for the other concerns and complaints from various 

different departments. So you see how, you know, there is an 

offset in the office to take the additional role of health care. All 

the other complaints in all the other departments will not get the 

time of day or the adequate time to begin to address some of the 

challenges that the people of Saskatchewan might have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to review to the people of 

Saskatchewan, so they know, the Ombudsman is an 

independent office of the Assembly. They investigate concerns 

and complaints that anybody has for this government. The 

minister announced changes today to the Ombudsman‟s Act, 

which includes the whole issue of having the publicly funded 

health agencies report to the Ombudsman now, and that‟s part 

of their office now. 

 

They have to do all this extra work, and so that‟s what the 

minister spoke about today. He spoke about public education 

and spoke about a lot of things that the people of Saskatchewan 

may think at the outset is something that might be good. But I 

can assure them that all this is is simply trying to create an 

overworked Ombudsman‟s office that won‟t have the ability 

nor the strength nor the recourse to give this government more 

and more grief, which it should be getting. 

 

You‟re going to see the increase in complaints and concerns in 

the Ombudsman‟s office. And now that they‟ve added health 

care onto some of the responsibility that he has to look after, 

that‟s going to take all the attention; thereby all the other 

agencies that include social services or housing or highways, 

they will begin to suffer a lack of attention from the 

Ombudsman‟s office. And that‟s all designed to do one thing, 

and that‟s to insulate this government from criticism. It is not to 

empower the Ombudsman‟s office. And that‟s why, Mr. 

Speaker, we take a great interest — a great interest — in 

anything this particular minister presents to the Assembly 

because we‟ve seen his act before and it‟s not something that 

we want to support in any way, shape, or form. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my other colleagues will certainly have points 

that they want to raise on this particular Bill. And as we reach 

out to different groups out there that are impacted by this Bill 

— to the average citizen, to the average complainant, and 

certainly to the people that are delivering our health care system 

— we ask them to participate in this Bill. Look at it online. 

Contact our office if they have any information and really 

become engaged with what the Ombudsman‟s office is all about 

and to see what extra pressures that are being put on by this 

minister will result in the Ombudsman‟s office becoming less 

effective, more overworked, and with more mandate but of 

course with a lot less help. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on this particular Bill, there‟s a lot more we 

have to say. We‟re going to spend our time that we have to 

spend to research it, to go out and meet the different groups and 

bring back what we think are probably good resolutions and 

certainly amendments to this Bill that we think would protect 

the people of Saskatchewan on a greater scale. So on that note, 

Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 25. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 25, The Ombudsman Act. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion was of adjournment. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adjourn debate on Bill No. 25? All 

those in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

The Speaker: — Say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. The motion is adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2011. The purpose of this Bill is to repeal five 

statutes that are no longer necessary to retain on the books as 

these laws are obsolete or spent. 

 

The first statute being repealed is The Collective Bargaining 

Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act. The Act was passed in 

2005. The effect of the Act was to exempt two collectively 

bargained agreements from section 33(3) of The Trade Union 

Act which restricted the length of a collective agreement to 

three years. The two collective agreements were between 

IPSCO and the United Steelworkers of America, Local 5890; 

and Shaw Pipe Protection Limited and the Construction and 

General Workers‟ Union, Local 180. 

 

In 2008 the government enacted amendments to The Trade 

Union Act which repealed subsection 33(3). As a result, 

employers in eight unions are able to negotiate collective 

agreements for a term that is appropriate for the parties. Given 

the repeal of this subsection of The Trade Union Act, there is no 

further need for this Act to continue in effect. 

 

The second Act that this Bill repeals is The Communications 

Network Corporation Act. This is the Act that established the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation or SCN 

[Saskatchewan Communications Network]. Mr. Speaker, as 

everyone is aware, SCN was sold to Bluepointe Investments 

Incorporated on June 30, 2010. The corporation was officially 

dissolved on March 31st of 2011. Repealing this Act is the last 

technical step in the winding down of SCN as a 

government-owned corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan continues to 

support the film and television industry through the 

Saskatchewan film employment tax credit, the 

Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage, and Saskatchewan Film 

and Video Development Corporation. 

 

[15:00] 

 

This Bill will also repeal The On-farm Quality Assurance 

Programs Act. The Act came into effect in 1998 to provide a 

way for on-farm food safety programs to be recognized in 

Saskatchewan. It was designed to enhance the safety and 

quality of agricultural products by recognizing producer 

organizations and their designated delivery agents that 

implemented on-farm quality assurance programs. This was all 

done before the Canadian Food Inspection Agency agreed to its 

role in on-farm food safety or OFFS. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, this Act is no longer necessary as the 

Canadian Food Inspection Agency has developed policies and 

protocol for national producer-led OFFS programs. The 

On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act has never been used 

given that OFFS programs have never become national in 

scope. Accordingly we are recommending its appeal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now turn to the repeal of The Soil Drifting 

Control Act. This is an old piece of legislation. It came into 

force in 1941 and gave rural municipalities the authority to pass 

a soil drifting bylaw on receipt of petition signed by at least 40 

ratepayers. 

 

The current legislation has been rarely used and is outdated and 

no longer required. Mr. Speaker, producers‟ attitudes towards 

soil conservation have changed. More than 80 per cent of the 

cropland in Saskatchewan is planted using zero till or minimum 

till systems, and that number is increasing every year. These 

systems protect the soil from drifting. That‟s why, Mr. Speaker, 

this Act is obsolete and can be repealed. 

 

The fifth and last statute to be repealed by this Bill is The 

Special Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act. The Act was 

enacted in 1995 — 1999, rather — and provided for an ex 

gratia payment to widows whose workers‟ compensation 

benefits were terminated due to remarriage prior to September 

1st of 1985. To receive the payment, a widow had to apply 

within a two-year period following enactment of the legislation 

and sign a waiver. Given the limitation on application of the 

benefits, there is no further need for the legislation. 

Furthermore, two court challenges to the Act have been 

dismissed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 26, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

again pleased to rise on behalf of the official opposition to 

speak about some of the statutes that the minister has proposed 

to do away with, and certainly as people in Northern 

Saskatchewan say, get them off the books. 

 

And the five Bills that he spoke about, of course the five issues 

that he‟s spoke about is the collective bargaining agreement 

between IPSCO and the steelworkers union; of course the 

argument we‟ve had around SCN in terms of The 

Communication Network Corporation Act, they‟re getting rid of 

that particular Act; and the on-farm food safety programs, 

talking about CFIA [Canadian Food Inspection Agency] and 

where CFIA is nowadays; and of course the soil drifting appeal 

Act; and of course the special payments Act in relation to the 

widows receiving some benefits from some of their . . . through 

I believe it was through the national program. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the collective 

bargaining agreement, when we look at some of the notes that 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

the minister spoke about and certainly some of the comments he 

made in his opening address, we always kind of cringe every 

time we hear the Saskatchewan Party talking about trying to do 

things that are right when they talk about collective bargaining. 

And now they have a statute — and maybe it‟s benign as could 

be — but they have a statute, talking a statute about collective 

bargaining agreement and ending those agreements because of 

the fact that this all old documentation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that we have got a lot of 

information that we want to shift through when it comes to this 

particular Bill. And we want to see what the history was and 

whether it sets any kind of legal precedents for any future 

discussion that might occur. And certainly if, at the outset, if 

it‟s simple and pure and as presented by the current cabinet 

folks, then I would think that people in Saskatchewan wouldn‟t 

have a concern with it. But we need to make sure that this is not 

something that we need to let go by the wayside, and that‟s why 

we want to take our time to look at any parts of this Act in 

particular when it has anything to do with collective bargaining 

processes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now on the SCN piece, Mr. Speaker, the minister alluded to the 

fact that now that SCN has been sold off by us as a Crown 

corporation that we don‟t need it any more. It‟s gone and this 

Act should be gone as well. Well that in itself, Mr. Speaker, is a 

very loud statement as to the intent that this particular 

government has towards any of our Crown corporations or its 

affiliates such as SCN. The Saskatchewan Communication 

Network was a proud, proud entity that served Saskatchewan 

for many, many years, Mr. Speaker, and it really stimulated the 

film industry in Saskatchewan. It‟s done a great amount of good 

service to many aspiring actors and artists and certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, to the province as a whole. 

 

And today now the minister, as part of a Bill, a Bill, and it‟s a 

very . . . again a Bill that at the outset looks very benign in 

terms of . . . Well it‟s An Act to repeal miscellaneous obsolete 

Statutes Act. Well, Mr. Speaker, even though people out there 

may not know that SCN has been sold, the minister was quite 

clear today that it has been sold to Bluepoint communications 

and that now this is just an obsolete statute that we have to get 

rid of it now. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a sad day, not only for 

the people that supported SCN but for the people that thought 

that Saskatchewan was a great haven for developing our artists 

and our actors and our actresses and so on and so forth, and 

SCN was a very sound vehicle to do that, Mr. Speaker. It was a 

very sound vehicle. We had some great things happening within 

SCN and now it has become, as he has indicated, an obsolete 

statute that we don‟t need on the books any more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we need to revisit that. And I can remember 

during the last session we had people from SCN out here that 

were very disappointed in the Sask Party‟s choice to cut SCN, 

to sell off any assets, and again to certainly get rid of it in many 

ways, shapes, and forms that they said they would. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I would point out that the SCN programs itself is 

enjoyed by many people and we see on the news some of the 

impacts that it had immediately on our film industry. And the 

minister indicated that, during his comments, he said that this is 

not going to impact the film development in Saskatchewan, or 

the employment film tax credit program is still working, is still 

there. But the question I have is, how effective is it? Have you 

seen any increase in any programming? Have you seen 

actresses and actors flock to Saskatchewan? Have we seen any 

kind of programs that will benefit our province, you know, as a 

whole? And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t see any evidence of that. 

 

So despite the minister‟s assurances that, oh with the film 

employment tax credit is still there and is still able to use it, so 

SCN really wasn‟t necessary, really wasn‟t needed, well I beg 

to differ. I think the people of Saskatchewan thought SCN was 

a great opportunity for us. It was a great, great venue for our 

actors and actresses and film directors and writers and so on and 

so forth to use that as the vehicle in which they can ply their 

trade. And now many of them have picked up and left. And that 

was a really sad day when SCN stopped operations and they 

were sold off. And despite the minister‟s assurances that the 

film employment tax credit will take its spot and still do 

wonders for our province, it is not so in any way, shape, or 

form. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out in my final comment to 

the SCN, SCN‟s legacy that the Sask Party now wants to wipe 

clean from their books, that forever and a day, I would remind 

this minister and that government that SCN was never an 

obsolete statute. It was a real entity that provided great 

entertainment and provided great service and developed many 

great actors and writers and actresses and directors, and it 

created a great venue for people of Saskatchewan. It created a 

great opportunity for many of our young people who have since 

left. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they have morphed that into a obsolete 

statute and that‟s a crying shame. And that‟s one of the things I 

want to point out today to that minister, that perhaps in their 

world SCN is now an obsolete statute. But in our world and 

many people‟s world, it was a great venue, a great vehicle, a 

great tribute to the people of Saskatchewan and to all the people 

that utilized it to ply their trade and hone their skills, and many 

of them have still moved on and have sadly moved on. Some 

are still here, but most of them have sadly moved on. 

 

And again what you have here, Mr. Speaker, is a film 

development employment credit, whatever they call it. It 

doesn‟t have the same bang for the buck, not in any way, shape, 

or form. So I am saddened today that this is how the minister 

views this particular Bill as it‟s thrown into a lump the future of 

SCN and the history. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on the on-farm food safety programs, you 

know, obviously this Bill, as the minister alluded to, is an older 

Bill. Now that the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, CFIA is 

engaged, you begin to wonder, well how heavy is their 

engagement? Does it take over the role that this particular 

statute that the minister says is no longer needed, this particular 

law? Does the CFIA, do they have the proper resources? Do 

they have the farm-by-farm service in which it can do some of 

this work or is it done on a large scale basis? And obviously 

many farms out there provide food, not only to their children 

and to their families and their extended families, but I imagine 

they must sell some of their crop to different agencies and 

different markets. Now obviously we think that the agricultural 

community is very responsible, they‟re probably the best in the 

world and they‟re good at what they do. But is this service that 

they have right now, is CFIA working with them very closely to 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

make sure we don‟t get ourselves into any difficulties over the 

next year or several years over farm food safety? That‟s really 

important. 

 

And when you start moving off and start taking off the books, 

as the minister hopes to do today, some of these programs that 

are there, meant at the original introduction of these Acts, 

meant to protect the public and protect the families, do we have 

the proper systems in place now to make sure that the farm food 

safety and the delivery of that safe food is something that 

everybody watches and everybody takes seriously? 

 

Now CFIA, Mr. Speaker, as you know, they have been all over 

the news. As you remember, they‟re involved with the mad cow 

scare several years ago and they‟re a pretty active organization. 

They‟re out and about all over the place. And certainly I 

sometimes wonder, the CFIA, how big have they become and 

certainly how effective have they become? This is always 

questions that we ask. And obviously when I buy some goods 

off the markets, whether it‟s potatoes or eggs, you know, I think 

that CFIA is probably involved with them in some way, shape, 

or form and they probably are. 

 

Now on a smaller scale throughout Saskatchewan with many of 

the farm families, now do they have CFIA‟s involvement with 

their operation? Are they given advice? Are they given 

opportunity to get some of the professional people there to 

again make their food safer? And if there‟s any concerns, to 

address them immediately before they get to, before it‟s too 

late? These are some of the questions that you would have off 

the on-farm food safety programs that the minister, as part of 

this Bill, also wants to do away with. 

 

So a lot of questions about CFIA‟s effectiveness in dealing with 

that issue. We need to know that that‟s an effective tool. You 

want to get rid of all those smaller programs that were meant to 

deal with the smaller farm families on the smaller scale, sale of 

. . . whether it‟s produce or meat. If the CFIA‟s able to 

adequately fulfill those areas and they have the assurance that 

they can do that, then perhaps this Bill could go. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I underline perhaps. If there‟s no backup plan in place, 

you be very careful on that front. 

 

The other point I would also make, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

other statute that he‟s really brought about, was the soil drifting 

appeal Act. Certainly as you know that there‟s so many groups 

and organizations that are actively involved with watching how 

our land is handled. I mean the soil conservation group is a 

dynamic group. They‟ve got some great ideas. And I can 

remember them talking about a carbon storage concept that just 

kind of blew my mind at the time. And so we look at the soil 

conservation in general that there‟s a lot more people, certainly, 

looking at how we can be more responsible as a province, in 

concert with the producers, in how we can really watch how we 

protect our land and, of course, protect the water and the soil 

and the air and so on and so forth. So there‟s no question that 

there‟s good, good people that are involved with soil 

conservation. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And again I want to reiterate my points, that if there is no need 

for this Act because it‟s an archaic Act, but the new Act has a 

group of people that are highly interactive —they‟re intelligent, 

they‟re dynamic, they know what they‟re doing — if this Act is 

meant to come under their umbrella . . . And the soil 

conservation groups out there are really good people. I just 

remember some of the meetings that, you know, that we had 

with them. And if they‟re able to make sure that some of the 

challenges in this older Act are addressed and that it is assured 

to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, then and 

only then, Mr. Speaker, that you know, we can really say yes, 

this Bill, some of the areas we‟re talking about is being covered 

in other programs and being covered very well. Then and only 

then, when we get their qualifying comments, that we will 

believe that this Act is okay to go. 

 

And finally the special payments, Mr. Speaker, that we spoke 

about in terms of the widows. There‟s a two-year payment plan 

in which many of the widows that got their benefits and an 

exgratia payment, as the minister has spoke about. And I don‟t 

know if that two years is long enough, but I‟m assuming that all 

the matters that were dealt with. And if it‟s an Act that needs to 

go, certainly that‟s something that we could look at after we 

have had all the information in front of our members for the 

next several weeks. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in relation to Bill No. 26, I want to point out 

that whether it‟s the collective bargaining agreement between 

IPSCO and the Steelworkers or whether it‟s SCN‟s activities, 

whether it‟s on-farm food safety programs, soil drifting, of 

course the special payments we spoke about earlier, it‟s 

something that . . . These are programs and ideas that really 

served Saskatchewan well. 

 

And any time we see any kind of statutes becoming obsolete, 

we look at who‟s presenting them and we begin to question 

them on a continual basis, especially the Saskatchewan Party. 

When they talk about collective bargaining, when they talk 

about SCN, when they talk about on-farm food safety, when 

they talk about soil drifting, we always want to make sure that 

we pay close attention to what they‟re trying to do away in 

terms of wiping them clean from the books. And this is one 

particular Bill that we want to pay extreme attention to, to make 

sure that no services are being eroded, Mr. Speaker. So on that 

note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 26. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 29, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011. Mr. Speaker, The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997 governs the 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

operation of the maintenance enforcement office. The 

maintenance enforcement office, or MEO, was established in 

1986. It is responsible for recording and enforcing support 

orders registered with that office. The MEO continues to have 

one of the highest collection rates in Canada. Last year over 91 

per cent of payments due were collected for a record-setting 

total of $35 million in collections. 

 

The Act provides the MEO with enforcement mechanisms to 

help ensure that support payments pursuant to orders and 

agreements are complied with. The Act also includes 

mechanisms for the enforcement of orders and agreements not 

registered with the maintenance enforcement office if recipients 

choose to pursue enforcement on their own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the MEO regularly reviews and suggests updates 

to the legislation to ensure it is offering the public the best 

possible service. For example the Bill adds provisions for the 

calculation, collection, and enforcement of interest on 

outstanding arrears. The MEO is in the process of implementing 

a new customized computer system to keep track of 

maintenance orders and the payments owing and received. This 

amendment will authorize the MEO to charge interest following 

the implementation of the new computer system in summer 

2012. Interest collected will be payable to recipients and will 

encourage payers to make support payments in a timely 

manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill also adds a new provision to allow the 

court to order suspension of certain enforcement actions for a 

period of up to six months. Sometimes payers‟ circumstances 

change and they are no longer able to meet their obligations. In 

those cases, the support order can be changed through 

agreement or a new court order, but in some cases the payer 

may be unable to meet his or her obligations for only a short 

period of time. The new provision will give those payers time to 

resume regular payments. The suspension order will not affect 

enforcement already in place with respect to a driver‟s licence 

suspension, federal garnishment, federal licence suspension, or 

a registration in the land titles or personal property registry. 

 

The Bill also adds a provision that will allow the MEO to 

enforce a maintenance order against assets located in 

Saskatchewan in cases where the payer lives elsewhere and the 

maintenance order is being enforced in another jurisdiction. 

Currently if an order is received from another province for 

enforcement, the MEO takes over all enforcement against the 

payer. In some cases, the other jurisdiction may want the MEO 

to take over enforcement in its entirety but may ask the MEO to 

pursue a specific enforcement action only. For example, where 

a payer lives in another jurisdiction but works or owns property 

in Saskatchewan, the Act currently allows for a garnishment to 

be placed in Saskatchewan at the request of another jurisdiction, 

but other enforcement actions are not permitted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill also clarifies the confidentiality provision 

with respect to release of information retained in the 

maintenance enforcement office. Mr. Speaker, the amendments 

will revise the garnishment provisions to incorporate the new 

language for the seizure of accounts set out in The Enforcement 

of Money Judgments Act. Updating the language will ensure the 

consistency for both debtors and creditors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments will also allow the director of the 

MEO to complete a demand for information with respect to a 

recipient. Occasionally the maintenance enforcement office 

may require information about a recipient such as a new 

mailing address. 

 

These amendments will extend the timeline for service of a 

notice of attachment for an RRSP [registered retirement savings 

plan] from 15 to 30 days. This amendment will put the service 

requirements for a notice of attachment in line with other 

service requirements in the Act, which are all 30 days. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill clarifies that agreements filed 

pursuant to section 7.1 must amend an existing order filed with 

the maintenance enforcement office. This will not prohibit 

parties who reach an agreement without an existing order from 

having that agreement enforced; however, the agreement must 

be filed with the court and then registered with the MEO. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will equip the maintenance 

enforcement office with the necessary tools to enforce support 

orders. These amendments also confirm the government‟s 

commitment to the timely payment of support for children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

29, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2011. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 29, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

certainly want to thank the maintenance enforcement office for 

some of the work that they‟ve done, the fine work that they‟ve 

done. 

 

And I noticed that when we got the Bill, it‟s a fairly thick Bill. 

And the minister was very quickly going to some of the points 

that he‟s raised. And that‟s why it‟s important that we tell 

people out there that the opposition needs time to go through 

the Bills, shift through the information, to make sure there‟s 

nothing that they‟re trying to sneak under the table, so to speak. 

That is something that we want to make sure doesn‟t happen 

from our perspective as the opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the MEO, in terms of their role of trying to 

make sure that there‟s judgments against parents, whether it‟s a 

dad or the mom, that they‟re working and there‟s a divorce or 

some other incident, that if they have to, by way of court order, 

pay certain amount to their spouse or to their girlfriend to help 

that person support that child, I think it‟s absolutely crucial that 

we continue that work, Mr. Speaker. As you know, there‟s 

many, many times that families struggle to . . . having a single 

parent or an older guardian. And we see that, you know, that 

really challenges families in general. So from the NDP 

perspective, we think anything that we can do to support 

families is really, really crucial to the future success of us as a 

people and as a province. 

 

Now the maintenance enforcement office is one particular 

agency that does good work as, you know, as certainly as the 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

minister spoke about. Now having the highest recovery rate for 

the country is pretty impressive, Mr. Speaker. It‟s pretty 

impressive — 91 per cent of all the claims that the maintenance 

enforcement office deals with, that they get some kind of 

response. That‟s 9 out of 10 cases that they work with, and 

that‟s pretty, pretty impressive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when we look at the notion of collecting $35 million from 

those processes, then we have to, in our minds, understand that 

$35 million is going to families and going to children that may 

have been subjected to either a breakup in marriage or a 

breakup in a common-law relationship or some other activity 

that really threatened the family, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s absolutely 

important that we note what the maintenance enforcement 

office is all about. What they are is they‟re an independent 

office that goes after parents or husbands or wives that may 

have gone through a separation or a divorce and that they‟re 

ordered by the courts to make these child payments to the 

appropriate spouse or parent. And this office does great work. 

 

And now the minister wants to add on a few components to this 

Bill, to this fairly thick Bill, that talks about trying to have the 

maintenance enforcement office become a bit stronger in terms 

of being able to charge interest on the arrears because he 

mentioned that‟s coming through in the summer of 2012. And 

I‟m not sure when he talks about the arrears, what type of 

arrears. Is it a month-by-month arrears? Because when you talk 

about 91 per cent and $35 million, how much of that $35 

million is made on time? These are some of the things we 

would like to know. It‟s more being curious than trying to be 

critical. 

 

And I think what‟s important is that we need to find out what 

kind of interest is potentially being spoken about here. Is it 1 

million? Is it 5 million? Like what kind of scenario are we 

looking at? And that‟s why it‟s important. The principle is not 

wrong. If people are in arrears for their child support payments 

and interest is kind of the penalty they‟ll have to pay, then if 

that results in better care for the child or a more secure future 

for that family, then so be it. 

 

The other notion, of suspension of paying for up to six months 

based on some of the judgments that the maintenance 

enforcement office gets, you know there are many times there‟s 

changing circumstances that many parents, the mom or the dad, 

may go through. And obviously the maintenance enforcement 

office, I‟m assuming that part of their success rate is because 

they‟re dealing fairly with both spouses, both the mom and the 

dad, and that they‟re sitting down with them and they‟re really 

working closely with them to try and do one thing, and that‟s 

make sure that there is some support for the children through 

their office. 

 

Now if they‟re asking for a suspension of paying for up to six 

months, for whether it‟s the mom or the dad that can‟t make 

these payments, and it‟s something that I think that is probably 

one of the tools that they would need to make sure that the 

conciliation and the good work that‟s being done continues in 

that this is one of the tools that they would use for the benefit of 

the families, and I always refer to children, and I think that‟s 

probably not a bad thing overall. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s good to see that there is some 

collaboration and co-operation with different . . . Because 

there‟s so many different enforcement orders out there, whether 

people have assets located in Saskatchewan and are working in 

another province or another country, how does this affect them? 

That‟s important to clarify that as well. And the minister spoke 

about confidentiality being protected. I‟m assuming that was a 

given right from day one. Now the Act is talking about a greater 

amount of confidentiality, being able to strengthen the 

confidentiality aspect of the MEO. I think this is important that 

we offer that opportunity to them. So I would assume that if it‟s 

confidentiality that needs to be enhanced, that‟s another one of 

the tools that the office of the child maintenance enforcement 

could use to their benefit. Then I think we should support that 

as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s really, really important that people 

out there know that there is an office. There‟s single moms out 

there that need the support or single fathers that need the 

support from another spouse or ex-girlfriend or ex-boyfriend. 

And they‟re able to go to court and able to get a judgment 

against their partner or their former partner, and that they‟re 

ordered to make these payments on a monthly basis, that there 

is an office that works on making sure that you do get those 

payments. And as I pointed out that this Bill talks about the 

child maintenance order and how important this office and the 

work that the office does and how important it is to the families 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

So I want to just kind of point out again to the people that are 

listening, the office of the child enforcement office, they collect 

91 per cent of all the monies owed to the spouses of the children 

that are impacted by a divorce or separation. The court orders 

the payments. The child enforcement maintenance order is 

followed through with this office, and so far they‟ve collected 

$35 million that has gone to families. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot of people that don‟t realize the 

incredible powers that this particular office has. Like for 

example they can suspend your driver‟s licence, so if you need 

to have a licence to do your job and to make money, then guess 

what? If you have a judgment against you for a child or children 

that you had in a previous relationship and if there‟s a judgment 

against you, then guess what? If you don‟t make those 

payments, if you don‟t work with them, then you could lose 

your licence. And that‟s something that is very serious to the 

people out there, and that‟s why I point out that this office 

certainly has a lot of tools at its disposal and that perhaps that 

people ought to pay attention and certainly try and work 

through the office and try and work on a good plan to make sure 

you meet your obligations when you‟re able to meet them, and 

if you‟re able to meet them. 

 

So the questions we have certainly are on the interest on the 

arrears. What happens in that instance? Like what kind of 

money are we talking about? When people have assets located 

in Saskatchewan but they live elsewhere, how does that impact 

us as a jurisdiction? Is there a greater clarity on the rules? Is this 

covered under the Western Canada trade partnership 

agreement? Is this part of the deal that they worked on, and as 

well in terms of the ability to give the office here — the child 

maintenance office — give them greater tools and greater 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

strength? And, Mr. Speaker, we can‟t see how that would be 

hurtful to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That being said, there‟s still a number of questions that we 

have. There‟s still a number of ideas that we think we could 

propose as we talk about this particular Bill. And like the office 

itself, like the office itself we want to work with all the parents 

— the mom, the dad, or in this case it might be a few elderly 

people in different cases. We want to work with them to make 

sure what is best for them to at least have the group as happy as 

possible. And that‟s our role as opposition because our role is 

not to blame nor to criticize nor to judge. We‟re simply here to 

do one thing, is to work with this particular office to help 

people meet their obligations and thereby strengthening the 

children‟s future. And as the great province of Saskatchewan, 

what is wrong with that particular scenario? 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we want to take a greater amount 

of time to look at this Bill and understand why it‟s so important 

to us, and therefore I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 

29. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member of Athabasca has moved 

second reading to adjourn debate on Bill No. 29, The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 30, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. 

 

This Act consequentially amends 11 English-only Acts that 

refer to garnishments pursuant to The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. In each case, the amendment 

makes a change to refer to seizure instead of garnishment to 

ensure consistency with amendments to The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act, 1997 introduced in this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

30, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

the second reading of Bill No. 30, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

am pleased to stand on behalf of the opposition to offer our first 

comments on this particular Bill. Obviously we made some 

great comments, and certainly we tried to educate as best we 

can through the different channels that are out there the 

importance of the child enforcement maintenance office and 

how important it is for the future stability of our children. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 30 is a consequential action to that 

particular office. And we have a few questions on that, like 

obviously the minister was quite short in terms of doing his 

introduction. And we need to ask the questions. And I picked up 

the wording: seizure as opposed to garnishment. Now what 

exactly does that mean in total? When I‟m talking about the 

notion of . . . What kind of money are we dealing with here? 

You know, we talk about seizure as opposed to garnishment, is 

this a better tool? Is this a greater amount of money going to the 

children, as an example? 

 

So it‟s a consequential amendment to the main Bill. And like 

anything else, we want to know what the impact is and how this 

is going to benefit the children impacted by the separation or 

the divorce. So on that point, Mr. Speaker, it is a very small 

point, and it‟s a very small consequential effort here. So I‟m 

going to move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 30, and then 

that‟s my motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 30, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 

sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 31, The Enforcement of 

Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide for the recognition and 

enforcement of foreign protection orders in the same expedited 

manner as is now provided for out-of-province Canadian 

protection orders. Under this Bill, out-of-country protection 

orders can be immediately enforced by the police as if that 

order had been made by the Court of Queen‟s Bench for 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan will be the first province to 

introduce this Bill as recommended by the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this House will recall that in 2008, 

The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 2002 was 

amended to provide for special rules for the enforcement of 

Canadian civil protection orders. A Canadian civil protection 

order was defined to mean an order made in any other Canadian 

jurisdiction that prohibits a broad range of activity from 

communication to actual contact that can be used by one person 

to intimidate, threaten, coerce, or otherwise harass another 

person. A foreign civil protection order will cover the same 

subject matter in an order made by a foreign court. 

 

As with the Canadian civil protection order under this Bill, a 

foreign civil protection order is deemed to be an order of the 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

Saskatchewan Court of Queen‟s Bench. As such it can be 

enforced by law enforcement agencies in the same manner as a 

local court order, regardless of whether it has been registered in 

Saskatchewan in the regular manner. 

 

The amendments also extend good-faith liability protection to 

law enforcement agencies that take steps to enforce an order. 

The ease of international cross-border travel combined with the 

severe risk to an individual who cannot obtain immediate 

recognition and enforcement of a foreign protection order by 

policing agencies makes the extension of this approach to 

foreign protection orders a priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill and the previous amendments for 

Canadian protection orders implement recommendations of the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada. The Uniform Law 

Conference previously concluded that where a Canadian court 

has determined that an individual needs protection, it should be 

immediately enforceable insofar as that is possible. Rather than 

presuming the court may have got it wrong or acted 

inappropriately, the Uniform Law Conference concluded that a 

presumptive approach should be to respect the order until it is 

effectively challenged, rather than refusing to enforce the order 

until it is formally registered or duplicated in Saskatchewan. 

This Bill will extend that approach to foreign courts. 

 

There are no final financial or property ownership consequences 

that stem from such enforcement. The order may be challenged 

substantively the next day. In an emergency situation with an 

individual potentially at risk, the choice of recognizing orders 

from foreign states over formalistic approach enforcement 

requirements is consistent with the principled victims-first 

approach to this issue. Mr. Speaker, out of an abundance of 

caution, this Bill does allow for the listing of the regulations of 

foreign states whose orders will not be enforced. Such steps 

should be rare. 

 

The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act is also amended by 

this Act to coordinate this new procedural option with the 

existing process for the enforcement of foreign judgments. Mr. 

Speaker, in my view the balance of interests protecting an 

individual at risk and the possibility of violence arising from 

failure to act strongly tilts towards expedited recognition and 

enforcement of foreign protection orders. Therefore I will invite 

all members of this Assembly to protect groups for this 

conclusion and this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 

second reading of Bill No. 31, The Enforcement of Canadian 

Judgments Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 31, The Enforcement of Canadian 

Judgments Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to thank the Assembly for certainly taking the time to 

present this Bill, and all the different groups and organizations 

that may be watching this Bill, and to encourage them to do one 

thing, and that is certainly participate in the discussions and 

bring forward some of the concerns and issues that they may 

have on this Bill or on any other Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I understand from the Bill itself, that is if there‟s a 

foreign country out there that has a protection order against any 

individual or person, then we as a province and we as a country 

would certainly want to kind of accept that ruling and that 

judgment, and to offer the same protection and the same legal 

support for any individual that may come from a different 

country, may come to Saskatchewan as their new home, and to 

be able to enforce a judgment, a foreign judgment, that they 

may have in their favour. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure who the intended target for this 

protection, so to speak, in Saskatchewan saying, look if there‟s 

a foreign judgment against a certain individual, not to approach 

this person while living in our province. We would support that 

and we would certainly enforce that. At the outset, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m assuming that many of the people that are moving to 

Saskatchewan, many of them may need that kind of support. 

And certainly from the NDP perspective, we think we should do 

all we can to protect families, not just in Saskatchewan, but 

throughout the world as well. So I want to point out, Mr. 

Speaker, that just for the sake of the people who might be 

listening, the: 

 

‘foreign civil protection order’ means a foreign 

judgment, or a portion of a foreign judgment, made by the 

court in a foreign state, except for a foreign state 

prescribed in the regulations, that prohibits a specified 

individual from: 

 

(a) being in physical proximity to a specified person or 

following a specified person from place to place; 

 

(b) contacting or communicating with, either directly or 

indirectly, a specified person; 

 

(c) attending at or within a certain distance of a 

specified place or location; or 

 

(d) engaging in molesting, annoying, harassing or 

threatening conduct directed at a specified person. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, foreign judgment is defined in The 

Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act and that includes a 

decision that would, if the decision were a final decision, be a 

foreign judgment pursuant to that Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am assuming the purpose of the Act today 

is to make sure that if there is a foreign judgment against person 

A that we — as a jurisdiction, as a province — that we will 

respect that judgment against . . . from that particular country or 

state, and that we‟d do all we can to offer our support and of 

course our protection as a province, as certainly as we would to 

any other person that has been born and raised in Canada or, for 

that matter, Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we obviously see a lot of the immigrant 

community that has come to Saskatchewan, and we see a lot of 

people from different countries. And whether they are from the 

States or whether they‟re from Australia or whether they‟re 

from Britain or whether they‟re from India, we see many of 

those folks that have made Saskatchewan their home over the 

last number of years. And we are quite pleased to be able to see 

that particular group of people join us as a province because 

they have great skill, they have great contribution to our land, 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

and that‟s the basis of how many of our . . . the new countries of 

Canada and the States were built. They were built on people 

coming to make this new land their home. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So I think if there is an opportunity under this particular Bill, if 

that there is some foreign judgment against certain individuals 

not to contact other individuals — and they may come here to 

try and create some problems for our new families or our new 

immigrants — that we would certainly do all we can to support 

and protect them. Now what‟s important is that it‟s part of the 

ongoing work of making sure that Saskatchewan‟s a safe place 

in which you can build your future, in which you can raise your 

families, and in which you can do great things, that they ought 

to be safe in their community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this particular . . . to enforce the 

foreign judgments Act is probably one step that is necessary. 

There‟s probably other steps that are necessary to make sure 

that many of these newcomers feel welcome to our community 

and feel protected by our province. And that they have to, of 

course, assist us to making sure that people know that this 

problem existed before they got here, and that‟s always 

something that‟s important that they undertake. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what you want to be also pointed out is that 

it‟s a nice opportunity to be able to share the land and share this 

protection and share this support with our newcomers. But we 

also must make sure that we respect a lot of the aboriginal 

community in the province as well, that they be afforded much 

of the same opportunity, the people that have made the 

community of Saskatchewan their home, that they be afforded 

the same opportunity as well. 

 

So this could be a wide-ranging impact Bill that could have a 

lot of different people involved. I am assuming that there isn‟t a 

whole bunch of problems attached to this particular Bill, but to 

the people that are impacted by it that do have a foreign 

judgment in their favour, that as a province we want to respect 

that. And we certainly want to offer them as much support and 

advice as we can while respective of their particular position 

and their ability to help Saskatchewan. My only point is that we 

make sure that we offer it to all groups of people and that it not 

just be constrained and confined to a select number of groups or 

people in general. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that the Bill No. 31, an Act 

to amend the enforcement of Canadian judgment Act, be 

adjourned. And I think it‟s important that people understand 

that this Bill has some good merit to it, but you need to take the 

time to study it. We need to take the time to ask questions of 

various people, and we need to take the time to make sure that 

the impact and the direction that the minister has alluded to in 

his Bill, that we make sure it‟s effective and that it stays the 

course and that it‟s of benefit to the people we‟re trying to 

serve. So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 31. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 31, The Enforcement of 

Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 32 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les 

ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 32, The Inter-jurisdictional 

Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011. Mr. Speaker, this Act 

establishes the procedure for registration of a foreign support 

order for enforcement in Saskatchewan. It also establishes the 

procedure for obtaining or varying a provincial support order 

where one party resides in Saskatchewan and the other party 

lives in another jurisdiction. This Act is based on model 

legislation adopted in all provinces except Quebec. 

 

Since 2004 the national interjurisdictional support 

subcommittee has monitored the operation of the process in 

each jurisdiction. In June 2010, the subcommittee 

recommended amendments to improve the model legislation. 

Saskatchewan will be the third province to introduce 

amendments to its legislation, following Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments will require the court to apply the 

law of Saskatchewan first when considering an application. At 

present when a Saskatchewan court receives an application 

pursuant to the Act for support of a child, the court must first 

determine if the child is entitled to support under the law of the 

jurisdiction where the child lives. If not, then the court will 

apply the law of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is always easier for a court to apply its own laws 

first, and in most cases, the child will be entitled to support 

under Saskatchewan law. This amendment will speed up the 

process as time will not have to be spent deciphering the law of 

another jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes it is unclear from the order itself or the 

court file if an order was made pursuant to federal or provincial 

legislation. That is important because if the original order was 

made under federal legislation, the ISO [interjurisdictional 

support orders] process under this Act is not available. In some 

circumstances, an applicant may start a variation application 

and find out several months later that their application should 

have proceeded under the Divorce Act, which is of course a 

federal Act. Requiring the court to state in the order the 

legislation under which the order was made will go a long way 

towards eliminating the need for multiple applications to be 

made or filed with the court. 

 

During an ISO application, the court in the reciprocating 

jurisdiction may request additional information from the 

applicant, and this information must be provided within the 

time period set out in the Act. The amendments will reduce the 

time period for providing information from 18 to 12 months. 

Eighteen months is a long time and can substantially delay 

resolution of the ISO application which, depending on the 

jurisdiction, can take anywhere from 3 to 12 months to be heard 

by the court. Twelve months will still provide the applicant with 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

ample time to retrieve and provide any additional information 

required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments will also add a new provision to 

establish location services in order to allow other jurisdictions 

to request a search for a person in Saskatchewan prior to 

sending an application to the ISO unit. Saskatchewan‟s ISO unit 

regularly receives applications from jurisdictions that have 

reason to believe, but cannot confirm, that a respondent is living 

in Saskatchewan. After an application is received, the ISO unit 

may determine that the respondent does not live in 

Saskatchewan, and the application would then be sent back to 

the originating jurisdiction while it continues to search for the 

respondent. Or the application may be forwarded to another 

jurisdiction where the respondent is believed to be living. 

Obviously this sending of documents back and forth can delay 

the ISO process. Therefore adding this new provision will 

definitely streamline the process. 

 

The amendments will also require that foreign jurisdictions 

provide proof of their law governing duration of support. When 

we are dealing with other Canadian jurisdictions, it is relatively 

easy to determine duration of support. However, when a foreign 

order is sent to Saskatchewan for registration, determining the 

law that governs the duration of support is more difficult. This 

amendment will clarify that in cases where Saskatchewan‟s ISO 

unit is unable to determine duration of support in the 

jurisdiction where an order was made, that duration can be 

determined by Saskatchewan law. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will replace the phrase 

“ordinarily resident” with “habitually resident” to be consistent 

with the Hague Convention on the International Recovery of 

Child Support and Other Forms of Family Maintenance. This 

government is committed to ensuring that support orders made 

in other jurisdictions can be registered and varied in 

Saskatchewan with maximum efficiency and minimum delays. 

This will allow enforcement to begin and support payments to 

be made for those children who require them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

32, The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 

2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 32, The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I‟m pleased to stand on behalf of the official opposition to 

offer our initial comments on this particular Bill, Bill No. 32. 

 

At the outset, the minister described what some of the impacts 

and what some of the aspirations of the Bill were. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the interjurisdictional support order, ISO, as he made 

reference, he wants to make a bunch of amendments to the 

interjurisdictional support order to make sure that the 

enforcement of maintenance orders that Saskatchewan has, that 

they are consistent, that there‟s some clarity, and certainly there 

is some effectiveness in some of the work that they want to do 

and aspire to do, Mr. Speaker. So I guess to the people that are 

kind of listening to this particular Act, what the minister‟s 

hoping to do is to make sure that when you have a child 

maintenance order in effect for Saskatchewan, that as it relates 

to other jurisdictions and certainly other countries, that there‟s a 

bit more clarity on how we‟re going to deal with this particular 

challenge. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we know, that there is certainly all kinds 

of different laws out there that govern different states, different 

countries, different jurisdictions, different traditions, and 

certainly different cultures. And it‟s really, really difficult to be 

able to ascertain whether there is continuity under this whole 

concept of making sure that if you have children, no matter 

where you‟re from, that you take care of them or you pay if 

you‟re not taking care of them. 

 

Now the policy and the point is pretty straightforward, Mr. 

Speaker. But the problem we have is that there is so much — 

there‟s a myriad of laws and customs and traditions — that it 

gets really difficult to try and figure out what‟s best and how 

best to approach this particular challenge of making sure 

parents, no matter where they are in this world, have the 

obligation and by a court order we have the means to enforce 

that they are paying for child care as they should be. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see that there is going to be 

some clarity between the province of Saskatchewan and the 

federal government on which law would apply in the case of a 

separation, as the minister spoke about, that divorce court is of 

course a federal matter. I‟m pleased to hear that today. I didn‟t 

realize it was a federal matter, but since it is, being able to 

clarify whether there is a different system in place between a 

federal process versus a provincial process, and in the meantime 

if there‟s all the confusion of who does what and which law 

applies and which group of people would benefit better under 

this jurisdiction or that jurisdiction, that‟s always helpful to the 

office of the child enforcement folks because they want to be 

able to have some clarity. And certainly confusion doesn‟t help 

anybody at all. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if there is some clarity under which law and 

which jurisdiction applies and there‟s some good, solid 

collaboration from Saskatchewan‟s perspective and there‟s 

good exchange of information, then perhaps the clarity will 

come. But as the minister spoke about, from what I understand 

is that if there isn‟t that clarity, there isn‟t that clear ability to 

understand exactly what the family should receive, then the 

Saskatchewan law would apply. I think the minister made that 

point, and I want to make sure I understood his Bill clearly. So 

in the case that there is some confusion, then Saskatchewan law 

would apply. 

 

So when you have inter-jurisdictional dispute over children, 

then what you want to do is be able to make sure two things 

happen. Number one is that you follow the person around the 

world if you have to, to make sure they meet their obligation. 

And secondly that there is some good . . . that your law is as 

good as the next person‟s law or the next country‟s law, and if 

it‟s not as good, then we would use our law as kind of the basis 

for determining what that child should receive from that parent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there‟s also the time in which people can 

appeal and to hold up the process. And I think time is always a 

critical issue on these disputes. There‟s no question that there‟s 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

probably a lot of hard feelings and a lot of difficult cases, and 

there‟s a lot of emotion to this process. But as you let the thing 

drag on for a long time, it doesn‟t do anybody any good. And 

obviously if you can appeal something and allow it to fester for 

two, three, four years, then frustration sets in and then anger. 

And what happens at the end of the day is that this thing drags 

out and the families and the children get hurt even more. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of appealing, I think location is 

really, really important because which place are you going to 

respect as the place that each of the parents or the divorced or 

separated couple should go to, to make sure that, you know, it‟s 

a place where it is as neutral as possible and that it‟s as 

comforting as possible to both parties, in particular those that 

have the children or have custody of the children. I think 

location is pretty important. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Bill goes on to make a few other points 

and I think that‟s the reason why we have to take the time to 

understand this Bill, so that the folks that are out there listening 

to some of the activity on what this Bill No. 32 is about, really 

it‟s about amending the inter-jurisdictional support orders to 

make sure that people that may have a child enforcement order 

from Alberta or Quebec or Maritimes or the States, that we 

would work closely with all those agencies to do a couple of 

things: to make sure the order follows them around; to make 

sure we have clarity in what their law is compared to our law, 

and in the event that there isn‟t that clarity and fairness to their 

law, our law would apply. And that‟s exactly what the minister 

wanted to make as a point in this particular Bill, and of course 

we have a lot of questions on the Bill. 

 

In terms of the exchange of foreign currency, obviously that we 

want to make sure that their rate is the same as ours in terms of 

real money to the folks. Visitation rights, all these things of 

course, those are all federal matters as the minister alluded to, 

but under the child enforcement Act, I imagine that exchange 

rates and all those issues are discussed and that there is certainly 

a lot of questions around, well where do we meet, and how soon 

do we have to discuss this matter? What do we do to make this 

thing work? These are all issues I think that are all pretty 

consistent and common sense in terms of what the Bill is trying 

to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there is a lot more we‟d like to ask 

questions on this particular Bill, but at this time I move that we 

adjourn the debate on Bill No. 32. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 32, The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 33, The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2011. This Act was designed to assist tenants 

in a tight housing market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, examples have been provided recently of 

landlords imposing substantial rent increases. With current rules 

and low vacancy rates, it can be very difficult for a tenant to 

find alternate accommodations within the notice period. To 

address this issue, Mr. Speaker, this Bill adds to the amount of 

time between rent increases on periodic tenancies. The notice 

period will change from six months to twelve months for 

landlords who do not belong to an approved landlords‟ 

association. This would provide tenants with additional time to 

find alternative accommodations if the rent increase is higher 

than they can afford. It will encourage the landlords to become 

members of a responsible and ethical landlords‟ association. 

Such membership will permit rent increases to be applied every 

six months. 

 

One such landlords‟ association is the Saskatchewan Rental 

Housing Industry Association, SRHIA. SRHIA requires its 

members to adhere to a code of ethics. It calls for tenants to be 

treated fairly. It also has a program, announced in October 

2011, for mediation between landlords and tenants if a tenant is 

faced with a large rent increase. The program also helps tenants 

find alternative accommodations if necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the effect of this legislation is to provide tenants 

with either access to a mediation program offered by a 

landlords‟ association or additional time to find alternative 

accommodations. In addition, the amendments clarify that, for 

landlords who belong to a landlords‟ associations, rent can be 

increased more than twice per year, and for landlords who do 

not belong to an association, rent can be increased more than 

once . . . cannot be increased more than once per year. This is in 

line with legislation in most other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation also provides for a period of time 

before the first rent increase after a tenancy begins. For 

landlords who are association members, the first increase 

cannot be earlier than one year from the start of the tenancy. For 

other landlords, the tenant must be free of rent increases for 18 

months. This will provide some additional stability in the rental 

market. 

 

Next, respecting fixed-term tenancies, this Bill amends section 

55. Fixed-term tenancies are for a specific term such as one 

year. Currently the tenancy agreement ends at the conclusion of 

the term unless the landlord and tenant have entered into a new 

tenancy agreement. However, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

requirement for either party to notify the other of their 

intentions respecting a new tenancy agreement. Examples have 

been raised in which the tenant is surprised to learn that, in 

entering into a new tenancy agreement at the end of the term, 

the rent is increased substantially and with no notice to them. 

The tenant in these situations who has not made alternative 

arrangements is left with no choice but to pay the increased 

amount. 

 

By making this section subject to regulations, it will be possible 

to pass regulations that provide additional rules for notices by 

either or both the landlord and the tenant for fixed-term 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

tenancies if necessary. Furthermore, there is nothing at present 

to prevent a landlord from entering into successive fixed-term 

tenancies for very short terms to avoid the requirements of 

section 54. If this becomes a problem, the amendment to section 

55 will allow regulations to control that practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will pass regulations pursuant to this authority 

only after thorough consultations with interested parties. 

Providing tenants with additional time to make arrangements 

either for the increase in rent or to find alternate 

accommodation along with our programs to increase housing 

availability will ease the burden on tenants while being fair to 

landlords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

33, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 33, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to stand today to offer our initial comments on this 

particular Bill, The Residential Tenancies Act, and the minister 

certainly spoke about what they had planned to do in relation to 

trying to be able to control the rent increases that different 

landlords may have on folks that are being certainly squeezed 

from, you know, from my perspective in terms of being able to 

have rents that they could afford. 

 

Now as an opposition, we were hearing a lot of the horror 

stories of people whose rent are increasing 30 to 40 per cent, 

and they‟re being told now that you either pay that amount or 

you‟re out. And this is a problem that‟s all throughout 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You have probably been subjected 

to, as many others have been subjected in the political world, 

that you‟re getting these concerns and these complaints. 

 

Now what we wanted to do as an opposition is to try and see if 

there‟s some solid measuring which we can do to protect the 

renters throughout the province of Saskatchewan because they 

are subjected to the whims of, many times, of landlords that can 

do what they want and when they want. 

 

Now obviously the minister has taken a half measure here by 

saying, look, we can‟t increase your rent; we‟re going to have to 

. . . without notice. We‟re going to do that from 6 months to 12 

months. Now what that is, Mr. Speaker, while many people 

may think that‟s a good step, the problem still persists. The 

problem will still exist. 

 

And I notice the language that he used when he talked about the 

landlord may assist the tenant in finding a new spot. Well I can 

tell you, most of the landlords I know aren‟t going to help you 

find a new place if they want you out of there. And what‟s 

important, Mr. Speaker, is that they shouldn‟t be putting 

language in there that is not going to be of any benefit to the 

tenant at all, because we‟ve seen that throughout the . . . 

especially in the cities where this is a growing, growing 

problem. Rent increases and rental rates are just going through 

the roof and there‟s nothing that seems to be addressing that 

particular challenge. 

And the two points that we have that the Sask Party say to these 

folks that are being subjected to all this unfair treatment and, I 

say, unfair rent increases, is that let the markets decide and no, 

they can‟t increase your rent. We‟re going to increase the rate or 

when they can increase your rent from six months to 12 months. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not good enough. That is not good 

enough in any way, shape, or form. 

 

And the other thing that‟s important, they talked about a 

prescribed rental or a prescribed landlord association. Now the 

minister made reference to that particular group and we would 

like to know who selected the group, who created the group, 

who started the group and how many memberships do they 

have on this particular group, and are they guided by a code of 

ethics? Well what are those ethics? We need to see them. And 

how is the consultation process done when they brought the 

name of this group forward? Were any of the renters or the 

tenants, were any of them involved or impacted or involved in 

the discussion when this issue was brought forward? I can 

almost guarantee you that they weren‟t. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there‟s hundreds of people that I know that 

have gone through rent increases in the last three or four years. 

It‟s just a bit too late when they brought these amendments 

forward because many of them have either crammed together in 

an apartment or smaller apartments. Many of them have gone 

home. Many of them have quit their jobs. Many of them simply 

can‟t afford their rent rates in some of the larger centres. And 

this is a bit too little too late. And, Mr. Speaker, the language is 

also very benign in terms of trying to hold a lot of the landlords 

and landlord properties to account for some of the increases that 

they‟ve had or have subjected too many tenants to. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s a crying shame. 

 

Now what I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is obviously we 

don‟t like this Bill. At the outset I don‟t like this Bill at all 

because all this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is simply delay, delay, 

delay. Because eventually the increases are going to come and 

many families cannot afford those rent increases. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what that means is that they have to look for a new 

place that they could afford. And guess what? If there‟s nothing 

else that they can afford, then they have to do two things: either 

give up food or shut off their power from morning till night and 

then, Mr. Speaker, then maybe only then they can afford to 

keep the roof over their children‟s head or the roof over 

themselves. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know a lot of the older people that still 

want to live independently, Mr. Speaker. They want to live 

independently. They live on a fixed income. Now how does this 

impact them? How does it help them, Mr. Speaker? Well guess 

what? If I‟m a landlord, I‟m not allowed to increase your rent 

for one year. I‟m going to tell you, look, I‟m going to give you 

a year but your rent‟s going to increase, and there‟s nothing 

here about percentage. Are they allowed to increase a certain 

percentage? 

 

And there‟s nothing whatsoever that talks about protecting the 

tenant‟s rights and to make sure they‟re not being gouged and to 

make sure that they have the ability to recover when there are 

rent increases. It‟s not an issue of time; it‟s an issue of 

affordability. That‟s what the issue is. And not one, not one 

word in this Bill talks about the affordability challenge. 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

It simply talks about the time, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s a shame. 

There are hundreds of people — people that are students, 

people that live on fixed incomes, families that are struggling, 

low-income families, students, the list goes on — that have no 

choice but to rent and they‟re at the mercy of landlords and 

different businesses like Boardwalk that rents out these places, 

Mr. Speaker, and they are the ones that own the property. 

They‟ll set the rates and there‟s nothing that the Saskatchewan 

Party will do or can do to change that. 

 

And that‟s when we have Bills of this sort come forward, we as 

an opposition saying, well that‟s not the answer. Nothing is 

being solved here. Nothing is being settled here. There is no 

power to the people in terms of dealing with the rent challenges. 

Rents are going up. They‟re going up steady. They‟re 

unaffordable. And quite frankly, this Bill doesn‟t do nothing to 

address the issue that was brought to this minister‟s attention. 

And once again we‟re getting the same old response of, well 

we‟ll handle it. But guess what, Mr. Speaker? Nothing will 

come of it. It‟s the same old, same old. They say one thing and 

they do the exact opposite. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know what the solution is overall for 

trying to get the Sask Party to move on this issue, but we see it 

every day. We see it every single day where people can‟t afford 

the place that they‟re renting. And what happens is parents 

subsidize some of the children or the kids going to school, you 

know, and they work long hours. Some have two or three jobs. 

Some people skimp on things that are very basic and many of 

them become the working poor. Because between having a job 

and child care and rent, now the rent increases, many of them 

simply can‟t afford to live. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what do they do? What options do they have? 

And the other options you have is you just have to try and find a 

different place. And what happens? You find a different place. 

Guess what? The rent‟s going to be the same darn thing. The 

same high price. So really this isn‟t an option. Okay, the option 

the Sask Party has is, instead of increasing your rent once every 

six months, they‟ve got to wait a year now. Well guess what? It 

buys them six months, but there‟s no solution at the end of the 

six months. And that‟s why when you have these kind of Acts 

coming forward, we in the opposition really watch very clearly 

and carefully and we look to it to see if there‟s the right 

language in there, and there is no language in this Bill that talks 

about affordability. 

 

Now I listened to the Minister of Finance rant today about the 

fact that it took a lot of low-income people off the income tax 

roll. Well that probably translates to 20 bucks a month, 200 

bucks a year for 90 per cent of those families. So stop using that 

language when you know that the net benefit to the low-income 

families is minimal. It‟s maybe 20 bucks at the most. 

 

How about you start talking about rent and affordability of rent 

for the low-income people and the working poor and the 

students and the elderly throughout our province? Then people 

will begin to understand that perhaps you guys understand what 

they‟re going through. Not to protect the interests of the real 

estate market and of course many of the landlords that are 

gouging some of these people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate my point earlier that when we talk 

about affordability as an NDP caucus, we‟re talking about 

affordability. We‟re not talking about managing time for the 

landlords. We are talking about affordability for many people in 

this province that simply can‟t afford the rent and the rent 

increases that they are subjected to. Now it‟s not every six 

months; now it‟s once a year. And I made that point earlier. It 

doesn‟t matter when it comes. The fact is the affordability 

matter is what the issue is and that‟s what we are trying to get 

this particular minister to do. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And I go back to my point to the people of Saskatchewan as a 

whole, that they simply don‟t care. The Saskatchewan Party 

simply don‟t care. If you‟re paying that much rent, guess what? 

We don‟t care. Because if they cared, if they had any shred of 

concern for your issue they would be doing that, they would be 

working with you and addressing the affordability issue. All 

they‟ve done with this particular Bill today was simply extend 

the time. Extend the time. That‟s all they‟ve done today for a 

landlord or a landlady to say, guess what? I can‟t raise your rent 

within six months. I can do it in a year from now. But it‟s 

coming. And the Bill or the Act says I have to help you find a 

new place. I don‟t have to. If I want to, I will. Well I don‟t think 

I‟ll find any landlord or landlady who is going to help you find 

a new location once you‟ve been moved out of your place 

because you can‟t afford it a year from now. That doesn‟t buy a 

lot of time, Mr. Speaker, but it certainly doesn‟t address the 

issue of affordability either. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the association that the minister spoke about 

in his Bill, I‟ve got to ask — the question is, who set up the 

association? Are they a volunteer association? Is there an 

analysis of their members? Like, what do you have to do to be a 

member of this association? Do you have to be a good landlord 

and have a nice clean manicured front lawn? What are the 

parameters for being part of this association? Now once you are 

part of an association, and say company A is a member of this 

association. Company A has a tenant. They know this tenant 

can‟t afford his unit a year from now, and company B is also in 

the same association. Well then company A is going to tell his 

associate, company B, well I‟m getting rid of this person and a 

year from now. They can‟t afford it so, guess what, I don‟t think 

you want this person in your unit too. Because they can‟t afford 

my unit at this rate, they‟re not going to afford your unit at that 

rate either. So company A and company B, in essence they 

don‟t want this tenant at all. 

 

So where does the tenant go? There‟s no other competing 

organization or competing association, so what happens here? 

So obviously they start going to the different housing 

authorities, the housing associations that are set up for 

low-income houses. Well their rents are going through the roof 

as well. They‟re understocked. They need more stock, and they 

also need to have more support from the province. Well, this 

Bill doesn‟t apply to those guys. It says very clearly in this Bill, 

and the Minister didn‟t pull it out, but the Minister . . . I want to 

point out that as part of the section here on page 2 item 6: 

 

This section does not apply to rent increases made by a 

public housing authority on the basis of an increase in a 

tenant‟s income. 

 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

So what that is saying is that the housing authorities that are 

out there, you‟re still paying 25 or 27 per cent of your 

income, no matter what. This rule does not apply to you. So if 

you live in a housing unit in P.A. [Prince Albert] or live in a 

housing unit in Buffalo Narrows and you work at the mine 

and you get a nice little increase, well guess what? They 

don‟t have to give you a year‟s notice here. That doesn‟t 

apply to you. Because you‟re working, making good money, 

you‟re going to pay more under the Sask Party government. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s another problem is they‟re very 

selective as to who they‟re dealing with. 

 

So the rent increases that we‟re talking about and 

complaining about, and we‟ve got petition after petition and 

concern from different renters and all these different groups 

of people out there — they‟re not being heard at all, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re not being heard at all. And I think this 

residential tenancies Act, Bill No. 33 . . . I want to point out 

that I think we should start getting the people mobilized. We 

should start getting the people mobilized and visiting our 

Assembly, get as many tenants‟ associations and groups of 

people in here to start telling this government that, hey, it‟s 

not about the time issue that you‟re talking about in this Bill; 

it‟s about the affordability. Like, get it figured out. It‟s about 

the affordability of our rent. 

 

Rent is too high. Yes, you can stop the rent increasing from 

six months to one year, but that‟s not going to address the 

problem of high rent. It‟s simply delaying the inevitable 

increase that is going to come. And if you have to go to a 

landlord that is part of an association that you‟ve set up, well 

we‟re going to get the same treatment off this company as a 

company five or six blocks down the road, because they‟re all 

part of the association and all part of the Sask Party club. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what‟s important is that people of 

Saskatchewan are seeing all the activity around us. They‟re 

seeing a great opportunity for a lot of folks, and yet many of 

them seem bypassed by the opportunities. And if they do get a 

job, they get entry-level job, and then their wife goes to work, 

and then they have to look after children through daycare. They 

look at the rent and the rent increases. It just gets so hard on 

families. And the instability that they go through is frustrating, 

it‟s maddening, and it‟s very hurtful to the basis of our families. 

So the point I would raise, Mr. Speaker, is that this Bill doesn‟t 

do any justice whatsoever to that particular matter. 

 

Now the minister can dress this up as much as he wants, you 

know, from six months to twelve months, but it doesn‟t address 

in any way, shape, or form . . . Not one shred of any evidence to 

address the affordability issue is contained in this Bill — not 

one word of affordability, Mr. Speaker. And in fact this 

government goes out of its way to make sure that they point out, 

oh, anybody living in the housing groups out there that have 

units, well that doesn‟t apply to you. They can increase your 

rent. The moment you get a better paying job — bang — next 

day your rent‟s increased. That‟s exactly what this Bill is 

saying, as I pointed out earlier. 

 

So if you want to help folks with the issue of rent, the whole 

issue is affordability and the rate of rent; it‟s not the timeline. It 

never has been about the timeline. You need to get that squared 

away in your thinking as a minister. The message is, it‟s not 

about timelines; it‟s about affordability, Mr. Minister. And 

that‟s a point that I would raise to him in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, because people out there are getting tired of waiting, 

they‟re getting tired of being pushed around, and they‟re getting 

tired of feeling the constant pressure of not being able to afford 

a home for their family. 

 

And if you think that the moms and the dads out there, or the 

guardians or the elders that may have grandkids in their care, 

imagine the stress and the strain that they go through every day. 

Every month they know that the 1st of the month is coming and 

rent is due. And we just seem to be picking up pennies here and 

there to try and make those payments. And what does the Sask 

Party have to offer? Oh, they won‟t be able to increase your rent 

without notifying you for, not six months now, one year. 

 

So the vast majority of people are saying, well we got a 

six-month reprieve here on death row, and that‟s not going to 

solve the problem because eventually we‟re going to have to 

face the eviction notice because you can‟t afford the rent. 

 

Now how does that impact families, Mr. Speaker? How does 

that impact the psyche of a dad or a mom or a grandmom? How 

does that affect them overall? Many of them probably can‟t 

sleep at night. Many of them have a difficult time trying to 

figure things out. Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of families, an 

incredible amount of families, suffer through this problem each 

and every single day in our province. Each and every single 

day. And has there been any increase in affordable housing 

units? None. Has there been any issue to address the whole 

issue of trying to make sure that rental supplements has 

increased? Minimal. Twenty dollars increase in your rental 

supplement is not going to cover a $400 increase in your rent. 

It‟s just not going to work. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, then you hear the Minister of Finance 

turning red here, saying we took hundreds of people on low 

income off the tax rolls. Well whoop-de-do; you saved 20 bucks 

there. You know, and that‟s the point; that‟s the point we‟re 

trying to make here. Families cannot afford this government for 

two reasons. Number one is they‟re not realizing the issue at 

hand and number two, they don‟t care to begin with. And that‟s 

the unfortunate reality, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I‟m fortunate enough to have a home that I can go to, and 

I can sleep in a nice warm bed and my grandkids and my 

children are fine. That‟s because, Mr. Speaker, I can afford — 

based on the money I make as an MLA — I can afford a decent 

home and a place for them to live. And I‟m not angry at myself 

for that because that‟s, you know, I worked for that. But you 

need to give the other people in this province the opportunity to 

afford their children that same peaceful feeling. And this 

government is not doing it, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve not seen one 

shred of evidence in their five years, and I‟m assuming their 

budget will be around another 10 billion this year. 

 

Five years and 50 billion bucks at their disposal, and, Mr. 

Speaker, have they addressed affordability and rents? Have they 

addressed the issue of having a social housing program that 

reflects those issues and the need? Have they done anything to 

help the single mom or the working families that are struggling? 

The answer is no, no, and no. And that‟s the sad reality, Mr. 

Speaker, is that this minister doesn‟t get it. 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

I‟ve been telling him for the last half-hour that this Bill doesn‟t 

do any good to anybody because it just talks about timelines. It 

doesn‟t talk about affordability. It doesn‟t talk about 

understanding the pressure and strain that these families are 

under each and every month. It doesn‟t talk about their rights. It 

doesn‟t talk about how they feel. It doesn‟t talk about a 

long-term plan or even a vision of how we might be able to 

address it — a new strategy, a new day. And the answer, Mr. 

Speaker, is that he has addressed none of those issues. 

 

And that‟s why I point out to the people of Saskatchewan the 

whole mantra — and I steal this line every now and then — the 

whole mantra that we kind of guide our thoughts on as a 

political movement and certainly as a political party is that this 

is not a good province for any of us unless it‟s a good province 

for all of us. And I want to point out that I‟ve stolen that line. 

And the answer is absolutely . . . That line is absolutely true. 

 

The fact of the matter is as long as you have your head in the 

clouds, flying off to all these little events and having a nice 

secure place to go and sleep, that there‟s other families that are 

struggling. And the problem is, is you have the means. As you 

hear your Premier yapping about all the great opportunity and 

the wealth and you hear the province saying right across the 

country how well Saskatchewan is doing, and yet when it 

comes to families and affordability to rent, you turn your backs 

to them. You don‟t address their issue. And about all you can 

offer them is an extension of the inevitable, which is they can‟t 

increase your rent for six months; they can only do it over a 

12-month period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is a crying shame. It is a crying shame, and we‟re 

trying to tell you once again that affordability is the issue. And 

I‟m going to say it five straight times. Affordability is the issue. 

Affordability is the issue. Affordability is the issue, Mr. 

Minister. Affordability has always been the issue. And for the 

fifth time, affordability is the issue. Affordability is the issue, 

Mr. Minister, and that‟s why I think you need to address that 

issue as opposed to talking about timelines. There are people 

that are struggling every day, every day to try and keep a roof 

over their child‟s head. There are some children that aren‟t 

eating in Saskatchewan. Some elders are going without their 

medicine because they can‟t afford rent. 

 

And that‟s my point, is this Bill doesn‟t do any good to anybody 

because all you‟re talking about is simply talking about creating 

an association of landlords and of increasing the time they have 

to give you for notice of rent. And the rent increases are a fact 

of life. Now, Mr. Speaker, if that‟s a fact of life and we accept 

that, the next big question is, what is this government prepared 

to do to address that affordability issue? And the answer, Mr. 

Speaker, is nothing. The answer is nothing. No evidence 

whatsoever that they plan on dealing with that matter. 

 

And once again we‟re seeing the true colours of the 

Saskatchewan Party. Because as long as their friends are taken 

care of, then guess what? The rest of us can just watch the 

parade go on by. And they might want us to cheer. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s hard to cheer when you are worried about having a 

home and a house over your children‟s head on a constant daily 

basis. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you look at some of the challenges with 

food prices, some of the challenges they talk about when they 

talk about the power bill . . . I was on a tour with several of the 

Sask Party guys when they were talking about the Crowns, the 

future of the Crowns. And this has a lot to do with this, Mr. 

Speaker, because every single one of the Sask Party MLAs said 

the increase in power is coming. That was their mantra. That 

was their number one song every time we had hearings on the 

energy future of Saskatchewan. They all sang from the same 

song sheet saying, the increase in your power bill is coming. 

 

So they‟re preparing the people of Saskatchewan for those 

increases. And then people are thinking, well why are they 

saying that; well they‟re talking about this green energy and this 

new energy alternatives. I said no, no, no, they‟re using that as 

the guise for what I think they want to do. I think they want to 

sell off SaskPower to their private buddies. And their privates 

buddies can jack up the prices, and we can say, oh we‟re 

looking at green energy as the excuse to jack up the prices. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now the privatization of the Crowns is something I think they 

are set on. It‟s going to happen. It‟s gradually happening now 

by stealth. So how does that impact this Bill, Mr. Speaker? You 

want me to make it relevant? I‟ll make it relevant. How that 

impacts is as your power bills increase and food costs increase 

and your rent increases, then guess what? You can‟t afford to 

live in these units any more. You‟ve got to head out down the 

highway. And I don‟t know where you‟re going to head, but 

you‟ve got a full year. You‟ve got one year to figure out where 

you‟re going to live and how you‟re going to afford to live. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a sad reality when you see this kind of 

half-baked measures that have zero per cent benefit to the 

renters that are being impacted by Bills of this sort that do 

nothing to address the issue. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟m hearing now the Minister of Housing 

chirping from her seat. I am hearing now that under the social 

housing program, Mr. Speaker, it was our party that decided if 

people are going to rent units, you know, and they live in these 

remote and isolated areas of Saskatchewan, the practice was 

you had the opportunity to actually purchase your home after a 

set period of time that you were a tenant. I think there‟s a lot of 

housing authorities out there that offered this program, whether 

it was the remote housing program or whether it was the rental 

to purchase program, the RPO, rental purchase option. These 

programs were out there to help the families or the working 

poor. 

 

Now I‟m hearing that they‟re changing their mind, that the 

Saskatchewan Party is now saying that deal is off. And the 

minister‟s chirping from her seat. I want her to clarify that. Is 

that deal off? And from what we‟ve been hearing from many of 

the people that have the opportunity to buy out their homes 

from Sask Housing or from these housing authorities, they‟re 

being told, oh no, that program is no longer in effect. And I 

would suggest to the minister she check with her P.A. office to 

confirm that because if that‟s the case, then we‟re going to 

organize all those people who‟ve been renting off them for 

years to begin an action against this government for what I 

consider is, a legal action I would suggest they do for what I 

think is a breach of a contract. 

 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think there‟s a lot of folks out there that 

are really watching that issue. And I‟m glad the minister 

chirped from her seat because I‟m going to remind her that‟s 

what the Sask Housing Corporation is trying to do. They‟re 

trying to break that contract they had with many people that 

said, if you rent out this place for a number of years, we‟ll look 

at a rental purchase option for you so you can have a home 

ownership to make you more independent. They‟re trying to 

pull that deal off the table. Now whether that‟s the minister 

that‟s doing it directly or some of her party operatives, I don‟t 

know. But I would ask the minister to check into that because 

that issue‟s coming at her full steam, Mr. Speaker. And we‟re 

building up a case as we speak. 

 

So I want to point out again on this particular Bill that I don‟t 

see any good, any good out of this particular Bill by simply 

delaying the inevitable increases from 6 months to 12 months. 

It‟s a crying shame that this government doesn‟t get it. People 

can‟t afford their rent and their rent increases, and this is a 

problem that is persistent right throughout the land. 

 

It‟s not just in Wynyard. It‟s not just in Meadow Lake. It‟s not 

just in La Loche. It‟s all over the place, Mr. Speaker, where 

rents are just way too high and the poor people that are 

struggling to try and make ends meet are the ones that are 

bearing the brunt of that pressure and of that pain. And what 

this minister does and what this government does is absolutely 

nothing. It‟s absolutely nothing. 

 

So we‟ve got to figure out . . . And I would suggest to the 

minister that he put on his innovation hat and try and figure out 

this thing — maybe talk to his seatmate who is a few seats 

down from him saying, what can we do to address this 

affordability issue? You‟re the Minister of Social Services. 

What can we do? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is the problem, is they, you know, they 

put these Bills in place but they don‟t coordinate, and there‟s no 

innovation and there‟s no excitement to how to deal with the 

issue. They‟re just letting this thing sit over there in a corner 

and hopefully it doesn‟t get too crazy on us. And that‟s the 

point is that I‟m urging the people that are renting to start 

petitions, to start a letter writing campaign, come to the 

Assembly, speak up for yourselves. 

 

Don‟t sit at home and complain, because sitting at home and 

complaining does no good. You‟ve got to come here. You‟ve 

got to speak up. And I‟d say to you, you‟ve got power as a 

people. Use it and send these guys a message that simply 

dealing with the time issue is not good enough for our families. 

We‟re tired of being pushed around. We‟re tired of being shown 

rent increases. We‟re tired of being treated like we‟re 

second-class citizens and we deserve to be treated fairly and 

respectfully and our issues need to be heard. 

 

And that‟s the point that I‟m trying to raise today, Mr. Speaker, 

on this particular Bill, because we have tons of people that want 

to have a lot more comment on this particular Bill. And there‟s 

no question that we will bring forward many compelling 

arguments why this Bill does not match the need that many 

people aspired it to be from that side because they‟re way off 

base and it doesn‟t deal with the matter at all. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would again encourage those people that are 

out there to look at the Bill and not just necessarily listen to 

what the minister and his Bill is trying to say, but where there 

are glaring omissions and where there are glaring problems, 

where this Bill does not address those issues, we need to bring 

those issues forward as well. And the responsibility not just to 

us as an opposition is to challenge this government and to talk 

to them about the affordability issues and to tell them your 

green energy argument that you made for increasing SaskPower 

rates, we seen through that three years ago. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see through this increase of the timeline. 

We see through that as well, just a delay tactic. And the only 

way we‟re going to get people out here to be heard is you‟ve 

got to start filling up these galleries. We‟ve got to stop being 

complacent and sitting at home and complaining about it 

because if these guys don‟t see no action, if they don‟t see no 

letters being written, they don‟t see no hands being . . . signing 

petitions, they don‟t see no people in the gallery, we don‟t have 

these advocacy groups silenced any more . . . But we‟ve got to 

get up. We‟ve got to get up and speak and start talking about 

this particular issue because as long as they insult our 

intelligence with Bills of this sort and we let them get away 

with it, they‟re not the problem. All of a sudden we become the 

problem for not reacting to this matter and not fighting back. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot more to be said on this particular 

Bill and the ineffectiveness of this Bill and the glaring 

omissions in this Bill, so that‟s why I move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 33. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 33, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi 

de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 35, The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly will recall that one of 

the first steps taken when this government was elected in 2007 

was to remove the uncertainty that had traditionally existed 

regarding when provincial elections would be held. To avoid 

gamesmanship in the choice of an election date, we instead 

provided for a process, an express provision, that fixed the date 

for provincial general elections as the first Monday of 

November in every fourth calendar year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we remain convinced that fixed-date general 

elections are the right thing to do. However, as the federal 

government and the provincial governments have now adopted 

the same approach, it has now become apparent that a number 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

of the fixed-date general elections will occur in the same year 

and in the same few months. In particular, we note that the 

federal fixed-date general election cycle would see the writ 

period for the next federal general election overlap significantly 

with the next provincial general election. It is our view that this 

overlap has potential to create unacceptable confusion in the 

electorate and that it will undermine the democratic process for 

each of the federal and provincial campaigns. Accordingly, Mr. 

Speaker, we are taking steps to avoid this conflict. 

 

Under this Bill, where the writ period for a federal fixed-date 

general election would conflict with the writ period for a 

fixed-date provincial general election, the provincial general 

election would be moved to the first Monday in the following 

April. This would create a more acceptable separation between 

the federal general election and a provincial general election. 

While it would be our preference not to move our election, we 

must recognize that if the federal government does not make 

this change, it remains with the province to avoid this 

operational conflict. 

 

Under the terms of this Bill, where a fixed-date general election 

is then held in April, the provincial election would return to 

being held on the first Monday of November in the fourth 

calendar year following that April general election. We make 

this change now at the earliest opportunity in our new mandate 

to ensure that to the degree possible, everyone will receive 

ample notice of when the next general provincial election will 

be held. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the federal government has not changed their 

approach and if they do not have an interim general election, 

this provision provides for a reasonable resolution to the 

significant operational conflict. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

move second reading of Bill 35, The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved Bill No. 

35, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 

minister spoke about, I wanted to make sure that the folks that 

might be viewing this program, that what the minister is saying 

today is that they typically want to hold their elections every 

four years. As he mentioned, every four years, the first Monday 

of November of the election year. So in theory we‟re supposed 

to have an election in 2015 and it‟ll be the first Monday. And 

now they‟re saying, well the federal government has also the 

same time frame as us. So what they want to do as the 

government, we want to move it over to April, six months later, 

April of 2016. And so that gives them an extra — what? — 

eight or nine months of a Sask Party government. And so now 

they‟re saying, well because we want to avoid all that 

conflicting schedule with the federal government, we want to 

move our election date from November of 2015 to April of 

2016. Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason they give today is because 

the federal government is having their election the same time 

frame as us, in the fall of 2015, and that‟s not a good thing to 

do. 

 

Now I‟m just trying to figure out why isn‟t it a good thing to do. 

They‟re confusing me, Mr. Speaker. Because the Saskatchewan 

Party and the federal Conservatives are tied at the hip. You 

know, I think they should, they should just, what they should do 

is they shouldn‟t try and skew their election date, and I‟m trying 

to figure why they would do that. They should just keep their 

original date because, see, the Conservatives spend their money 

on advertising using the in-and-out scheme. Then in theory, 

them being their cousins, they would benefit from that two 

months later and they would actually save on advertising and 

they‟d save on messaging. They‟d just say, Mr. Harper, you do 

all the work for us and we‟ll just come on your coattails and we 

don‟t have to spend all that money and we‟ll be elected the fall 

just like we hope that you would be. So that kind of, at the 

outset, why would they do that? Because that‟s their cousins, 

you know. And I‟m trying to figure out what the heck‟s going 

on over there. 

 

And then it dawned on me. Well maybe they might pretend to 

have a fight because generally people of Saskatchewan want to 

have a fight every now and then with the federal government. 

And what would the fight be over? Well there‟s tons of things 

we can think about now. As an example, we‟d think about the 

. . . on TV right now with the voter suppression tactics, you 

know, where they‟re investigating 31,000 complaints of people 

that were phoned at their homes and told to go vote at a 

different place. Well that might hurt the federal Conservatives, 

so maybe that‟s why the Saskatchewan Party moved a few 

months away. 

 

And then, oh we got this other idea. We got this idea, we should 

change the retirement age from 65 to 67. Well the 

Saskatchewan Party said, well we better move a few months 

away from that too. So they‟re kind of shifting on the schedule 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that‟s what I thought: well maybe that‟s what they‟re after. 

And then I was sitting here thinking about this particular Bill. 

There‟s no way, there‟s no way that I would say that this has 

nothing to do with gamesmanship. It‟s all about gamesmanship, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s what it‟s about. And for them to say that 

they don‟t want to conflict with the federal election, there‟s 

something going on there that I think eventually people of 

Saskatchewan will find out about. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now I‟m not going to mention that today, Mr. Speaker. But 

there is stuff coming up, Mr. Speaker, that you would be very, 

very surprised to learn about as we go down this path. So I 

think it‟s important for people out there to know that there‟s no 

way that they‟re moving the election date because they want to 

be convenient for the federal election. That‟s not what this is 

about. There‟s something other at stake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I‟ll point out, when you look at the whole gamesmanship, 

the Bill itself is simply saying one simple thing. We want to 

hold our elections every four years, on the first Monday of 

November of the election year. That was what their Bill said 

originally. Now he‟s coming along saying, well because the 

federal Conservatives are going to have their election the same 

time, we want to move ours further down to April of 2016 — 

the first Monday of April, I‟m assuming, of 2016. 

 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know what the deal is, what the 

magic timeline on April. But isn‟t that the year of the . . . a 

couple of months after the budget of 2016? So the budget will 

be announced in March, and they want to have an election in 

April. Okay, now it‟s beginning to make a little more sense. But 

because the Conservatives are not sure how they‟re going to do, 

they want to distance themselves a bit from their cousins 

because this thing about 65 to 67 certainly catches a lot of 

steam and people don‟t like that. 

 

They don‟t like that stuff. So they‟re moving a little ways from 

their cousins. So right now they‟re prepared to eat their federal 

cousins, these guys. You know, that‟s how bad they are. To 

retain power, they‟re ready to throw them under the bus, Mr. 

Speaker. So this whole notion of avoiding gamesmanship, our 

collective caucus has started bursting out laughing here because 

that‟s the funniest thing we‟ve ever heard this minister and this 

government say. We want to avoid gamesmanship in the 

political arena. Yes, right, you know, but anyway, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s kind of why it‟s so funny. It‟s so ridiculous it‟s funny. 

 

So the point I would say to the minister is that, you know, don‟t 

use the guise of wanting to avoid gamesmanship as a reason for 

positioning your party for a couple of months after the 

provincial budget and to see what happens with your federal 

Conservative cousins in the fall of 2015 when we all know that 

you guys are joined at the hips. And you‟re kind of confusing 

the heck out of the New Democrats. What the heck are they up 

to, Mr. Speaker? So I would point out that, like I said to our 

caucus, this Bill, it‟s so ridiculous it‟s funny. You know, and I 

keep telling folks out there, gamesmanship, we want to avoid 

that, and that‟s coming from the same organization that 

benefited from the federal Conservatives‟ voter suppression 

tactics, you know. And that‟s kind of what I think is important, 

Mr. Speaker, is that we don‟t buy that for one instant. 

 

So I‟ll tell the people in the province of Saskatchewan two or 

three things. It‟s all about gamesmanship when the 

Saskatchewan Party gets up and speaks about being fair. It‟s all 

gamesmanship. They talk about being neutral. It‟s all about 

being partisan. When they say one thing, they do exactly the 

opposite. But you see, the problem is that they do so well . . . 

what they do so well, Mr. Speaker, is they confuse a lot of 

people. For one minute they say, well it sounds okay, but then 

we don‟t see the benefits of that. But that‟s going to catch up to 

them, Mr. Speaker. It will catch up to them. Because there‟s no 

question that people out there are watching, and they listen and 

they learn. 

 

So my whole point is, on this particular Bill we know that there 

are some issues at play and that there are some plans, Mr. 

Speaker, that they want to put in place that they need a bit more 

time for. And if anybody out there wanted to think, well 

gamesmanship, and our potentially third term, want to get the 

third term; we can‟t have an election in November of 2015 

because maybe that‟ll be our time when wind‟s out of our sails 

a bit as a Conservative cousin, so we want to be distanced from 

that. The second thing is well, you know, we should try and do 

it around our election, or on our spending plan. The budget 

time, oh that‟s right, budget comes out in March. Well let‟s 

have it in April. No, it would have been better if we would have 

had it in May. It would have given a few more months to kind 

of drive around and tell people how great your budget is. 

So this whole notion, Mr. Speaker, to avoid gamesmanship, like 

come on, get real. The bottom line, it‟s all about gamesmanship. 

It‟s always been about gamesmanship. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

people‟s overall arching message today is that it doesn‟t matter 

who‟s sitting in the government‟s chair, the economy of 

Saskatchewan was going to move anyway. And the economy of 

Saskatchewan is going to continue to move, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

going to continue to build, and I say it in spite of them, but 

they‟re standing there flashing their hand, their cue cards 

saying, we did it. We did, you know. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan know no matter who was sitting in that Premier‟s 

chair, Saskatchewan was going to burst, its economy was going 

to build. And the only difference was when we came along, we 

were going to make it a good Saskatchewan for all of us, not a 

good Saskatchewan for a few of their rich friends, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟re going to do it working hand in hand with the business 

community, with the unions, not just to try and privatize the 

Crown corporations like they‟re trying to do. We‟re going to 

engage the Aboriginal community. We‟re going to engage our 

teachers, not put Bills like the essential services Act in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan didn‟t elect them to 

fight the unions, nor fight our teachers, nor give away all our 

resources. They elected them because they thought they had a 

chance to be heard and to be fair and reasonable with the people 

of Saskatchewan, but that‟s not happening, Mr. Speaker. So 

when a minister says gamesmanship, gamesmanship, you want 

to avoid that stuff. Well you know, from our perspective, we 

don‟t buy that one bit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what‟s important is that when we 

talk about the election itself, I want to make sure people out 

there know during the last campaign the NDP sure took a 

beating, no question about that. There‟s nine of us remaining, 

and to the nine of us I‟m saying, weather the storm. There‟s 

some great colleagues that were lost, Mr. Speaker. But when 

you talk about gamesmanship — the minister made that in his 

opening comment — and I looked at that and said, I wonder 

what these guys done, what these guys done that was so 

effective in suppressing voters. 

 

Well, I mentioned at the outset, I walked into the polling booth 

in my home community and there‟s three ladies there that I‟ve 

known all my life. And I said, I‟ve come to vote, me and my 

gorgeous wife come to vote. I voted for myself, hopefully she 

voted for me too, but I don‟t know that for certain. And anyway 

I said to them, can I vote? Can I vote, can I vote? And they said, 

Buckley, this was the quote, you can‟t vote without an ID. And 

I said, but I‟m the candidate, you know me. You know me. No, 

you‟ve got to have an ID. Well, my name‟s on the ballot here. 

That‟s me here. I‟m voting. And I had a couple of my cousins 

behind me. They wanted to vote for me too. And guess what, 

neither of them had a driver‟s licence nor ID. And I said, but 

you guys, you guys know who I am. I‟m the candidate. My 

name‟s on the ballot there. Oh no. No, you can‟t. You can‟t. 

You need your ID. I said, what do you mean I need my ID? 

You guys all know . . . No, I need to see your ID. And I said, 

my goodness. My goodness, I said, is this what it‟s come down 

to? Is that how you‟re going to win elections by these kind of 

silly notions and these silly rules? 

 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

So don‟t talk to us about avoiding gamesmanhip, Mr. Speaker. 

Because it‟s all about gamesmanship. And the guys at 

gamesmanship, Mr. Speaker, slide under that voter suppression 

technique that they‟re so good at, and that‟s exactly what their 

objective was. And the plan was to decrease the Aboriginal 

vote, which they‟ve done; to decrease the elderly vote, which 

they‟ve done; to decrease the immigrant vote, which they‟ve 

done; to decrease the people that didn‟t have their voter‟s 

licence and that was done. You look at all those folks that are 

impacted by that Bill, Mr. Speaker. That‟s exactly what 

happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was hundreds of people in all the constituencies that 

didn‟t vote or were discouraged to vote, so they stayed home. 

And the bad thing about it, Mr. Speaker, why did they do that? 

Why did they not have the opportunity to vote freely as we have 

in this great democracy at all times is because their vote was 

being suppressed by actions of that particular minister under 

this voter ID registration Bill that he brought forward. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s not justice. That‟s not justice. But who it 

affected, Mr. Speaker, it affected just us. And that was the 

whole point. It affected a lot of people not only in my 

community but other communities as well. 

 

And you know the bad thing about it, Mr. Speaker, is that where 

did this thing come from? Where did this whole notion come 

from that you had to have voter ID? Well their leader, the 

Premier said, oh well, there‟s some discrepancies last election, 

he said. And the media asked, what discrepancies? Oh there 

were some. So that ended the story there. There was no 

discrepancies last election, Mr. Speaker. There was none 

whatsoever. There were none. 

 

And I happened to listen to this discussion around the whole 

notion of what‟s happening in Ottawa right now, you know, 

where Elections Canada is investigating, investigating some of 

these allegations of voter suppression. And the problem is one 

of the former, I believe he was a former Elections Canada CEO 

— I think his name was Kingsley — he said, on the average we 

get for a national complaint in terms of after a national election 

is about 1,000 people, he said. That‟s par for the course. I think 

that‟s the figure he used. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on this whole notion of the people getting 

calls at their home for a variety of reasons, this robo-calling, 

there are now 31,000 people that have come forward. Now that 

is what you would call some problems. That‟s what you would 

call discrepancy. 

 

Now I challenge the Premier today to say what discrepancies 

was he talking about. There was no discrepancy. His plan all 

along, in concert with the Minister of Justice, was to make sure 

that they got people that typically voted NDP to deny them the 

opportunity to vote. And that‟s an affront to democracy, and 

that‟s a shame to that office, Mr. Speaker, because you don‟t do 

that to people. You don‟t do that to people. That is just not how 

it should be done. You should be winning elections clearly and 

fairly. And you know, the other thing too is that the people out 

there look at that and they say, oh no. No, we didn‟t do that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is always about gamesmanship. It is all 

about gamesmanship. And after the robo-caller stopped calling 

before that, they were calling about the resource revenue 

sharing. I think the question was along the lines of, do you think 

the Indians are getting the ownership of the potash mines? I 

think press one if you agree with the NDP or press two if you 

agree with the SaskParty and say no. Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

gamesmanship? That‟s gamesmanship? 

 

So as you are about to embark on your given second term, you 

throw in voter suppression. You throw in the robo-calling that 

was done in that front. You run a bunch of negative ads, and 

that‟s how the Saskatchewan Party and that‟s how the 

Conservatives operate. So when they bring back Bills of this 

sort. And they say to us, we want to avoid gamesmanship so 

we‟re going to move the election six months later than the 

federal election, which is anticipated to be a few months in our 

area. It‟s not about gamesmanship. It‟s about manoeuvring. It‟s 

about posturing, and it‟s about positioning for the budget that‟s 

going to be coming up in March of 2016. 

 

Nothing to do with respect for the federal cousins because, as I 

said, you guys are tied at the hip. You benefit from both groups 

of people. But in a heartbeat you throw them in the bus, under 

the bus. They made a mistake. And that‟s the sad reality of 

where elections of this sort come out. And we read some of 

these Bills like Bill No. 33 . . . Sorry, not Bill No. 33, but the 

Bill to talk about the changing the election date — Bill No. 35 

— and you see that this has nothing to do with being fair, being 

open, being transparent, or being accountable. It‟s all about 

gamesmanship. 

 

We understand that on that end, and we‟re telling the people of 

the North, of the South, of the East and the West, and all 

throughout this land, their time will come. The pied piper will 

come calling for them. And, Mr. Speaker, when that time 

comes, their true colours by then would be exposed and their 

mandate by then — and we hope it‟s not to a point where it‟s no 

return for the people of Saskatchewan — their mandate to 

privatize the Crowns and bring in private health care and all that 

those objectives, they‟ll be on their way of doing that. And only 

one group of people can stop them, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I pray that they don‟t focus on those groups who‟ll be 

changing their minds, and I pray they‟re not thinking about that 

today of how we, how do we suppress those vote changers now. 

That‟s probably what‟s in their strategy right now — change 

their minds about not voting for us. How do we eliminate them 

from voting? And I mentioned earlier in my analogy about the 

movie The Jerk, when he was working at the circus, and so 

what do I do if I knock these balls out? You win everything left 

of these dolls and everything above these stuffed animals and 

everything on this side. Pretty soon there‟s a very little amount 

of people, and the racer is what they want. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we would hope that this Bill doesn‟t mimic 

that kind of strategy that the Saskatchewan Party has when he 

starts talking about elections and how they want to avoid, as the 

minister said, gamesmanship. Been there. Done that. Seen that 

10,000 times from them. And I think after a while it gets a little 

tiring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o‟clock, this 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

House stands adjourned till 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tochor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 259 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 

  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 267 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 259 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 260 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 260 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Telemiracle 36 

  Tochor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 260 

 Rural Women’s Month 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 

 Nutrition Month 

  Jurgens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 261 

 Scrabble Tournament 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 261 

 Engineering and Geoscience Week 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 261 

 Rural Women’s Month 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 262 

 Heritage Award 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provincial Budget 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 263 

 Accommodation in Seniors’ Facility 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 264 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 264 

 Essential Services Legislation 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 266 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 266 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 267 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 267 

  Belanger .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 268 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 273 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 273 

 Bill No. 29 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 275 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 276 

 Bill No. 30 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 278 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 278 

 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 278 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 279 

 

 



 

 Bill No. 32 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 280 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 281 

 Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 282 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 283 

 Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 287 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 288 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


