




















































Hansard: November 01, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 6A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1713 

 November 1, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I ask for leave for an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has asked for leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing and I were pleased to host the annual meeting of the 

federal, provincial, and territorial ministers of Justice and 

Policing in Regina over the last couple of days. Joining us in 

your gallery today are the Hon. Glen Abernethy from the 

Northwest Territories, the Hon. Robert Trevors from New 

Brunswick, the Hon. Mike Nixon from the Yukon Territory, 

and the federal minister, the Hon. Vic Toews, Minister of 

Public Safety, as well as a number of their officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were proud to co-chair the FPT 

[federal-provincial-territorial] meetings in Regina this week 

with the Hon. Vic Toews as the Minister of Public Safety, and 

the Hon. Rob Nicholson, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were encouraged by the discussions over the 

last couple of days. We had a full agenda that covered a host of 

issues that were important to the people of Canada and the 

people of Saskatchewan. Meeting with our Canadian colleagues 

at the annual gathering such as this was an important piece of 

our collaborative work together. We had the opportunity to 

discuss issues that affect all of the provinces and territories and 

Canada itself. These meetings provide an opportunity for us to 

meet face to face and discuss ways to strengthen our justice 

system. And I’d like to thank my colleagues that attended the 

meetings for their participation. 

 

The dialogue among all the ministers made it clear that we’re 

committed to building safer and stronger communities for 

Canadians. We met with some very good people this week, Mr. 

Speaker, and those relationships will serve us very well into the 

future. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would just like to 

publicly thank all the officials, especially the officials from my 

ministry, who were at these meetings. And they made them a 

tremendous success. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for my colleagues in the legislature to 

welcome our guests to our legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with the 

Minister of Justice in welcoming all of the ministers and 

officials from across Canada who have been here as part of the 

ministers’ meeting. 

 

As a former minister of Justice who worked very closely with 

Minister Vic Toews, I want to make a special point of 

welcoming Vic here. When I was first appointed minister of 

Justice, he was the minister of Justice in Manitoba and we 

worked together very closely on a whole number of issues, 

especially related to Canada-US border issues, drug issues, and 

coordination of policing. And I think it’s quite important, as the 

Minister of Justice just mentioned, that the relationships that 

you develop across our jurisdictions in Canada and the States 

serve us all well in the long term. 

 

And I know that Vic, even though we often had many 

disagreements, but we always had good discussion. But we’re 

both proud that our partner in a lot of the Canada-US [United 

States] border issues, Heidi Heitkamp, is in a very close race for 

the Senate of the United States in North Dakota, and so we’re 

both watching to see how Heidi does. So I know that Vic’s 

continuing his work, and I want to thank him and appreciate the 

fact that he’s come here to Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu-Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today in the House we have 55 grade 10 students from Winston 

Knoll Collegiate. They’re in the west gallery. And 

accompanying these very bright, intelligent, and probably some 

of the most gifted students is Mrs. Michelle McKillop, Mr. 

Dennis Matheson, and Mrs. Cathie Hunchuk. I’ll have an 

opportunity to get together with the students after question 

period and maybe answer some questions in regards to the 

dialogue that was undertaken here today. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Howard Willems is a 

Saskatoon resident who is an advocate for asbestos safety. 

Howard is also battling cancer and is unable to be in the 

Assembly today because his health does not allow for him to be 

here. 

 

But connected to that, Mr. Speaker, a number of individuals 

who are here in support of Howard. I’d like to introduce 

Marianne Hladun, who is the prairie vice-president of the 

Public Service Alliance of Canada and a friend and colleague of 

Howard, as well as Howard’s sister, Audrey Berlovan, 

Howard’s son, Jesse Todd, and Howard’s daughter-in-law, 

Kelly Harmsworth. I would ask all members in the Assembly to 

join me in welcoming these individuals, these friends of 

Howard’s, to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly a guest whose artistic vision leads a successful 

Saskatchewan theatre company, a company that has 

experienced remarkable growth and success over the past 

several years and which has recently been recognized with a 

national honour. Mr. Denis Rouleau, the artistic director of La 

Troupe du Jour, is with us today in the government gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

La Troupe du Jour recently won the inaugural artsVest 

Outstanding Partnership Award presented by the organization 

Business for the Arts who have partnered with this government 

to bring the successful artsVest program to Saskatchewan. The 

award recognizes the dynamic partnership created through the 

program between La Troupe du Jour and Saskatoon Express, a 

successful media company in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is proud to support Saskatchewan 

cultural organizations through programs such as artsVest. 

Accompanying Mr. Rouleau is Gerry Folk, the executive 

director of the culture branch with the Ministry of Parks, 

Culture and Sport. Mr. Rouleau, bienvenue, welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join 

me in welcoming our guest today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

opposition I’d like to join in welcoming Mr. Rouleau to his 

Legislative Assembly. La Troupe du Jour isn’t in my 

constituency. It’s in Saskatoon Centre but it is just across the 

street. And La Troupe du Jour moving to 20th Street has meant 

a huge . . . has been a big part of the revitalization of 20th 

Street. So bienvenue, Monsieur Rouleau, and welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce three friends of mine in your gallery. And I’ll just ask 

them to wave when I introduce them individually. Firstly, Mr. 

Speaker, Nicholas Popowich, and don’t let his good looks fool 

you. This young man is very impressive in so very many ways 

and I’ll be speaking more about him and some of the initiatives 

he’s involved with a little bit later. He has become somewhat of 

a celebrity. 

 

His mom, Elizabeth Popowich, is very well known in Regina. 

She is the manager of public information for the Regina city 

police service. I got to know Elizabeth when she moved to 

Yorkton in the ’80s. I think she was about five back then. And 

she’s very well known and very recognized throughout the 

province and a really great friend of not only my wife’s and 

mine but very good friends of my brother and sister-in-law. 

 

One other member that was able to come with us and visit with 

us in the Assembly today is Greg Popowich. That’s Nicholas’s 

dad. Greg is an architectural technologist and associate at 

SEPW architects. And just thank you all for visiting with us 

today. Their younger son Lucas isn’t available to be with us 

today. He’s in his second year of a degree in musical theatre at 

Sheridan College in Oakville, Ontario. And I ask all members 

to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, it is a pleasure to recognize today, seated in 

your gallery, Kalen Emsley and David Luba, if you wouldn’t 

mind standing. Kalen and David are partners in Regina’s Ten 

Tree Apparel, a company that you’ll be hearing more about 

today. These young men are fine examples of the 

entrepreneurial spirit that we speak of in a new generation of 

business leaders that will keep Saskatchewan growing and 

prospering into the future. I ask all legislative colleagues to help 

me welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011 Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot twice and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station alone in Yorkton, unprotected from 

intruders. 

 

We know other provinces including British Columbia have 

brought in several safety precautions through law, including a 

requirement that workers cannot be alone during late-night, 

early-morning hours, and if they are required to work, there 

must be protective barriers such as locked doors and protective 

glass. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Jimmy’s law, to 

ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

rise today to present a petition on bringing cell service to 

underserved areas of northern Saskatchewan. And the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cellular service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, 

along with the neighbouring communities of Michel 

village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nation and the community of Turnor 

Lake, including all the neighbouring communities in each 

of these northwestern areas. 

 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 

all these First Nations locations, and there are hundreds of 

signatures on each of these petitions. And, Mr. Speaker, I stand 

today to proudly present this petition in support of expanding 

cell service to northwestern Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 

residents as it relates to education in our province. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes, that 

is based on proven educational best practices and that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions today are signed by concerned residents of Moose 

Jaw. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

National Down Syndrome Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today to draw the attention of the Assembly to a national 

event that is taking place from November 1st to the 7th. Today, 

Mr. Speaker, November 1st, is the first day of National Down 

Syndrome Awareness Week, a public awareness campaign 

initiated by the Canadian Down Syndrome Society. The 

campaign focuses on the unique strengths and abilities of 

people with Down syndrome. Celebrating National Down 

Syndrome Awareness Week helps to ensure equitable 

opportunities for all Canadians with Down syndrome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to make this statement in the 

House in recognition of a young man that I’ve known for 22 

years, Nicolas Popowich, and this cause that he represents. 

Nick now lives in Regina; he works at SaskTel’s retail store in 

the Cornwall Centre; he has a girlfriend; he plans to have his 

own house some day. Nick is an amazing young man by any 

measure, Mr. Speaker. Nick has a great family and a great life. 

Nick also happens to have Down syndrome. 

 

You may have seen Nick before. I stated earlier he is a celebrity 

in his own right. His photo is on billboards across Canada, 

including two in Regina to publicize National Down Syndrome 

Awareness Week. The campaign slogan is See the Ability, and 

Nick is a fine example of ability and potential. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 

National Down Syndrome Awareness Week and join me in 

thanking Nick for his advocacy work for all people with Down 

syndrome. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Children’s Hospital Foundation Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to once again 

take part in the radiothon fundraiser for the Children’s Hospital 

Foundation of Saskatchewan. Missinipi Broadcasting 

Corporation once again teamed up with Cameco to host the 

seven-hour radiothon that was held on September 21st. 

 

The radiothon raised over $272,000 because of the generous 

support of our northern First Nations, many other communities, 

individuals, and businesses. Cameco was extremely generous in 

agreeing to match all donations raised, dollar for dollar. This 

brought the total amount to $545,873 in addition to the 626,000 

raised during last year’s event. The radiothon has raised 

approximately $1.2 million. 

 

The Children’s Hospital Foundation has now raised a total of 

11.5 million of their $25 million goal. The money raised will go 

towards a new children’s hospital to be constructed in 

Saskatoon by 2016. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Debra Charles from Missinipi Broadcasting Corporation, Gary 

Merasty from Cameco for their sponsorship and leadership. I’d 

like to thank all the businesses, organizations, and community 

members that pledged financial support. I’d also like to thank 

the incredible volunteers that dedicated countless hours, 

especially to those who rolled many, many pennies for this 

worthwhile cause. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Project Red Ribbon 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 1st marks 

the 25th anniversary of Mothers Against Drunk Driving project, 

Project Red Ribbon campaign. To honour the 25th anniversary 

of the Red Ribbon campaign, MADD [Mothers Against Drunk 

Driving] Canada has asked that November 1st be proclaimed 

Project Red Ribbon Day. 

 

Each year from November 1st to the first Monday after New 

Year’s, volunteers across Canada distribute millions of red 

ribbons to the public to attach to their vehicles, key chains, and 

purses. The red ribbons serve as a reminder, an encouragement 

to not drink and drive during the holiday season. The red ribbon 

is a significant symbol. By displaying the ribbon, you are also 

making a commitment to drive sober. It is a highly visible 

reminder to make sure that you plan a safe ride home if you will 

be drinking during the holidays. 

 

MADD Canada and SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] encourage people to report any impaired driving you 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

see on the roads this holiday season. Mr. Speaker, the Report 

Impaired Drivers program or RID was expanded province wide 

in November of 2011. Since the inception of the RID program, 

over 500 impaired drivers have been charged, meaning over 

500 impaired drivers have been taken off the road to date. So no 

matter where you are, if you see an impaired driver please 

report it to the police. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage all Saskatchewan citizens to follow 

MADD Canada’s advice and plan a safe ride home this holiday 

season. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Avenue Community Centre Awards 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on June 8th this year, the Avenue Community Centre 

for Gender and Sexual Diversity held its annual Affinity Credit 

Union Community Service Awards. 

 

Through these awards, the Avenue Community Centre 

recognizes those who’ve made a significant contribution to the 

growth and development of a strong, vibrant, and healthy queer 

in Saskatoon and area community. 

 

This year two youth were presented with Community Service 

Youth Awards for their outstanding community work — 

Chance Briere and Humboldt Magnussen. There were also two 

winners of the Community Service Award — Trish Salah and 

Jim Komar. 

 

The Special Merit Awards were presented to Festivale 

Photomedia and Fran Forsberg. A special award was also given 

to Garnet Woloschuk to recognize his 15 years of great work at 

the Avenue Community Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, October has been named Queer History Month. 

Started in 1994 in the United States, a high school teacher 

decided a month should be dedicated to the celebration and 

teaching of gay and lesbian history. LGBT [lesbian, gay, 

bisexual, and transgender] History Month now provides 

positive role models, builds healthy communities, and 

recognizes extraordinary national, international contributions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

these people who continue to work for justice, respect, and 

equal rights in our communities. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Estevan United Way Reaches Goal 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

this House with pride to announce that Estevan’s United Way 

has maintained their ranking as the number one in the country. 

The organization became the first United Way in Canada to 

reach its goal for the 35th time in the organization’s 36th year 

annual telethon. Mr. Speaker, the off-air total for the 33-hour 

telefest was an outstanding $347,953. This is nearly $13,000 

better than their goal of $335,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize some amazing 

Saskatchewan citizens who made outstanding contributions to 

help push the Estevan United Way past its goal. Local 

SaskPower employees donated $102,000, half of which was 

raised by the employees, the other half matched by SaskPower. 

Sherritt Coal and the United Mine Workers of America raised 

$92,000. Members of the UMWA [United Mine Workers of 

America] raised half the amount. The mine matched them. And 

Eve of Destruction of Estevan Motor Speedway donated $7,500 

with about 75 minutes remaining in the telethon to push the 

United Way past its goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have always been known 

for their unmatched generosity. I ask all members to join me in 

thanking all those who helped the Estevan United Way reach its 

goal for the 35th time in 36 years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Regina Minor Football League 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

recognize an organization that has a positive impact on many 

young people in our province — the Regina Minor Football 

League. The RMF finished the 2012 season this past weekend 

with the champions being crowned in each age category. The 

Mustangs won in the peewee division, the Raiders were the 

champs in bantam, and the Cardinals took home top prize in the 

atom division. 

 

More important than the winners, Mr. Speaker, over 1,600 

athletes played the great game of football from communities in 

and around Yorkton, Estevan, Weyburn, and of course Regina. 

The majority of this year’s games were played on beautiful new 

Leibel Field, to which this government granted $750,000 

towards its completion. Last year was the first year that RMF 

games were played on the field, and this year a new score 

clock, stands with individual seats, and a coaches’ box were 

added. 

 

Mr. Speaker, being a coach in the league, I know first-hand just 

how much hard work and dedication it takes to make Regina 

Minor Football run so well. 

 

I’d like to thank and acknowledge two special people — Len 

Antonini and Kelly Hamilton. Len and Kelly have taken the 

RMF to new heights since becoming involved 10 years ago, 

and it would not be a stretch to say that they have helped to 

create the best youth football league in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 

of the young athletes who participated this year and in joining 

me in thanking all the coaches, players, referees, and volunteers 

for their hard work and dedication this season. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Company Promotes Environmental Stewardship 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take 

great pleasure in highlighting the founders of a new 

Saskatchewan company, Ten Tree Apparel, headquartered right 

here in Regina. Kalen and Derrick Emsley and David Luba 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

established the company only eight months ago and have 

achieved outstanding success. 

 

Ten Tree Apparel not only sells casual clothes but they are 

great promoters of environmental stewardship. For every item 

of clothing sold, the company commits to plant 10 new trees to 

renew forests in Canada, and through WeTrees, a non-profit 

organization dedicated to reforestation around the world. 

 

Not only is Ten Tree environmentally green. They have 

partnered with Saskatchewan’s favourite green team by 

producing a line of men’s and women’s Saskatchewan 

Roughrider clothing. 

 

The idea is simple but compelling. So compelling, in fact, that 

on their recent appearance on CBC’s [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] Dragons’ Den, Ten Tree Apparel successfully 

attracted two new partners, Arlene Dickinson and Bruce 

Croxon. 

 

Since the show, Ten Trees have also locked up major 

sponsorship for their Inspire campaign in conjunction with the 

Canadian Wildlife Federation to get kids outdoors. These young 

people, Mr. Speaker, demonstrate a blending of environmental 

values and entrepreneurial spirit. They truly represent the intent 

of Saskatchewan’s plan for growth, which is to grow our 

economy in an environmentally responsible way in order to 

improve our quality of life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Asbestos in Public Buildings 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Asbestos is a 

dangerous substance and threatens our health and safety. 

Howard Willems was a federal civil servant inspecting 

buildings and was unknowingly exposed to asbestos. He is now 

battling mesothelioma cancer but is still working to improve the 

public safety as it relates to asbestos. 

 

My question to the Health minister: does he believe citizens 

should be able to easily access information about the presence 

of asbestos in public buildings? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve met with 

Mr. Willems and have a great deal of sympathy for him. And 

on behalf of all members, I would like to offer our support and 

encouragement for Mr. Willems, both in dealing with his health 

issues and in advancing the issue of asbestos in buildings. It’s 

something that the government takes very seriously. 

 

And our officials tell us that the best assumption we can make 

is that all buildings constructed prior to 1980 contain asbestos 

and that we should take steps to try and deal with enforcement 

and education and trying to deal with best practices around 

asbestos. It would be impossible to remove asbestos from all 

buildings but, Mr. Speaker, we want to take steps to ensure that 

the asbestos stays encapsulated and we have appropriate 

methods in place to deal with asbestos once it’s discovered. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, today the minister has the 

opportunity to do something more than extend sympathy. He 

has the opportunity to change and take some action here. 

 

Howard has received a listing of ministry properties with 

asbestos through a freedom of information request. The 

government has this information in its hands, but the 

information is not easily accessible to the public without prying 

it from the government’s possession. Today I will introduce an 

amendment to The Public Health Act requiring the government 

to list on a centralized website all the public properties with 

asbestos. 

 

To the minister: will he support enhanced public safety, support 

the prevention of cancer, and support the asbestos 

right-to-know amendment Act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The officials 

advise us that they feel the best practices right now are to make 

the assumption that all buildings constructed prior to 1980 

contain asbestos. A number of buildings that were constructed 

after that or have had renovations may well contain asbestos as 

well. 

 

The concern that they have with maintaining a central registry 

is it may create a false sense of security. The assumption should 

be there that whenever dealing with a building that there is 

asbestos there and that appropriate steps be taken to it, that 

people ought not rely on a registry that may be incomplete or 

may not have accurate information. We know that the vast 

majority of our schools that were built during the 1950s and 

1960s contain asbestos. Our school boards and our school 

divisions around the province are working at maintaining good 

practices in that area. 

 

I can advise the members opposite that some of the things that 

are already in our regulations include things such as identifying 

and labelling asbestos-containing materials, maintaining 

installed materials to prevent fibre release, notifying OH & S 

[occupational health and safety] of high-risk asbestos processes, 

and have an asbestos control plan to prevent and minimize 

worker exposure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, mesothelioma is a terrible disease, usually fatal. 

And I think it’s appropriate that the government deal with it 

carefully and appropriately, and that’s what we’re doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the government has this 

information. The government should not be secretive about the 

information. It should be made available to Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

http://www.cbc.ca/dragonsden/dragons_arlene.html


1718 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, this is common sense legislation. It simply 

requires a listing of the public buildings with asbestos and some 

basic detail about its safety. It’s not about spending money for 

cleanup. It simply allows people to make informed decisions. 

For example, if a tradesperson was working on a government 

building, he or she could know if they needed to take extra 

precaution. 

 

To the Health minister: Saskatchewan men and women deserve 

to be safe when they work. Will he support this legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, a number of property 

owners have maintained private registries. The various public 

buildings are on different internal registries. To create a public 

registry that would create a false sense of security would not be 

regarded by our officials as best practices. We continue to look 

at and review the legislation and review what is taking place in 

other jurisdictions to make sure that we take every step 

possible, every step practical, and every step that is reasonable 

to ensure the safety, not only of workers, but people that are in 

our public buildings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that during the late 1970s, OH & S 

facilitated an assessment of approximately 75 per cent of the 

over 700 schools in our province. A high level of asbestos was 

found in those schools. Fortunately it was encapsulated and not 

available for public contact. We have taken steps to ensure, 

since the 1970s, that all of the asbestos remains encapsulated 

and best practices continue to be followed throughout the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, hiding this information, keeping 

it from the public is backwards thinking. It’s the right thing to 

do, Mr. Speaker, so people can make informed decisions. 

 

The knowledge of the existence of asbestos will improve the 

health and safety of people other than workers. We can think 

back to the botched handling of St. Mary’s Villa renovations. 

These residents deserved to know if asbestos was involved with 

the renovation project. Or we can think, Mr. Speaker, of our 

children going to school. Surely parents deserve to know if 

there’s asbestos in a building when school renovations are 

occurring. That’s common sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Health minister because this is an issue of 

public health: will he keep Howard Willems’s experience in 

mind, do the right thing, and allow this Assembly to pass this 

amendment in short order? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work 

to ensure that best practices are being followed. We’ve only 

received the member’s opposite bill just immediately preceding 

this session. It would be appropriate for our officials to have a 

look at the legislation, review it, and try and make sure that we 

are still continuing to use best practices. 

 

I know that the practice within the ministry is to look across the 

country to make sure that other jurisdictions are doing things. 

And if there are things there that they are doing that are 

appropriate, we would adopt those practices as well. We will 

certainly look at the member’s opposite bill and see whether 

there’s things in there that would be beneficial or that would 

reduce possible chances of exposure. 

 

It is not our desire to engage in fearmongering or create a false 

sense of security where somebody may go into a building and 

do some work or do something where they would come into 

contact with something where the registry happens to be wrong. 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we are always open and 

amenable to look at new legislation or ideas, whether they come 

from the opposition or anyone else. We have a great deal of 

sympathy for Mr. Willems’s situation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it seems the Sask Party 

has adopted the no-money-down pitch you see on TV ads that 

usually put consumers on the hook for a much higher cost over 

the term. 

 

At its recent booklet launch, the Sask Party announced a 

rehashed and failed approach to finance our province’s 

infrastructure. A couple of years ago the Sask Party admitted 

their failed P3 [public-private partnership] secretariat didn’t 

work for the province and in fact wasted half a million dollars. 

The recently launched program SaskBuilds is a rehash of that 

same idea, and this government is risking public dollars. 

 

To the minister: why choose this failed approach? Why risk 

even more public dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the 

Throne we talked about a new organization, SaskBuilds, that 

has been constituted. And it is beginning to do its work. Its 

work is wide and varied. It is to look at all of the capital needs 

within the province whether it’s in health, education, highways, 

to look at all the capital needs and develop a capital plan 

moving forward, priorize that capital so we understand the 

need, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And part of the responsibility of SaskBuilds is also to look at 

the funding models, the different funding models that are 

available to ensure that in a growing economy, in a growing 

province — it certainly was not the case under 16 years of NDP 

[New Democratic Party] government, but certainly has been the 

case over the last number of years, a province that is growing 

— to look at different funding models that would be available 

to meet the needs of the province and the growth that we are 

experiencing. 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

We look at other jurisdictions across Canada especially, and we 

see that P3s have been used in a number of jurisdictions and 

have been used very successfully. I would also look at it in 

Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, where their brothers and sisters are the 

government, have used P3s, Mr. Speaker. And it seems to be 

quite fine in that jurisdiction. We want to explore the different 

uses of P3s across Canada and see how they will help address 

the capital needs of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the province needs 

infrastructure renewal, absolutely. That’s why we must be 

smart and effective with the investments that we make. Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve studied this model before. It failed, just as so 

many P3s have failed all over and across Canada. 

 

An October 14th Globe and Mail article on the hidden costs of 

P3s shared that UBC [University of British Columbia] business 

professor Anthony Boardman concluded, in a recent study on 

P3s, “Governments are essentially renting money they could 

borrow much more cheaply on their own because it’s politically 

expedient to defer expenses and avoid debt.” And Simon Fraser 

business professor Aidan Vining concluded, “They get a service 

now, and they get someone to pay for it later.” As Paul 

Wilkinson wrote in The StarPhoenix, “It’s a buy now, pay 

much more later scheme.” 

 

To the minister: why is he putting taxpayers on the hook for 

excess costs and unneeded risk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think we need to do a 

little bit of a history check for the leadership hopeful on the 

opposite side, Mr. Speaker. He should realize that of course 

under the NDP they started a P3 office in 2000, Mr. Speaker, 

headed up by who other than Pat Atkinson under CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

I know they’re trying to distance themselves from that old 

administration but, Mr. Speaker, they were pursuing the very 

thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you don’t have to look too far across Canada, in fact we 

can look next door and see what the NDP finance minister had 

to say about P3s. I’m sure they should know this information, 

Mr. Speaker, but I’ll reread it. This spring, Finance Minister 

Stan Struthers from the Government of Manitoba, which is an 

NDP government, says, “Public-private partnerships can 

provide an opportunity for the public sector to build projects 

more efficiently and receive better value for the money being 

invested.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s okay in Manitoba. But for some reason for the 

NDP here, we can’t even look at it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote that same Globe 

and Mail article citing a new U of T [University of Toronto] 

study of 28 Ontario P3 projects worth more than $7 billion: 

 

. . . found that public-private partnerships cost an average 

of 16 per cent more than conventional tendered contracts. 

That’s mainly because private borrowers typically pay 

higher interest rates than governments. 

 

Sixteen per cent more, Mr. Speaker. In these cases, debt doesn’t 

disappear. It simply gets booted down the line and eventually 

costs us much more. The costs are significantly higher. The 

Sask Party is ignoring common sense, evidence, and the best 

interests of the public on this front. Their no-money-down 

approach reflects nothing more than costly budgetary games to 

try to manufacture a rosier financial picture. 

 

To the minister: why risk wasting public dollars instead of 

investing in the infrastructure that we need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting. I 

would like to know that party’s position then on the recently 

announced expansion of Highway 914, Mr. Speaker, 914 which 

is in the Athabasca region. 

 

We heard from the opposition earlier, this week or at the end of 

last week, Mr. Speaker, that not enough was being done in the 

North. Well 914 is a public-private partnership. A private 

company, such as Cameco, is putting up half the funds and 

agreeing to look after the maintenance into the future, Mr. 

Speaker. That is a private-public partnership. In the NDP world, 

Mr. Speaker, that would never happen because in the NDP 

world there was never growth in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Information Services Corporation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, no one 

in the province can understand why the Sask Party wants to sell 

Information Services Corporation. This is especially perplexing 

because the Sask Party government has actually expanded the 

work that ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] does in its first term. In 2008, the Sask Party 

government moved vital statistics information from Health to 

ISC. And in 2010, the Sask Party moved the province’s 

corporate registry database from the Ministry of Justice to 

Information Services Corporation. More recently, Mr. Speaker, 

in 2011, ISC undertook new ways to help our potash industry 

and other businesses who use ISC data to expand and grow 

their operations. 

 

Why would the Sask Party privatize this profitable and 

ever-increasingly important Crown corporation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I said on the additional day of question period last 

week that no decision has been made on ISC. But if there was a 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

decision to be made, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made it very clear that 

vital statistics would not be part of any company moving 

forward. That would move back into the Ministry of Health. 

Vital statistics has been modernized from where it was before 

and can quite easily be transferred back into the Ministry of 

Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but I still find it very curious, and they still won’t 

answer the question. But the former premier, Premier Calvert, 

answered the question about why was ISC left out of the Crown 

protection Act, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, the former premier 

said he just forgot to put it in, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask the 

members opposite, is that exactly what happened? Did they just 

forget to put it in, Mr. Speaker, or was it in the Act and they 

took it out because they had ideas of selling ISC themselves? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear that the 

only thing that’s not on the selling block right now is vital 

statistics. This is not the position the Sask Party took on ISC in 

the past. In its 2008 annual report, the former minister said in 

an opening letter: 

 

My priority in the future remains the same: to ensure that 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations remain publicly 

owned and provide high-quality services at a low cost. 

This is a promise our government made to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and it is a promise we will keep. 

 

He then said, “ISC went on to have another outstanding year of 

business in 2008 and was recognized as one of Saskatchewan’s 

top 15 employers.” Why has the Sask Party flip-flopped on 

public ownership of one of the top 15 employers in this 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that ISC was 

not put into the Crown protection Act. And it was for a reason, 

Mr. Speaker, because we know that it was in the Act and taken 

out. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] to talk to her predecessor, Pat 

Atkinson, who asked CIC to take it out of the Act just before it 

was to be passed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had it in the Act. They took it out for a very 

good reason, Mr. Speaker. Because if you look at the history of 

what the NDPs wanted to do with ISC, you can take quotes like 

for example from Chris Axworthy. Chris Axworthy, who was 

the minister responsible, said, “Information Services Corp will 

succeed in tapping into the billion-dollar market of 

computerized land systems around the world.” Mr. Speaker, 

they had planned on ISC selling its goods around the world. 

How many sales did they make? None. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The history we’re 

interested in is how this minister is flip-flopping on what a 

previous minister in his government has said. It is jarring to 

hear the minister try to rewrite history. It’s more spin and PR 

[public relations], but it isn’t what the record shows. 

 

Just before the 2007 election campaign the current Premier, 

who was then the Leader of the Opposition, told the media in 

no uncertain terms “The Crown corporations will not be 

privatized under a Saskatchewan Party government.” Why has 

the Premier and his entire Sask Party government caucus 

returned to their 2003 plans for privatization of our Crowns, 

beginning with ISC? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if you go to the platform 

that was in the last provincial election, that the people of 

Saskatchewan quite obviously liked, Mr. Speaker, you would 

see that our platform was that we would support and not to 

change the Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 

living up to that very commitment, Mr. Speaker. ISC was left 

out of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ISC is a model company in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. It is doing great work and has done great work with 

great leadership from the board and its management and 

employees, Mr. Speaker. We believe that if there was a 

decision, if there was a decision to have the company go public, 

that the opportunity to sell, Mr. Speaker, its expertise around 

the world would be much more successful than it was 

government-owned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are many models of government-owned entities such as 

the PotashCorp that was publicly owned, Mr. Speaker, then 

went into the private sector and has been very, very successful. 

We have not made any decisions, as I’ve said, on ISC, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think it has a very good opportunity, if it was to 

change in the structure, to be very successful in the world 

market. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — A growing population is something 

we’re all proud of — families from all over the world choosing 

to build and better their lives here in our province. But in our 

classrooms, Mr. Speaker, the challenges are increasing because 

there are literally hundreds of more children in our schools 

going unfunded by that government. This mounts pressures on 

classrooms. I heard about it from the students and teachers from 

Winston Knoll that are here today. 

 

The school divisions are short on resources and are rightfully 

calling for changes. The teachers are strained to meet the needs 

of every child. This funding shortfall quite frankly impacts all 

students and classrooms. We’ve been calling for this to be 

addressed since budget time. Mr. Speaker, what’s the Sask 

Party’s plan to deal with and address growing enrolments in our 

schools? 

 

[10:45] 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

and I recognize the member opposite for the question. 

 

Last spring we announced with our sector partners to look at the 

funding formula. As you know, we have a new funding formula 

that will address equity in the education system. As you know, 

previously the foundation operating grant was a system that 

allowed for inequities all across the province. And the new 

funding formula is an attempt, and a very good one because we 

have agreement from our sector partners that it is a good first 

step in addressing those inequities. 

 

We agreed with our sector partners last spring, Mr. Speaker, 

that we would look at the process. We know that there are some 

tweaks that will need to be made. We held a technical briefing 

on September the 20th, and we received the information from 

them. And we will go forward to look at how we can mitigate 

those enrolment pressures, and we know there are some. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to require 

some action of that government, and to date we haven’t seen 

any of that. 

 

We’re all excited about an ever more diverse and growing 

Saskatchewan, but to ensure its success, we need resources in 

our classrooms. We need to support our diverse classrooms — 

English as an additional language supports, resources to support 

First Nations and Métis students’ success and the success of all 

students. Not properly funding education, as is occurring, 

impacts the learning of all. I’ve heard from educators all across 

Saskatchewan that the Premier’s plan to spend more on testing 

instead of investing and supporting our classrooms is 

backwards. 

 

To the minister: when will the Sask Party take the squeeze on 

our classrooms seriously and act to support and enrich 

education in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again I 

recognize the member opposite for the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government makes education a priority. It was 

prioritized in the Throne Speech. It was prioritized in the 

growth plan. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve witnessed it first-hand as I 

travelled around the province during Education Week, turning 

the sod in places like White City, Saskatoon, Swift Current. 

Five hundred million dollars in infrastructure, $500 million to 

fill a $1.2 billion hole, Mr. Speaker, left by 16 years of 

declining enrolments and difficult decisions to make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having said all of that, we’ve made a historical 

reduction in education property taxes. We promised a new 

funding formula to address years of funding inequity. We kept 

that promise. We promised to consult with the sector to help 

frame the funding formula, another promise kept. And we 

promised the technical forum, Mr. Speaker, and another 

promise kept. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — If the minister’s view of making 

education a priority is to have class sizes bursting at the seams, 

to have educational assistants cut across this province, to have 

services cut, to have full-day kindergarten cut, to have early 

learning in this province constrained, then I can clearly say we 

have a different idea of making education a priority. 

 

That minister, of all people, should know what the results will 

be if adequate resources aren’t placed in the classroom. And 

those results will not be positive for students or for our 

province as they could and should be, Mr. Speaker. Parents and 

families are worried about the impact of these crowded and 

strained classrooms. The divisions are calling for changes now 

— not in a number of weeks, not for the next budget cycle, but 

now. The matter is urgent. The funding needs to take actual 

population growth into account because those students are in 

the classrooms now, their futures impacted today. Will the 

minister step up, support education, and commit to this needed 

funding here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 

member opposite — I’ll try to keep an eye on the clock; I have 

45 seconds — Mr. Speaker, we are experiencing record growth 

in our province, population in our classrooms. I understand that 

those pressures are there. I’ve spent a couple of years in this 

sector. I know full well the impact of larger class sizes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our record stands on its own merit. We have 

increased funding to school divisions by 21 per cent since we 

took office. We’ve implemented a record property tax reduction 

to improve educational, and we are working with school 

divisions to recognize current-year enrolments, Mr. Speaker, in 

the funding formula. And I will be seeking a mid-year funding 

formula as we move forward. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) 

Amendment Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No 604, The 

Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place that Bill No. 604, The Public Health 

(Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act be now introduced 

and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Broten: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Potential Sale of Information Services Corporation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to rise and speak to this topic today. I’m going to be 

introducing a motion here in a few minutes. 

 

I just want to talk a little bit about why we think this is an 

important motion. Certainly the privatization of Crowns is 

something that’s very important to the public of this province. 

It’s part of our proud history as a province, and it’s something, I 

think, that sets us out as unique in the world. And certainly any 

time discussion on privatization arises, it’s something that 

we’re concerned about and we want to look at very closely, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As I indicated earlier in question period, we’re very concerned 

to see the flip-flop of this government on their position about 

Crowns. It appears to be somewhat misleading, as we know 

they originally campaigned on keeping the Crowns public. That 

was something they were proud of announcing. And we’ve 

heard it from the Premier; we’ve heard it from the ministers. 

And so there’s a lot of concern within our caucus, certainly 

within our party, and I would say within the public at large, Mr. 

Speaker, who are very proud of the long tradition of public 

owned companies and publicly held businesses, which make a 

lot of sense. And they’ve employed a lot of people and they’ve 

supported and provided good services to the people of 

Saskatchewan for many, many years. 

 

As we know, Information Services Corporation was a new 

Crown introduced in around 2000, and the sale of that Crown 

was not mentioned during the election or any Throne Speech. 

Certainly it was never contemplated by this government, this 

party, when it was in government. There was never any 

contemplation of sale. And when the media revealed that 

legislation’s being drafted to privatize this profitable Crown, it 

was a surprise to everyday families who count on public 

services and Crown corporations. What we’re hearing here is a 

surprise, and this is not what people voted for. 

 

Information Services Corporation is a very profitable Crown. 

We have knowledge that it has made $17.2 million in profit last 

year and of that $17.2 million, it actually paid back a $15.5 

million dividend back to taxpayers. The rates are competitive. 

The service is impeccable and excellent. The people are getting 

good service from Information Services Corporation. And it 

just doesn’t seem that this makes any sense. It seems like 

selling a profitable Crown like this, Mr. Speaker, is a very 

infuriating case of ideology trumping common sense. Once 

again we see that coming from this government where they take 

a position and in this case flip-flopped entirely on a previous 

position, misleading the public, and that are now considering 

selling something that’s very profitable and very useful to the 

public. So it just doesn’t make sense. 

 

As people . . . Well they may or may not know this, Mr. 

Speaker, but your relationship, every one of us has a very deep 

relationship, as it turns out, with this Crown corporation. It 

starts at birth and it ends in death. When you’re born, your birth 

statistics are all registered now with Information Services 

Corporation. When you buy property, that record is in 

Information Services Corporation. When you have . . . I’m just 

describing to the people, Mr. Speaker, the actual components of 

this corporation just so it’s for the record. And the minister is 

concerned about vital statistics. We are too, and that’s why 

we’re talking about vital statistics at this point in time. It’s a 

very important part of this corporation and we’re concerned 

about what happens to it if the corporation’s sold. If it’s 

retained, where is it going to go back to? There’ll be no Crown 

agency that’s capable of handling it anymore. 

 

One of the other things that happens: you get a mortgage; that’s 

on the record. If you buy a car or a vehicle and you want to get 

security on some financing for that vehicle, we have the 

personal property registry. So as you see, you go throughout 

your life; there are various interactions with this Crown. 

 

Anyone who starts a business or anyone who’s involved in the 

non-profit sector will be dealing with the corporations branch. 

And the COBRA [corporations branch] number that they get, 

the nine-digit number that you get as a corporation, stays with 

you, either non-profit or profit, for-profit corporations. That’s 

part of your interaction with this Crown and with the registries 

it maintains. 

 

Of course that’s a public registry that people can search and 

find out information. It’s available to everyone that’s there. And 

then as you move along and you get later on in your life, when 

you pass away, there’s again several interactions with this 

Crown corporation — first of all through vital statistics and 

your death certificate, but also when your estate is wound up 

and all the administration of the estate. If you have any 

property, that’s again, you’re dealing with Information Services 

Corporation. This is a very important public organization. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, there’s some interesting . . . If you 

look on the history of land management and land registries in 

Saskatchewan, there’s some very good information that’s 

available from the Saskatchewan Archives Board, and I think 

this is something that’s really been lost since this Crown came 

into effect, is the importance of the history of the land titles 

system in Saskatchewan. 

 

If you travel through the province in any area where there was a 

land registry established — there was probably 10 or 12 land 

registries that were established — their, first of all the 

architecture alone of those buildings is something that is a 

proud monument to the land system in Saskatchewan. And I 

can think of the Land Titles Building in Saskatoon now on 21st 

Street, where that’s a beautiful piece of architecture. It’s 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

currently occupied by some law offices and they very carefully 

maintain the heritage aspect of that building. 

 

In 2003 I was fortunate to spend time as a Crown expert at ISC 

as they converted, and one of the things that’s very vital to 

Information Services Corporation is the abstract registry of 

Crown land, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure the minister’s familiar 

with this particular registry. Indeed the registrar’s responsible 

for the abstract registry but . . . Actually it’s called the abstract 

directory. It’s not a registry. It’s a directory. But the registrar of 

ISC is responsible for maintaining the directory of all Crown 

lands in the province — all unsold, unpatented lands, including 

the lands in our mineral layer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m not sure this is something that the people of 

Saskatchewan want a private corporation, a monopoly, to be 

managing. I’m not sure this is something that the Ministry of 

Energy and Resources would be interested in. They are working 

very, very closely on the cadastral with ISC to ensure that the 

staking from mining and that the mining claims can be done 

more efficiently using the geodata in the cadastral, in the 

mineral layer. So that’s one area I think Energy and Resources 

would be very concerned about, that this data and this 

information was handed over and entrusted to a private 

corporation that could go bankrupt, that could do things that are 

not appropriate, and there’d be no controls over that. This just 

doesn’t make any sense to sell off something like this that has 

been a key feature of the orderly development of land titles in 

Saskatchewan and of mineral development, Mr. Speaker. So 

these are things that we are very concerned about. 

 

The Dominion government back in the 1870s was very wise, 

and we had some knowledge in those days, seeing what 

happened in the eastern provinces about the difficulties with the 

deed system. The notion of using a Torrens system of land 

development was very popular in those days and our Dominion 

land surveyors did an excellent, excellent job of developing the 

survey fabric of this province. And we continue to develop the 

survey fabric to this day using the Torrens system. 

 

This is something that has been the envy of the eastern 

provinces. It’s something that has been very important for the 

entrepreneurs and business developers. It was really important 

to people like my grandfather who came out and homesteaded 

in 1909. When he got his land grant after he perfected his 

homestead application, in 1909 he got his first grant, the 

homestead grant. And our family farm just celebrated 100 years 

of farming because of the orderly system of land titles. Of 

course that followed the successful settling of treaty claims in 

the 1800s as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

So we’re talking about a vital, historic, successful Crown-run, 

Crown-owned system that has made total sense for the last 130 

years basically since the Dominion Lands Act was passed in 

1870. Why, why on earth would we ever want to turn that over 

to a private corporation? It doesn’t make sense. 

 

The claims that this minister has that the ISC’s having difficulty 

finding sales with other governments is simply false. We know 

that they’re talking to the Yukon government right now and that 

they’re negotiating and looking at a potential land registry in 

the Yukon. The Yukon’s not scared of the Saskatchewan 

government. And in fact this government is seeking out, 

actively seeking out other registries run by governments 

because they trust them and they have confidence in them. 

 

For example PRIME [process renewal and infrastructure 

management enhancement], the project renewal and 

information management enhancement project implemented by 

the Minister of Energy and Resources, they are actively 

working with the Government of Alberta to use their existing 

registry to use in Saskatchewan to facilitate better handling of 

royalty collection and well site information and pipeline 

information and all the things that are in a public registry in 

Alberta. It makes sense to deal with another government, and it 

certainly makes sense for ISC to make those services available 

to other governments. There’s no evidence from ISC or this 

minister that other governments are scared of the Saskatchewan 

government. It just doesn’t make sense. 

 

Furthermore when this government is looking at perhaps 

establishing a lobbying registry, you’ll see in the report of the 

lobbying registry report that was introduced and accepted by 

this Assembly last spring you will see that one of the 

recommendations in that report is that this government look at 

what the Alberta government is doing in relation to its lobbying 

registry. And we never ever made the recommendation that the 

lobbying registry should be sold to a private individual and be 

handled in a private level. It doesn’t make sense. 

 

There are certain things, Mr. Speaker, that is entirely 

appropriate for a Crown to handle. And I submit, and I think the 

people of Saskatchewan agree, that a land titles registry, a land 

surveys registry, certainly the vital statistics — and the 

minister’s clear that’s not on the selling block — but also the 

corporate registry and all of the other services that ISC 

provides, there’s no need for it to be handed over as a 

monopolistic control by a private company who could do 

irreparable damage to the system and the reputation of our land 

titles. That would have huge reverberations throughout the 

business and the economy. And I think the land surveyors 

themselves have submitted a letter indicating their concern 

about this proposed idea. 

 

I know the minister keeps saying that they’re not doing it. But 

then why, I want to know, why he has actually introduced . . . 

or indicated that legislation’s been drafted. That is also 

concerning, Mr. Speaker, because if legislation’s already been 

drafted, they are obviously presupposing what the end of the 

result of their audit is. So that’s not something that makes me 

very comfortable. 

 

But a letter dated October 16th, 2012 . . . I’m not the only one, 

Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Land Surveyors Association, a 

venerable association that does very good work in this province 

. . . These land surveyors are of the highest calibre. I’ve worked 

with a lot of them in my former career. And they said, they 

responded to comments made by this minister on Friday in his 

comments to The StarPhoenix on Friday, October 12th. And 

just to put that in the record, the minister says they are, he’s 

looking at options for the company to move more into the 

private sector. This is the complete flip-flop, Mr. Speaker, from 

what his predecessor said in 2008. So that’s of concern. Why 

are they flip-flopping on their promises to the people of 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

Saskatchewan? He says it gives the company much more room 

to grow and expand outside of our borders. 

 

He also was quoted as saying, “There is a real hesitation for 

other jurisdictions to contract a government-owned company.” 

Again there’s no evidence of that statement. There’s nothing to 

back it up. And in fact I’ve given you, Mr. Speaker, a couple of 

examples of the exact opposite where this government is 

actually looking to other government registries for services 

because they have confidence in them. So it makes absolutely 

no sense what he’s saying and he hasn’t backed up any of those 

statements. 

 

What the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors had to say on October 

16th to the Premier of this province, they said, “As this 

proposed privatization process seems to be moving forward 

rather quickly, we felt that we should respond immediately.” 

And previously to that they said, “The news came to us as a 

shock as it was for other professionals in this province and 

more importantly to the public as a whole.” 

 

So they go on to give several quotes in support of their position. 

It’s quite a long letter but the final quote I want to read to you 

right now, Mr. Speaker, is this, the quote: 

 

Before coming to a decision, we trust that the Government 

of Saskatchewan will seek input from the professions that 

have an intimate relationship with ISC and of course the 

public. The ramifications of the sale of ISC will adversely 

affect the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So this is something, Mr. Speaker, that there’s definitely 

concern. We are worried about the impact of this on the 

public’s ability to have fair prices. If it’s privatized, who knows 

what it’s going to cost to get a mortgage? Who knows what it’s 

going to cost to get a corporation registered? Who knows what 

it’s going to cost to get a land, a survey of land registered? Who 

knows about the integrity of the system and whether there’ll be 

the back . . . And I think most importantly one of the essential 

features of the land titles system is the indefeasibility of title. 

This is also something that’s very envied across Canada 

because this system, the Torrens system and the land registry, 

has an absolute guarantee that what you see on the title is 

correct. 

 

And that’s a guarantee that’s backed up by an assurance fund 

that is there and available for the people of Saskatchewan in the 

event that there is an error that causes damage to businesses and 

to individual landowners, Mr. Speaker. And that includes 

people with mineral titles or mineral leases registered in not 

only in the land registry, but it also extends to the Crown 

abstract directory which this minister hasn’t even spoke about. 

 

So I think those are a number of concerns. Unfortunately I have 

more to say, but the time is running out. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

going to pass this on to other people to make comments, and I 

will move a motion that says: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for planning 

to sell the profitable Information Services Corporation. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for planning 

to sell the profitable Information Services Corporation. 

 

Is the Assembly . . . I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the 

past five years, our government has continuously shown its 

unequivocal support for Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. 

Much to the chagrin of members opposite, our government has 

routinely stated its commitment to support The Crown 

Corporations Public Ownership Act. This commitment was 

made in our 2007 election platform and in our most recent 

platform in 2011. Mr. Speaker, an evaluation of ISC is being 

done, and no final decisions have been made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have committed to ensuring that Saskatchewan 

residents have one of the lowest cost utility bundles in the 

country. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people enjoy lower 

costs for telephone, electricity, heating, and auto insurance than 

all other provinces, other than Manitoba. In Saskatchewan our 

utility rates are $3,800 cheaper per year than Ontario. And 

compared to Alberta, our utility costs are approximately $1,300 

cheaper per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when our government took office, we inherited a 

massive infrastructure deficit within our province’s Crown 

corporations. And not only were we faced with a massive 

infrastructure deficit. Since 2008 our Crowns have had to 

continuously invest in infrastructure to meet the demands of a 

growing population and a growing economy, Mr. Speaker. 

Since our government took office, we have invested $3.8 billion 

in SaskTel, SaskPower, and SaskEnergy to improve, expand, 

and continue to provide high-quality service at an affordable 

price. 

 

In the first term of the Saskatchewan Party government, we 

have increased the capital spending on SaskPower, SaskTel, 

and SaskEnergy by 39 per cent which is more than the 18 per 

cent increase in spending in the last term under the NDP 

government. In our first five years in government, capital 

expenditures at SaskPower, SaskTel, and SaskEnergy will total 

over 95 per cent more than the New Democrats spent in their 

final five years. Our government’s capital expenditures in all 

Crown corporations from 2008 to 2012 are 77 per cent higher 

than the average amount spent over the last 10 years of that . . . 

under the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has invested $1.7 billion in capital 

expansion upgrades since 2007. Our government has provided 

SaskTel with $48 million to develop 56 new digital cellular 

sites in rural communities. And SaskTel will continue to meet 

the increasing demands of a growing population, particularly 

for data and cell service. Over the next seven years, our 

government will invest $670 million to upgrade the broadband 

network and to provide fibre to some of the homes in the 

province’s largest urban centres. Mr. Speaker, these are 

investments that show our government’s indisputable support 

for our province’s Crown corporations, and they are 

investments that are designed to meet the demands of a growing 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

province and a growing economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, due to the unprecedented growth in 

Saskatchewan, SaskPower is now facing almost four times the 

amount of transmission construction than it experienced five 

years ago. Mr. Speaker, SaskPower will continue to maintain a 

diversified portfolio of power generation sources. SaskPower 

will pursue a dual strategy of upgrading its aging power 

generating capacity and transmission lines while ensuring the 

power system meets the increased demand of one of Canada’s 

fastest growing economies. 

 

To accomplish these goals, $9.8 billion in capital investment 

will be undertaken over the next 10 years to expand and 

refurbish existing infrastructure and to develop new 

infrastructure that is needed. In 2011 alone, SaskPower invested 

$625 million in electrical infrastructure. And in the past five 

years, our government has invested two and one-half billion 

dollars in SaskPower’s electrical infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, 

under this government, SaskPower is developing its largest 

infrastructure project ever, the $1.2 billion Boundary dam 

integrated carbon capture and sequestration project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is no secret that Saskatchewan’s population is 

growing at its fastest and most sustained rate since 1921. 

SaskEnergy has seen its customer base grow by more than 

30,000 new residential, business, and industrial customers since 

2007, expanding it more than double the 10-year average. 

We’ve increased safety spending to $79 million for 2012 with a 

further increase to 100 million for next year, the most ever by 

SaskEnergy. These investments will elevate safety-related 

system upgrading for SaskEnergy’s 81,000 kilometre pipeline 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations are a vital 

component of our government’s environmental initiatives. 

SaskPower now provides loans for homeowners that choose to 

install geothermal heating. These loans are available for new 

home construction or for retrofits in existing homes and, Mr. 

Speaker, I know of many, many homes in rural Saskatchewan 

that are now using geothermal as their main heating source for 

not only their homes but their farmyards. 

 

SGI now provides a 20 per cent green rebate on the cost of 

insurance and registration for Saskatchewan people who drive a 

hybrid or a high fuel-efficient vehicle. And our government has 

committed to doubling Saskatchewan’s wind power capacity by 

the year 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, water is one of our province’s most vital 

resources, and our government is committed to ensuring that 

Saskatchewan has the water capacity to meet the demands of a 

growing economy and the growth in our population. In the year 

2011, SaskWater achieved its strongest earnings to date, 

posting a surplus of $3.5 million due to an increased focus on 

growing the business and significant project management work 

with the potash industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has released our 25-year 

Saskatchewan water security plan fulfilling a commitment that 

was made during the 2011 election. For the first time all of the 

government’s core water management responsibilities and 

technical expertise will come together to ensure our 

comprehensive and integrated approach to our Saskatchewan 

water management system. This plan will ensure the 

sustainability of and the quality of Saskatchewan’s water 

supplies while protecting drinking and our water supplies from 

the source to the tap. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is merely undertaking an 

evaluation of ISC and no decision has been made. Since our 

party was formed in 1999, the members opposite have been 

fearmongering that our party has some secret agenda. Mr. 

Speaker, this is simply not the case. Our government has 

repeatedly and publicly committed our support to The Crown 

Corporations Public Ownership Act. Our government has made 

record investments in Crown corporations and infrastructure 

over the past five years. We have committed to continuing 

investment in our Crown corporations and to ensure that they 

provide valuable, efficient services at some of the lowest costs 

in this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our supposed secret agenda must be an awfully 

well-kept secret because the members opposite are the only 

ones that seem to have heard it. This government believes in 

our Crown corporations, and we are committed to making sure 

that they meet the demands of one of Canada’s hottest 

economies here in this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are undertaking an evaluation of ISC. There 

are no final decisions that have been made. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to thank you for our time here today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to join in the debate on the future of ISC and the 

future of the Crown corporations as the Sask Party certainly has 

not defended the Crown corporations in any way, shape, or 

form, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And before I get into the whole issue, I want to make reference 

to a comment made by the Minister of Education, I believe, 

when he made reference to 16 years, what were the NDP doing 

then, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll clarify for the member because the 

member is fairly new to the Assembly. In the 16 years, Mr. 

Speaker, that the NDP were in power, it took us 14 years to 

clean up the last Tory mess, Mr. Speaker. Fourteen years of that 

16 years was left cleaning up the Tory mess, where this 

government paid 2 to $3 million a day on interest alone, Mr. 

Speaker, on a $5 billion budget. We paid 2 to $3 million a day 

on interest alone, never mind debt, Mr. Speaker. So it took us a 

good 14 years, 14 years to clean up that Tory mess of the last 

16 years. 

 

So when he uses that argument, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan want to get up and they want to say, yes, that’s 

absolutely true. History will reflect upon the fact that the 

incredible financial challenge we had when we took over from 

that government, Mr. Speaker, was a huge, huge amount of . . . 

it took a huge amount of work and effort by the people of 

Saskatchewan working with the NDP administration, Mr. 

Speaker. So 16 years, yes, 16 years we were in power; 14 years 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

of that, Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity to clean up that 

mess. And, Mr. Speaker, we did. 

 

Now today, Mr. Speaker, one of the most valuable tools in 

cleaning up that last Tory mess, Mr. Speaker, in the last Tory 

mess was we had to use the Crowns. The Crown corporations 

came to the aid of the people of Saskatchewan, and they 

actually helped solve the problems that the Tories created when 

they were in government in 1980, Mr. Speaker. We had a 

deficit and, Mr. Speaker, we had a debt in the province of 

Saskatchewan that was third behind health and education, I 

believe, or maybe even second to education. I think health care 

was the highest expenditure, and then the debt, you know, 

servicing the debt I think was second. In fact it was even higher 

than the education budget when the NDP took over, and that’s 

the result of the Tory mess, Mr. Speaker, left by that party, Mr. 

Speaker. They will not rewrite history, Mr. Speaker, because 

bottom line is these Crown corporations are valuable. The 

people of Saskatchewan want to make sure that they are there 

for the future. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’m having some difficulty hearing 

the member from Athabasca even though he’s close to the 

Chair. I would ask . . . The member from Athabasca currently 

has the floor. I would ask members to give him the opportunity 

to speak to the motion. I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So 

standing up here again, Mr. Speaker, they talk about the 16 

years that the NDP were in power. That minister knows very 

well the huge debt that we faced. And now he’s sitting amongst 

those that created the debt, and yet he has the gall to stand up 

today and turn around and blame the NDP for the fact there 

they were there 16 years and didn’t address some of these 

concerns. 

 

But that wasn’t good enough, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t good 

enough. He was handed a note. And as a new minister, I would 

expect that he would have a bit of a foresight in terms of how 

he wants to approach his new role. But no, they give him the 

old Tory note, blame them for being in power 16 years. It 

seems to work with some of our right wing people. So let’s 

keep singing that song. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was a great personal disappointment today 

to hear the minister talk about the 16 years that the NDP were 

in power, when we used the Crowns to really balance the books 

and bring back Saskatchewan from the brink of bankruptcy 

created by the Saskatchewan Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the things that’s really important is that Crowns 

like ISC provide a valuable service, Mr. Speaker. They provide 

a valuable service. And when the NDP lost in 2007, Mr. 

Speaker, it wasn’t good enough. It wasn’t good enough that the 

NDP left them wads of cash in the bank, Mr. Speaker, $2.3 

billion in the bank. It wasn’t good enough, Mr. Speaker. We 

also left them a booming economy, Mr. Speaker. Oil and gas 

companies were coming to town. The potash industry was 

really picking up their investment, Mr. Speaker, and people 

were moving to Saskatchewan. The population was growing 

and that was all compliments of the people of Saskatchewan 

alongside the NDP administration. And history will reflect that, 

Mr. Speaker, not messages from the Saskatchewan Party at all, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the biggest weapons that we used in addressing not 

only the debt and the deficit, Mr. Speaker, but the fact that 

building this economy, was the Crown corporations. ISC took a 

lot of investments, and it took a lot of investments from the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. And I remember the minister at the time 

was Eric Cline. And Eric Cline fought to build up the 

Information Services Corporation. He done a remarkable job, 

Mr. Speaker, and today they’re making profits. I think it’s $100 

million over the last five years. That’s an impressive Crown 

corporation. 

 

Why would you want to sell an impressive Crown corporation 

like Investment Saskatchewan? Because you know why, Mr. 

Speaker? Do you know why? They came back to finish off 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, so everything is owned by 

everybody out of the province including the Crowns. That’s 

their job today, Mr. Speaker. Make no bones about it. The 

people of Saskatchewan know very well what their agenda is on 

the Crown corporations, and that is to get rid of them and to 

make sure that they’re weakened so they can sell them off. 

That’s their plan. And it’s not only liquor stores, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s going to be STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 

next. What’s next? The casinos. 

 

ISC is up next. The conservatives want to sell Information 

Services Corporation. In a heartbeat they’ll do it, Mr. Speaker. 

And the NDP are going to stand up and we’re going to fight 

back and tell the people of Saskatchewan, they betrayed your 

trust on the Crown corporations. They betrayed your trust when 

they said they wouldn’t sell the Crowns. Guess what? They’re 

slowly selling the Crowns. They’re slowly selling the Crowns, 

Mr. Speaker. They want to get rid of them. They want to sell it 

to their right wing buddies because after they’re done politics, 

they’ll sit on some of these boards that they privatized and 

guess what? That’s their cushy retirement plans and they look 

important again, Mr. Speaker. So they’re coming back to finish 

off the Crowns and finish off Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I tell the people wherever I go that despite the fact that they 

want to say that they’re here to protect the Crowns, that’s not 

the plan — not the plan at all. I tell the people of Saskatchewan 

this. They are going to sell everything. Anything that it is not 

bolted down, they will have a wall-to-wall sale, including our 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker, for next to nothing, Mr. Speaker. A 

wall-to-wall sale. 

 

So how do they finish us off, Mr. Speaker? How do they finish 

off Saskatchewan? Well one of the things they do is they sell 

off the Crowns so we have no tools available for the future. 

What do they do? They’re hiding debt, hiding long-term debt 

dressed up as P3 partnerships, Mr. Speaker. They’re hiding 

long-term debt. The people of Saskatchewan have got to pay 

that. But they want to sell, buy now and pay later. And the 

people of Saskatchewan don’t want that, Mr. Speaker. They 

spin facts. They spin their story to a point where people are 

beginning to say, what the heck is going on there? This is a 

bizarre government. This is really bizarre. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they deny their actions. They deny their 

actions, and they blame others, Mr. Speaker. Why doesn’t the 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

minister stand up in the Assembly today and say, we are going 

to do what the Saskatchewan people elected us to do, what we 

promised to do? What we promised to do was not sell the 

Crowns. 

 

So one of the biggest things, Mr. Speaker, my message to the 

Sask Party is: if you promise, you should follow through. You 

should follow through with your promise; otherwise you’re 

betraying the trust of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So what I tell everybody when we talk about the Crowns, you 

look at the example of Northland Power in North Battleford, 

Mr. Speaker, a private company from Ontario, I believe. It built 

that . . . built a power station. SaskPower could have built that, 

Mr. Speaker. I believe the SaskPower project . . . You had two 

projects: one for SaskPower; one by the private sector. The 

SaskPower project come in under budget and on time, Mr. 

Speaker. Now the other Northland company, I understood, was 

over budget and there was a lot of problems there, Mr. Speaker. 

But the point is that SaskPower could have built both those 

units. But the Sask Party got along and said, we’ll bring our 

company in, our friends in from Ontario. We’ll guarantee them 

a low price for the next 20 years. And guess who’s paying for 

that? We’re paying for that, Mr. Speaker, through our power 

bill. 

 

And that’s another example of how this Sask Party has betrayed 

the trust, has betrayed the trust of the people of Saskatchewan 

in the Crown corporations, and every backbencher and every 

right winger over there knows that’s the truth, Mr. Speaker. But 

they’d rather blame us in the past: oh we didn’t put it on under 

this protected list. My goodness. You’ve got to have a better, 

more intelligent response than that, Mr. Speaker. I know this is 

crass politics. But my goodness, you’ve got to have a better 

response than that. The people of Saskatchewan ask you. 

 

So I sit here, and I watch them dilly-dally about the Crowns. 

What are we going to do? Are we going to do this? Or are we 

going to do that? They’re going to have their wall-to-wall sale, 

but let’s not tell anybody. But the people of Saskatchewan are 

very, very, very sharp, Mr. Speaker. And as they get up and 

they get angry and they start throwing their hands up in the air 

and they turn red — they turn absolutely red when we talk 

about the Crowns. And on this side we refer to that as a severe 

allergic reaction to betraying the Saskatchewan people’s trust in 

protecting our Crowns, and it’s also a severe allergic reaction to 

the truth, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to send you a message next election. 

We trusted you to protect the Crowns. You have not done so. 

Shame on you. And it’s time to get rid of you all. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always interesting to follow 

the speeches always made by the member opposite from 

Athabasca. 

 

You know, I just want to correct a little bit of record. I will 

admit that they faced some challenges when they first got 

elected. But what did they do with them challenges? They made 

a total mess of it for 16 years. When we had challenges, we 

turned this province around. We met them challenges, and we 

made changes. The people of Saskatchewan will never forget 

the mess that you guys made for 16 years. 

 

But we’re dealing right now with the motion dealing with ISC, 

and the member from Nutana had mentioned a little bit about 

the history. And when I was listening to the speech from the 

member from The Battlefords, he had talked about the original 

land titles building. I didn’t even realize it, that it was in North 

Battleford in the North-West Territories, being restored right 

now by I believe some realtors and community-based 

organizations that are reliving it. 

 

Most of the constituents in my area and throughout the province 

may not be familiar with ISC until you actually do a land 

transaction. And you know and they do a very, very good job of 

it. The people that have dealt with them have commented that 

they’re very impressed with the professionalism and the jobs 

that they’re doing. 

 

You know, and also we’re talking a little bit about history. I 

want to talk about the history of our party’s support for the 

Crowns. You know, when we were in opposition we fully 

supported the NDP’s Crown corporation public ownership Act. 

 

On November 18th, 2004 — I can still remember that day; I 

was here — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act 

was introduced in the legislature and read for the first time. 

This Act then received reading on November 2nd, 2004. And I 

would like to reaffirm today what was the case in 2004 by 

reading comments made during the second reading speeches. 

You know, prior to the vote that happened, the member for 

Cypress Hills spoke on behalf of the Sask Party, and he spoke 

quite eloquently, I may add. He said, and I quote: 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

make a few brief comments on The Crown Corporations 

Public Ownership Act. For the record, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Party supports this bill. The Saskatchewan 

Party supports the continued public ownership of the 

major Crowns. 

 

In the last election the NDP grossly misrepresented the 

Saskatchewan Party position on the Crowns, and we’ve 

learned from that experience that we must be absolutely 

clear in stating our position on Crown ownership. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party, like the majority of 

Saskatchewan people, believe the major Crowns should 

stay in public hands. We believe that the major Crowns 

and their employees do an excellent job, providing 

services to the people of Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, we have no problem supporting this bill . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes it is the role 

of government to provide essential services like power, 

like gas, like insurance, like telecommunications services, 

but they need to be directed to the people of Saskatchewan 

at the lowest possible cost. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports 

The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act and 

commits to the people of Saskatchewan that a 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

Saskatchewan Party government will keep the major 

Crowns publicly owned while focusing on providing the 

best possible service to the Saskatchewan people. Mr. 

Speaker, all the while at the lowest possible cost. Thank 

you. 

 

[11:30] 

 

You know, our government has further supported the Crowns 

by investing in the badly neglected infrastructure that was left 

behind by the previous member. You know, the ex-Liberal that 

spoke before me — is now an NDP — you know, talked and 

ranted about how they support the Crowns. But you want to 

look at how they’ve shortchanged them over the years and look 

at how we’ve invested money. 

 

The SaskPower capital spending in the first three years of our 

government: 2008, 422 million; 2009, 640 million; 2010, 565 

million. Now the NDP government record pales in comparison. 

They’re spending averaged a meagre 280 million annually for 

the last 10 years that they were in power. 

 

We can talk about capital spending at SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and 

SaskPower by the Saskatchewan Party government: 2008, 718 

million; 2009, 967 million; 2010, 979 million. You know, when 

we came to power, we discovered that our Crown infrastructure 

had been neglected for years. In our first five years in 

government, capital expenditures at SaskPower, SaskTel, 

SaskEnergy totalled and will total over 90 per cent more than 

the members opposite, the New Democrats, spent in their final 

five years if you want to match five years against five years. 

 

We have a record of building our Crowns. The book value of 

our three major utility Crowns has increased by nearly 53 per 

cent between 2007 and 2011, and that is pouring money back. 

That is building SaskTel towers. I can remember when first 

elected, there was no cellphone coverage. That was our biggest, 

biggest of calls. SaskPower — I mean how many lines were 

overhead? They brought . . . We brought a program where we 

were paying to bury lines in farmyards if they were close to 

bins, and SaskPower paid for that. The farmer didn’t. He just 

had to pay for the electrical box that was installed above the 

ground, but all the underground lines in the yard were buried 

for safety. Those were the issues that we were dealing with, was 

a shortcoming when we were first elected. And those are the 

ones we’re addressing through our Crowns. We’re far from 

neglecting our Crowns like the member was talking about, 

opposite. All you have to do is look at our past record. In the 

last four years you want to compare, NDP government, the 

value of the Crowns only increased by 23 per cent compared to 

ours, 53 per cent. 

 

You know, the NDP continues to rely not on ideas and progress 

but fearmongering and baseless accusations. You know, they’ve 

been running on that on the Crowns for how many years. And 

the people, they’re not believing it. They’re not buying it. You 

can just tell by the last election. They know the infrastructure 

that we’re providing out there, working with our Crowns, 

working for the best possible service for our constituents. 

Because that’s what the people expect to be provided — the 

best services through the Crowns, professional service. 

 

I mean you look at the people that are in the Crowns. They’re 

out in our area — our SaskTel representatives, our SaskPower 

workers. I mean the last . . . I can remember the storms we’ve 

had in June, the hours they put in working around the clock to 

restore power. People, you know, they respect that, and they 

respect the workers that they were doing, and we respect 

SaskPower in helping them do that. I mean they met some huge 

challenges in June with the major storms we’ve had. It wasn’t 

as bad in our area, but I believe up in The Battlefords, up 

towards P.A. [Prince Albert], I mean, you know, power out for 

days. And they were working, you know, around the clock, a lot 

of them getting no sleep for hours . . . I mean for days, working 

on that. So that’s why we’ve invested the money in SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy, SaskTel. That’s why we’ve worked with the 

infrastructure. We know what they provide, the importance to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Saskatchewan Crown corporations are also a vital 

component to Saskatchewan environmental initiatives. You 

know, SGI now provides a 20 per cent green rebate on the cost 

of insurance and registration for Saskatchewan people who 

drive a hybrid, a high fuel efficient vehicle. SaskPower now 

provides loans for homeowners that choose to install 

geothermal heating. These loans are available for new homes, 

construction, or for refits on existing homes. You know, those 

are the many ways that our Crowns . . . And we’ve supported 

them in environmental ways and also working with the people. 

 

You know, we look at what we did in the last five years we’ve 

been in government, the money that we’ve put into the Crowns, 

and how we’ve had to rebuild them because basically the NDP 

basically stripped most of the capital out of them. They had no 

infrastructure capital spending left. When we first took power 

and we’re looking at their books, I mean their infrastructure 

capital was way down here. They were taking that away from 

them. They did not put the money back into them. 

 

We are putting the money back into the Crowns to get them 

back into shape so they can provide good service for the people 

of Saskatchewan and never mind what the member opposite 

says. The election says what the people believe, that they 

believe in what we’ve been doing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to get up on this very important 

motion, because people out in the province are deeply 

concerned about the mixed messages that we’re getting from 

this government. They can’t seem to quite get their story 

straight on their position on the Crowns. Now they want to 

deflect and they want to spin and they want to create a lot of 

other stories out there, but they don’t want people to be taking a 

look at what their plan is. 

 

You know, ever since their former leader Elwin Hermanson 

was caught in the election of 2003 musing about the potential 

for Crowns, this party, the Sask Party, has learned to be very 

careful about message management when it comes to Crowns. 

They don’t want to be too clear. They can wrap themselves 

around the Crown flag, like we’re seeing some of the 

backbenchers do today, just trying to say, oh we’re there for the 

Crowns. But we heard earlier in question period the minister in 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

fact be kind of vague about, is it just the 13 Crowns that are 

listed in the Act, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 

Act, that they’re really committed to? Those 13? And the other 

57 are really up for sale? We’re hearing mixed messages. 

 

And that’s what we’re hearing when we’re out on the doorsteps 

or at different events. People aren’t sure, aren’t sure what this 

government’s plans are when it comes to Crowns. Are they 

truly like what they said in their election brochure? And I have 

it here, that they’re going to keep their Crowns publicly owned 

to provide high quality utility services for Saskatchewan people 

at the lowest cost. So does that mean just the utility Crowns that 

are the 13 or are they talking about the other 57 could be up on 

the auction block? 

 

And I think my colleague from Athabasca said it very well 

when he talked about it. It seems this government’s position is, 

if it isn’t bolted down, if it’s not bolted down it for sure is for 

sale. We’re going to take a look at it. We’re going to take a 

look at it because when you look at their document, and this is 

it right here. I’ve got the whole thing right here. Now if they 

want to refer me to the page but I’ve got the whole piece, but it 

says, “Keeping our Crowns publicly owned to provide high 

quality utility services to Saskatchewan people at the lowest 

cost.” So was that just the utility Crowns they are talking 

about? Are they just talking about the 13? It’s kind of vague. 

It’s a message that’s not clear. They do acknowledge in their 

election platform that they did vote for the 2004 piece of 

legislation that we had put forward, but they’re not talking 

about whether they’re going to honour that or not; they’re just 

acknowledging that they did vote for it. 

 

You know, so there’s some real questions we have here, and I 

think when we’re out talking to people, they have questions. 

They want to know what’s happening with this government, 

because when they were in campaign mode they seemed to be 

wrapping themselves up around the publicly owned Crowns, 

and don’t worry about anything because we’re going to be there 

for all 70 Crowns. And now they’re saying something kind of 

different. They’re kind of hedging their bets, and I think that 

it’s completely right to be worried about it and I think this 

motion is completely in order, that this Assembly condemn this 

government for planning to sell the profitable Information 

Services Corporation. 

 

And we’ve outlined the fact that this Crown is doing a really 

good job of the work that people expect, that it’s had a strong 

turnaround. And we remember the early days when things 

weren’t going as well as they might for this Crown, but with 

good management, it’s brought it around and now we see, just 

for example, that this government transferred over to ISC just a 

few short years ago, the whole vital statistics from Health. You 

know, and so what a switch to say, now we might bring it back. 

How does this fit in to their . . . Does this make common sense? 

How does this fit into their lean approach to be moving things 

around like this from one place to another? I mean, I think with 

a lean approach or maybe a common sense approach, that these 

folks should take a real common sense approach, is that once 

you make a plan you kind of stick to it. And when you’re 

moving different departments or different services around, 

people get used to it. They don’t want things sort of shifted 

here, shifted there, back and forth. 

 

This is critical. You know, we’ve talked a lot about vital 

statistics on this side, particularly when we’ve seen the new 

initiatives from this government around voter suppression when 

it comes to photo ID [identification], that they want to do 

picture ID. That’s a big issue. And now you’re involving ISC, 

and how can this be appropriate? And I think that we have 

some real concerns. 

 

You know when I talk to people that they’re very concerned 

about what this may mean if we transfer this over to a private 

corporation, if we sell it to a private corporation. It would now 

. . . People accept that land titles and that type of thing really is 

appropriate for government service that we understand a 

monopoly, and in theory we should be having the lowest cost 

services there. People understand that if you do make a profit in 

this case, 100 million is very decent, but at least it’s going to 

the people of Saskatchewan in terms of health care, education, 

highways, those things that we think are very important. 

 

Of course this government is talking about, you know, opening 

up private liquor board stores because of the concern around 

costs. Well we know that one of the things around when you 

have government services like liquor board stores, that the costs 

at least go back to pay for services for people. And we think 

this is really, really important. 

 

So there’s a real question around the unintended consequences, 

the unintended consequences of what may happen if this 

government goes through with its plan to sell ISC. What will 

happen? What will happen to the business community, to 

ordinary people when they buy and sell homes, that type of 

thing, and all the other services that ISC does? So is this a bit of 

testing the waters, raising the flag, see what happens, and they 

got caught? And now we’re going to have that conversation, 

because what does their promise really mean? Does it really 

mean that many of the Crowns are up for sale, that there’s over 

50 Crowns that are up for sale, that that’s the . . . this is the first 

of a few that’s going to be coming down the tubes? Is this really 

common sense? We have some questions here, you know, and 

of course we hear from the other side. 

 

And I think my colleague here from Athabasca was very, very 

good in terms of charting out the past history of where our 

province has come and where it’s going. And we think there’s a 

real potential for this province in terms of demand that’s there 

for our resources, the way that our economy is going right now. 

 

And the question is, and we’ve seen this — I’ve raised this 

many times, particularly around labour law — if it ain’t broke, 

why fix it? And this government seems to be intent on fixing 

things that aren’t broke and they’re testing waters here, and this 

is going to have a real problem. So in many ways this 

government really does rewrite history. They want to portray 

things as being broken when in fact they are not broken at all. 

And we see that the people of Saskatchewan want to have that 

stability and predictability of a government service that they 

can count on, that they can count on and not have things be up 

for the auction block. And you know, we see a catchy title 

there, Sask builds. Whether we’ll see one in the near future, 

Sask sells . . . You know, when we come to things like the 

Crowns, the ones, the other 50 or so that this government may 

consider because they’re not in those significant top 13 or so. 

 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

[11:45] 

 

But I have some real concerns about it and I know they’re 

shared on our side. And so that’s why we think this is a very 

important motion that we bring forward right off the bat as we 

enter our fall sitting here. So we have some real concerns and I 

really want to emphasize that when you see the inconsistency 

here, the inconsistency between what the backbenchers are 

saying, that all Crowns are protected. All the Crowns are 

protected. The campaign really implies that it’s only the utility 

Crowns that are protected. And we have the minister today 

alluding to the fact that it’s really only the 13 that are protected 

in The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. 

 

So which is it? Which is it? I think the government is obligated 

to come clean with the people of Saskatchewan to say, this is 

our policy on Crowns. Are all 70 protected? Is it just the 

utilities? Or is it the ones that are in The Crown Corporations 

Public Ownership Act? And this government should stop 

deflecting, should stop spinning, and come clean with the 

people of Saskatchewan. This government is notorious, 

notorious for message management. They want to confuse the 

public around what a former government may or may not have 

been doing and what this government is obligated to do, which 

is to keep its promises and to be clear with the people of 

Saskatchewan on what they really mean when we talk about the 

Crowns which people of Saskatchewan hold near and dear and 

don’t want to see changes to. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. I recognize the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I am 

pleased to join in this debate today, and I guess I feel a little 

sorry for myself right now because I had a great speech written 

out, planning on how to talk about ISC and how it’s a great 

Crown corporation. But right now I’ve really got to counteract 

some of the history that the member from Athabasca spoke 

about a couple of speakers ago, and I’d like to set the record 

straight in that he seemed to open up the debate a little bit and 

talk about some things that were, in his mind, factually correct, 

which may not be to the rest of Saskatchewan. And one of the 

things is that the government of the day, when they had the 

previous administration, they always had to clean up everyone 

else’s mess, and then they said, we’re going to get to it. We’re 

going to get to it. We’re going to get to it. 

 

Well when the member from Athabasca calls himself a hockey 

player just dabbling in politics, I think one of the reasons he 

never made it to the big time was that he actually never got his 

skates sharpened because he was going to get to it. He was 

going to get to it, and he could only turn left. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the member talked about 

some investment into North Battleford. And he said that . . . 

The member from North Battleford would like me to correct the 

statement and say that Northland is actually ahead of schedule 

and they’re under budget. So now that we’re going to get to our 

ISC and the motion at hand, Mr. Speaker, and first and 

foremost we want to make sure that we put our statement on the 

table that we support our Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 

That was in our campaign platform, and we do support that. 

And this speech, this debate, could have been a lot shorter. All 

the member from Nutana had to do was call her predecessor 

and talk about why they left ISC out of the Crown corporation 

protection Act back when they were in cabinet, Mr. Speaker. I 

also think the member from Athabasca was at the cabinet table 

at that time, too. So they can really get their nine members 

together and figure this out pretty quick. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk about that the NDP I think did 

have designs on selling ISC before they . . . I think that’s why 

they left it out of the Crown corporation Act. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not only . . . The NDP did sell off interest in the 

upgraders for fertilizer plants, and some of which did provide 

funding for the children’s hospital that we’ve committed to 

building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I will correct some of the history that has gone 

by, and straighten the record out here. In 2003 the NDP 

dramatically raised rates at ISC. On a $100,000 house 

transaction the pre-increase was $280 dollars, and the 

post-increase was $450, Mr. Speaker. That’s an average 

increase to the average homeowner of 61 per cent under their 

administration. Mr. Speaker, a $300,000 house transaction, the 

pre-increase was $280, and the post-increase was $1,050, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s a 275 per cent increase on the cost to the 

average Saskatchewan homeowner under their administration. 

And they want to talk to us about not respecting Crown 

corporations. Mr. Speaker, that should be taken with a little bit 

of a grain of salt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP claims that our government does not 

respect and like our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. But this 

government continues to invest billions of dollars in Crown 

infrastructure that the opposition neglected when they were in 

power. And I know they were going to get it, they were going 

to get to it. They were going to get to it. But they just never got 

it done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP put in a lot of money in failed 

investments which cost this province millions of dollars. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d just like to read in the record from Hansard in 

November 2004, the then member from Meadow Lake said, “It 

is believed these investments will achieve great things.” You 

know what followed that statement, was that Navigata ended up 

losing $90 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s another interesting statement that we’d 

like to remind them. As I said, from the yellow sheet, it does set 

the history straight a little bit from what was spoken from the 

other side.  

 

And as the NDP planned to lose money, they planned to lose 

money. And in 2001 the Crown Investments minister Maynard 

Sonntag said, I bet, and I’ll put my job on the line, that we will 

lose money in the future. Mr. Speaker, does that really make 

sense? And as one of my colleagues said, he actually did put his 

job on the line. He ended up losing it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Can you believe someone, someone whose job it is to protect 

the provincial purse, the taxpayers’ money, not an NDP 

government’s money but the taxpayers’ money, can you believe 

that someone would say, I will bet that the money we invest 

right now will lose money? Could you imagine a CEO [chief 

executive officer] saying that to his shareholders? Can you 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

imagine anyone going into a board meeting and saying, you 

know what? We’re going to throw some money into this, but 

it’s probably not going to work. They should have put it on 

roulette, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP did have designs 

to sell ISC. And I believe that that’s something that we cannot 

state enough.  

 

And I’d like to just for the record read some of our investments 

that we’ve put into the Crown corporations, which we 

committed in our election platform that we support the Crown 

protection Act, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in our first term the 

Saskatchewan Party government has increased capital spending 

on SaskPower, SaskTel, and SaskEnergy by 39 per cent, which 

is more than double the 18 per cent increase in spending in the 

last term of the NDP. More than 18 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I find it interesting that they run around Saskatchewan, 

well most of Saskatchewan, and say, we believe in our Crowns. 

We believe in our Crowns. We’re going to do this, and you 

guys are letting them fall to the wayside. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s just not true. It’s simply not true. We’re investing money 

so that our Crown corporations can deliver the services to the 

people of Saskatchewan in a timely manner for one of the best 

prices in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it is time to set the record straight on a lot of the myths that 

are being portrayed, like the myth of our booming economy, as 

their leader would say from his seat. Mr. Speaker, the 

government has increased investments at SaskPower by 45 per 

cent, which is a substantial increase from — well you can guess 

it, from the previous administration — the 3.3 per cent 

SaskPower saw in the last term of the NDP government. Three 

point three per cent, which is a little confusing because as the 

member from Athabasca said, well the boom began in 1998. 

Well if the economy was booming in 1998, how do you invest 

3.3 per cent into SaskPower? You just kept on stripping 

dividends from the Crown, taking monies from the Crown so 

you could factually balance your budget, but you didn’t invest 

any money into the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the first term, in our first term, Mr. Speaker, the 

book value, the book value of utility Crowns — SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy, and SaskTel, SGI — increased by 45 per cent. The 

book value of our Crown has increased 45 per cent, but we 

don’t respect our Crowns. That’s a statement that pales in 

comparison to what . . . In the first term this government spent 

$3.8 billion on SaskTel, SaskPower, and SaskEnergy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one might say — and I may take a statement from 

our illustrious member from Athabasca — we’re just cleaning 

up your mess. We’re cleaning up your guys’ mess, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what he likes to say that they’re doing for 16 

years, cleaning up mess. And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that we appreciate the mess you guys left behind because 

people are seeing more and more investments in their Crown 

corporations, are seeing better service, are seeing more timely 

service. 

 

Like the member from Arm River-Watrous said, our SaskPower 

people did an amazing job this summer in fixing downed power 

lines in Prince Albert, North Battleford. These are 

hard-working men and women that appreciate a government 

that’s putting money back into their companies. And they’re 

working hard and they did a fantastic job. And I just want to 

say thank you very much for the job you guys did during our 

summer of storms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what we’ve done and now 

what we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

government is projecting capital spending of 8.1 billion over 

the next four years with 7.5 billion projected to be spent on 

utility Crowns. Mr. Speaker, 7.5 billion will be spent on our 

Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, that’s not because we don’t 

respect the Crowns, which comes from the other side. I would 

say not respecting the Crowns would be putting 3.3 per cent 

into a Crown over the last term, not 45 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the first term the government has invested 

over 1 billion in SaskTel. And I want to talk about SaskTel for 

a little while because they’re doing a great job out in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that’s someplace where I came 

from. And I found that we have great service out there. And the 

men and women for SaskTel are providing wonderful service 

out in rural Saskatchewan. I just want to say thank you on 

behalf of my family who still lives on the farm out in Rush 

Lake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as time is running short, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say 

that when you guys go, when the NDP goes to rural 

Saskatchewan, they should maybe tell the truth when they go 

out and talk about Crown corporations. 

 

The Speaker: — Oral questions. I recognize the member for 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP governed the province 

with a short-sighted outlook. They lost $15 million dollars in 

Channel Lake, 90 million in Navigata, and 35 million in 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company]. What’s worse, Mr. Speaker, in 2003 the NDP raised 

ISC rates from $280 to $450 for a $100,000 house transaction. 

That’s a 61 per cent increase. On a 300,000 house transaction, 

the NDP again increased rates from $280 to $1,050. That’s an 

increase of 275 per cent. To the member from Athabasca: was it 

an oversight or did your party deliberately leave ISC out of The 

Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let it be known that the NDP 

never had any plan to sell any Crown, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

the position we will take forward, Mr. Speaker. And I also want 

to add, Mr. Speaker, on Information Services Corporation, to 

test that member from Prince Albert’s resolve in standing up 

and asking that question, my question back to her is this: if your 

government sells ISC, will you make sure when they sell it they 

take the profits from that sale to build a bridge to P.A.? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question for the other side, you know, this morning we’ve heard 

three different versions of what their promise is. We’ve heard 

the minister allude to just protecting the ones under the Act. 

We’ve heard other backbenchers saying they’re protecting 

every Crown. And then we hear and we read from their 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

campaign booklet that they’re protecting the utility Crowns. To 

the member from Walsh Acres: which is it? Which Crowns are 

you protecting? Come clean on this. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, I love getting up. And thank you 

for the question to the member from Saskatoon Centre. And I 

love getting up and talking about what our government 

promises to do because we promised to do . . . is we do what we 

say we’ll do. And, Mr. Speaker, you can obviously see if you 

read our campaign platform is that we promised to protect the 

Crown protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Read the campaign platform; you’ll figure it out, Mr. Speaker. 

I’d say that a lot of people in Saskatchewan read our campaign 

platform and really, really enjoyed what they read as you can 

tell by the configuration of this Legislative Assembly. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, in 2002 the NDP 

management of ISC was described as “a runaway wreck.” The 

NDP Minister Responsible for ISC insisted that ISC software 

“would be a world leader in information technology.” Yet at the 

same time, the NDP-managed ISC was posting losses year after 

year. Finally on January the 9th, 2007 the NDP admitted in 

committee, “The software was not marketed elsewhere,” 

indicating a complete failure of NDP management. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: why was your party’s 

government not successful in marketing ISC software, even 

though it cost the taxpayers tens of millions of dollars? 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 

what’s really important here is the discussion that’s on the table 

right now, and that’s why this particular government has 

flip-flopped on its position not to talk about the Crowns. In fact 

August 21st, 2007, here’s a quote from the Premier — the then 

leader of the opposition, soon to be Premier — and it was from 

Murray Mandryk. He said, this is a quote, “Would you be 

willing to support the sell-off of some aspects of Crown 

ownership?” The current Premier said no. And then he went on 

to say, “We have said they’re not for sale, that they won’t be 

privatized, and that’s exactly what we mean”. 

 

So I would ask that member why the Premier is now 

flip-flopping on positions he took at that time? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to ask the member from Walsh Acres a simple question. I asked 

the member from Prince Albert that if they did sell ISC would 

they use the profits to build a bridge for P.A.? She didn’t 

answer the question. Now I’m going to ask you a question. 

Given the fact that you have quite frankly said, we’re here to 

protect the Crowns, if your government decides to sell ISC, and 

despite your protest here today they go ahead and sell it, will 

you resign? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

not going to engage in answering hypothetical questions back 

and forth Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s a great thing and I 

appreciate our government and I respect all the members of our 

government. We do what we say we’re going to do. And I think 

the people of Saskatchewan respect us for committing to 

making promises and keeping those promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that before he throws stones over 

on this side that he maybe go back and read some of his 

statements and see if they’re factually correct, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has 

a proud history of Crown corporations, one I had an honour of 

working with for nine years. They provide valuable utility 

services for the people of the province and employ a sizeable 

amount of Saskatchewan’s workforce. Our government 

continues to invest billions of dollars in Crown infrastructure 

that the opposition neglected when they were in power for 16 

years. However their failed investments of the former NDP 

government cost the province of millions of dollars, including 

Navigata for $90 million and $2 million in supplying power to 

Guyana. 

 

To the member from city centre: what is the reason for the 

NDP’s failure to include ISC within The Crown Corporations 

Public Ownership Act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I mean the 

real question today is, why is this government flip-flopping? 

They want to get into message management. They know this 

isn’t going the place they want it to go. They’re sending out 

mixed messages. The people of Saskatchewan want to know, 

what is their position on the Crowns today? That’s the question 

of the day. They’re not interested in the spin and deflection that 

this government is engaged in. It’s absolutely the wrong thing 

for the people of Saskatchewan to be exposed to. Come clean. 

What is your position? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Walsh Acres. 

 

You know, he’s a bit of history student here. He knows the 

history of his party. He would know that in the ’90s the PCs 

[Progressive Conservative] and the Liberals, they were quite 

interested in privatization. That built on the work they did in the 

’80s, Mr. Speaker, trying to chop up corporations like 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

SaskEnergy to sell them off. We know that that’s what they ran 

on in ’99 in terms of privatization. And we also know that in 

2003, privatization was a pivotal issue on which they think that 

the then Leader of the Opposition, Elwin Hermanson, lost the 

election. So after 2003, they took the pledge, Mr. Speaker, and 

said, oh we’re for public ownership, full stop period. 

 

I guess my question is this, Mr. Speaker: in 2007, they said they 

were for public ownership. When did it get an asterisk? When 

did we hear about this fine print that is only now coming into 

play? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

from Elphinstone for the question. And I always enjoy getting 

up and speaking on what our government has done, what our 

government will do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I really want to re-emphasize that our 

government spent more money, investing more money in 

Crown corporations than any other government in the history of 

this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, investing money in 

SaskPower, investing money in SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s companies are delivering fine services to our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And really, Mr. Speaker, what I really want to know right now 

is, they never answered the question of why they left ISC out of 

The Crown Corporations Act in 2003, Mr. Speaker. Why did 

Pat Atkinson, why did the member from Athabasca not include 

the ISC in Crown corporation Act when they want to protect it? 

They say they’re for the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. I’d love it if they 

could answer that question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question 

for the opposition: as my colleague from Arm River mentioned, 

on November 18th, 2004, the former NDP government 

introduced the Crown corp public ownership Act. This bill was 

passed by both sides of the House. However, Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP government of the day did not include ISC in the Act. On 

face value, it would appear the NDP deliberately . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate has 

elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for P.A. Carlton. 

 

Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and 

Resource Boom on Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 

today to stand up and provide a speech which I believe will be an 

intellectual speech, a speech of education for the nimble nine 

across the way, Mr. Speaker, and more so for possibly, hopefully, 

their leader in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. Because later on today, I plan 

to move a motion that talks about how we are in disagreement 

with the NDP leader in Ottawa of the NDP party in Ottawa that 

actually has a contention that an economic boom in the West — 

the resource sector in the West that supports all of Canada, not just 

from its resources sector, but in the manufacturing jobs — is in 

fact what he claims to be a Dutch disease, a disease, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to start with the whole process today of this speech, Mr. 

Speaker, I went through lots of different data, a lot of research, 

Mr. Speaker, moving forward. And you know, it’s been an 

interesting time here listening through our Throne Speech debates 

about the growth plan that we have for this province, Mr. Speaker, 

and knowing full well that we have set targets and goals to move 

forward as a government. Our first term we did that — promises 

made, promises kept, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have a problem with 

setting a very strong stance and a strong position paper moving to 

2020, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But using issues that we see at hand such as the booming 

economy of Saskatchewan, the resource sector that supports that, 

but then looking deeper into that resource sector development, Mr. 

Speaker, we see across this country, whether it be Manitoba, BC 

[British Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, Mr. Speaker, Northwest 

Territories, we see . . . Alberta of course comes to mind. We see 

that the resource sector is booming and also supports 

manufacturing sectors across this country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This particular time in our country, like no other time before, it’s 

true to say that we see across governments of any political stripe, 

across provinces, and working with the national government, 

the federal government, we see a very strong economy. We see 

strong dollar support. We see manufacturing sector jobs 

increasing. We can look at Saskatchewan’s own immigration 

increase of our population. We see people moving here from 

outside the province and from outside the country, Mr. Speaker, 

in support of various jobs that we see being driven by a large 

part by the resource sector in our own province. 

 

This kind of opportunity and activity isn’t just in the oil fields 

or the mines. Mr. Speaker, it’s those individuals that service 

those communities and jobs such as working in hotels, 

restaurants, car dealerships, Mr. Speaker, those men and 

women who work in production line manufacturing companies 

to produce the things that are needed in the mining sector and 

resource sector. 

 

I don’t know where Mr. Mulcair comes off saying that the 

resource sector boom hurts the Canadian economy and 

manufacturing jobs down east when it’s proven — and I’ll 

reference these articles later on, Mr. Speaker — that things 

have to get made to support the resource sector. I’m not sure 

where Mr. Mulcair or his colleagues . . . And I think some of 

the members across the way and especially there’s two 

leadership candidates across the way that I want to talk about 

later on that have remained too silent on this issue, I believe. 

But how would they come to a consensus in their caucus in 

Ottawa, and I would assume across Canada with their 

membership, that a resource sector doesn’t support or doesn’t 

impact manufacturing jobs? 

 

You can look at any of the oil rig facilities in this province. You 

can look at the mining sector that I have friends working in. 

And I’ve met a lot of the men and women working in the oil 

fields. I mean they talk about things like the size of their rigs, 

Mr. Speaker, the opportunity that has to . . . all the support 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

sector jobs that have to support one operation in an oil patch. I 

mean people have to build those trucks, they have to build those 

rigs, they have to supply the cable, they’ve got to supply the 

pipes, Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t happen unless there’s a 

resource sector boom. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We’ve seen across this 

country over decades that the resource sector has ridden a tidal 

wave of activity. It’s boomed and it’s busted for a lack of any 

other better terms. But guess what, Mr. Speaker? When those 

kind of things happen, other sectors step up. If there’s a bust in 

the oil field, well manufacturing jobs and service sector jobs 

will increase because it’s been correlated that a rise in the dollar 

value in Canada in a booming economy also falls when there’s 

a bust in the resource sector. But manufacturing goods and 

services then become cheaper for other countries to purchase so 

that sector thrives. 

 

And right now, Mr. Speaker, we have a time that we’re seeing 

the rise in resource sector boom and the rise in the 

manufacturing boom to support those particular resource sector 

jobs in the resource sector fields. You know what, Mr. Speaker? 

I found it very interesting as I was doing research for this . . . I 

mean I want to thank the individuals from the Minister of 

Energy and Resources office and the caucus research staff that 

helped to compile some of this data for me along with some of 

the research I did. The Internet’s a wonderful thing because you 

type in under the search engines anything to do with 

resource-economy-based manufacturing jobs or resource 

economy, and you have a realm of opportunity to pick and 

choose through different studies and data reports. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, the ones I found that I went 

through and the researching staff found are all supportive of 

one thing, that if you have a resource sector increase and boom, 

you will have a correlation of increased annual wage earnings 

by those individuals who then support their communities, buy 

goods and services, and the sector itself has to then, as it 

booms, has to buy manufactured goods to support the industry, 

Mr. Speaker. And most of these companies will be looking at 

internally in Canada to buy those particular, those wares, those 

products that they need in the oil fields and the mines to 

actually harvest the resources to put them in the open market, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

One report I came across was done by the Macdonald-Laurier 

Institute. It’s actually from May of 2012. They reference a 

study by two well-known individuals. And this isn’t just a . . . I 

would argue and offer up to the opposition at any given time, 

and to Mr. Mulcair and his caucus, that when you have a report 

that’s authored by a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in economics 

from New York University, Robert P. Murphy, and a colleague, 

Brian Lee Crowley, who actually interestingly enough, he holds 

degrees from McGill and the London School of Economics, 

including a doctorate in political economy from the London 

School of Economics . . . I mean these two individuals, these 

two men who have committed their lives to studying various 

anomalies, I’ll say the economies of various countries, put their 

names to a report, a study that looked at a summation of the 

activity in the resource sector that up to this point in time 

through the boom and bust cycles, has a correlation to future 

projections. 

 

This particular report that I am looking at and I studied looked 

at a 25-year modelling of the economic impact of the resource 

sector boom in Canada. I’m not talking about just 

Saskatchewan. I’m talking about the boom in Canada across 

various fields — oil, gas, uranium, potash, different mining 

sectors. And one thing that they came to a conclusion is that, 

with oil sands production as their primary look within the oil 

production aspect of their report, they found — surprisingly 

maybe to some across the way, Mr. Speaker, and maybe to 

some in Ottawa because I know that Mr. Mulcair has never 

referenced this document or have his colleagues, by the way — 

that the Western resource extraction showers large economic 

benefits in all provinces. That’s one of the primary, 

fundamental statements as they set out their hypothesis moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker. And then being that these two learned 

individuals aren’t about just to make statements off the cuff — I 

mean they do various research and data collection; they do 

various research and looking through . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. I am asking leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

[12:15] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With us 

today in the Speaker’s gallery is a good friend and a strong 

supporter of certainly my past campaigns. And she’s lived in 

Buffalo Narrows, but I believe now she’s living in Prince 

Albert. So I’d like the MLAs and the entire Assembly to 

welcome Ms. Doreen Gabriel to her Assembly. Because 

obviously as they travel to the city here to visit us, a lot of 

people don’t think that this is their home and their House, but to 

assure her that this is your Assembly, and I’m certainly glad to 

see you here today. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and 

Resource Boom on Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you again, Mr. Speaker and 

welcome to our guests this afternoon, or this morning. I guess 

it’s afternoon right now. 

 

So I go back to, Mr. Speaker, to this report that I’m looking at, 

and what’s interesting is that these two esteemed, learned 

authors have also considered the impact in this 25-year 

projection of modelling through the oil sands and other resource 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

sector developments. What would the impact be on things like 

pipeline development, Mr. Speaker? Keystone is one that they 

talk about, and the Enbridge Northern Gateway. So within some 

of their data and their research, Mr. Speaker, they’ve found 

some interesting results. And you know, one thing that they talk 

about and referencing now . . . What I’ll do is I’ll talk about 

some numbers here, Mr. Speaker. I want to focus on Ontario 

and Quebec. 

 

But one should not lose sight of the fact that when we have a 

resource sector that’s booming and there’s potential for 

development of this resource sector, not just feeding our own 

economy, our own consumption here in this country, but we’re 

looking at outside countries from Canada’s borders . . . The 

Asian market is thriving right now. They know that they have a 

massive need and want for our resources. Oil comes to mind, of 

course, to drive their economy. But we’ll talk about uranium 

later on too and the historic signing that the federal Government 

of Canada did with the Government of China, talking about 

how now we can use our uranium resources, can be mined and 

shipped easier to supply their new emerging need for nuclear 

power plant and for power generation, the need for uranium, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there’s one thing I want to talk about first of all. This report 

does talk about various things. One thing they focused on was 

the employment and, you know, thousands of person-years 

associated to a 25-year economic modelling from 2010 to 2035. 

So I’ll set that reference point moving forward. And they do 

acknowledge that a big basis of their data and the resource 

boom is also tied not just to the economies of Saskatchewan 

and the West. It’s linked to the resource sector, how it thrives 

and produces wealth across this country, but also because of the 

fact that our resources are demanded and needed throughout the 

world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, we look at . . . Ontario is interesting because, you 

know, we had an interesting time when we see a federal leader 

of the NDP Party making a statement. And I’ve said it before, 

and of course our Premier did a great job yesterday, as he 

always does, highlighting various aspects that, across Canada 

and when it comes to his time talking about budget speeches, 

and Throne Speeches, addressing those. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? You know, this term, Dutch 

disease, it really, it just cuts to the quick, doesn’t it, Mr. 

Speaker? I mean it really gets to the point that it’s a vile thing, 

it’s disgusting, and it’s awful to have, to have something called 

a disease that is earmarked and targeted at Western Canada. 

You know what? It’s a division. It sows the seed for a division 

between the East and West, and it’s . . . For a person who is a 

leader of a federal party it does surprise me as to why they, or 

he and his caucus would be supporting that. 

 

And I would assume that, you know . . . I hate to make 

assumptions because of my previous job, Mr. Speaker, as a 

police officer. You hate to assume anything. But when you start 

to investigate and you start to look at aspects and you start to 

read information, you start to listen to interviews back and forth 

as people speak, there are certain things that come out. And you 

know, statement analysis is an interesting tool, Mr. Speaker. 

And I can talk more about that if anybody asks. But you know, 

really it’s some things that aren’t said, Mr. Speaker. It’s when 

we hear a federal leader of a party talking about the Western 

provinces as having a Dutch disease, and that is why he truly 

believes that manufacturing jobs in what he believes I think is 

the entire country which is . . . I think to him it’s Ontario and 

Quebec. I want to make a very bold statement here. I think that 

he thinks that if Ontario and Quebec are the ones that drive 

everything in this country, well that’s his sole focus. That’s 

sadly mistaken. 

 

I know when he came out to Saskatoon to, when Mr. Mulcair 

came to Saskatoon to talk to the Federation of Canadian 

Municipalities this last year, this last summer, I know he was 

questioned as to this comment, and this back and forth, this to 

and fro that we talk about with our Premier taking a stand for 

our people in this province as this entire Saskatchewan Party 

caucus does, Mr. Speaker, that we believe that we will stand up 

for our people and the people of this province over any leader 

anywhere that wants to drive a wedge between us and another 

part of the country — definitely. 

 

But maybe Mr. Mulcair has taken some pause, you know, a 

sober second thought, have you and mind you, to think about 

some of his comments because at the FCM [Federation of 

Canadian Municipalities] conference he was pretty much taking 

a back, kind of a backpedalling stance that he wouldn’t, he 

wouldn’t comment about this with, you know, in a public venue 

with our Premier and have an argument. But you know what, 

Mr. Speaker? Again this caucus, this government, this Premier 

. . . who I might also say I’m very proud to say, you know, he 

leads the nation when they do surveys as to the likeability, the 

support, you know, of a premier. I believe, I think my 

colleagues would believe as well, it’s not just because he’s a 

good looking guy; it’s because he’s a smart guy. You know, 

he’s fighting, he’s fighting. He’s standing up for the people of 

our province. And you know what? I think that’s an amazing, 

that’s an amazing thing. And people in this country I think are 

asking questions about Mr. Mulcair because of his statements. 

And we hear our Premier and our ministers who proudly stand 

and say that, you know, that they’re always going to do what’s 

right for our province, supported by a caucus at all times, in 

moving their message forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when you have a federal leader of a party who wants to 

continuously talk about a disease, well I think it’s time that we 

stick up for ourselves. And we do it every day. And that’s why I 

felt very motivated to volunteer for this. I always say I 

volunteered for this opportunity, Mr. Speaker. We have a great 

team on this side of the House of men and women who are 

more than capable of doing this job and some, I would argue, 

much more capable than myself given their level of 

understanding of the topic and their capabilities. 

 

I know my seatmate, I relish the opportunity to hear him stand 

up for 45 minutes and speak on numerous days. I’m sure he’s 

going to do a great job. He’s learning well, Mr. Speaker. We 

have him in a bit of a huddle here, going on, where we can 

teach him, we can mould him. He’s workable. We can do it. It’s 

okay. I look forward to it. A big old teddy bear. Yes I think we 

can put our arm around him, and we can teach him a few things 

and lead him down that golden path as opposed to astray. And 

he’s listening well today, Mr. Speaker, because I know he 

believes fully on this. 

 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

In Regina Walsh Acres and in Regina, there are men and 

women who live in this city, in Regina, that work in the oil 

patch, Mr. Speaker. They work in the potash mines. They are 

supporting jobs. They work in the manufacturing sector. They 

work for companies who are part of the expansion in our 

mining sector right now, Mr. Speaker, those dollars coming 

back to Regina. And what are those dollars going to, Mr. 

Speaker? The local economy of the city and back to our 

province. 

 

So this goes to another greater point, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite think that . . . And I believe the Leader of the 

Opposition across the hall or across the aisle said, this is a 

myth. This growth plan’s a myth. It can’t exist. Something’s 

not right with it. It doesn’t seem to make sense. Like it’s a false 

document, maybe built on expectations that can’t be supported. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? They don’t want to see this 

province continue to grow because under their time . . . And 

you know what? I think the people of Saskatchewan saw that 

message in 2007 . . . Being one of, back then, to be one of the 

few that were elected at the time and, you know, in that 

particular cycle — newbies I call ourselves — but to learn now 

that this government had promises. People trusted our platform. 

They looked at us, and they gave us a chance, Mr. Speaker, 

because I think for too many years the NDP were 

underperforming. They were undervaluing the province. They 

never saw the true potential that it had. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? What we’re seeing now is 

an economy in this province that isn’t because of us. I will say 

that. Our Premier says that. Our ministers say it all the time. We 

don’t go out there and turn the cranks and turn the lights on in 

the facilities in the resource sector and the mining sector and 

the jobs. It’s the fact that our government supports the economy 

growing based on sound policies, sound . . . You know, Mr. 

Speaker, you know what? I get that the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale on the other side wants to take part in this debate. I 

look forward to that. Thankfully someone on that side of the 

House wants to take part in a debate on the actual disagreement 

with Mr. Mulcair. I hope that she’ll actually . . . [inaudible] . . . 

I look forward to that. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I can tell you right now that 

that particular member from Riversdale should have stood up 

and ran for the leadership of the party. I’ll tell you why, Mr. 

Speaker. Because she’s the one who wants us to talk about this 

now in this debate. She’s okay mentioning things in this debate 

about how she agrees with Mr. Mulcair. I think that’s what she 

said. Not too late, though, because there are two members on 

that side, two members, one from Saskatoon Massey Place, one 

from Regina Rosemont, who have put their name forward to be 

leadership candidates in their political party.  

 

And I mean I give them credit for that. I don’t think I would 

ever have that kind of aspiration in this party. I know that . . . 

Not that I have to because we have a great Premier — he’s not 

going to leave us for a lot of years — a great leader. And 

whenever that does happen, I look forward to seeing what 

happens on this side. We have some great women and men on 

this side that are prepared to step in when Mr. Wall decides that 

. . . or the Premier, the member from Swift Current decides to 

retire at some point in the future. 

But the member from Riversdale is prepared . . . I digress. The 

member from Riversdale wants to speak from her chair. She’ll 

have a chance to vote, Mr. Speaker, and I truly hope that she 

votes in favour of this. Because she can show that she stands up 

for the people of Saskatchewan, unlike her two members, the 

leadership candidates I mentioned, who are staying silent, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re staying mute on this whole statement. I can’t 

understand why, if you’re going to lead a political party, why 

would you not step forward, put your best foot forward, come 

out of the chute with a policy that . . . after looking and seeing 

what’s happening in this province. And again I say that it’s not 

because of us. We aren’t the ones who are saying do these 

things, invest more money in these sectors, tell the private 

companies to hire more people. No, Mr. Speaker. We work 

with them to ensure that we produce policies. We want to move 

forward. 

 

We take best practices of other countries, other provinces as 

well, moving forward on making this economy grow. We do 

not want to hinder that. We want to expand that. And, you 

know, it does shock me that the two members on the other side 

of the House that are leadership candidates haven’t been out 

really talking a lot . . . I mean, maybe I’m wrong. But I mean, 

maybe my colleagues can help me. I don’t think either one of 

them has said anything about Mr. Mulcair’s statements. You 

know what? And you know what? That’s a shameful, shameful 

thing, Mr. Speaker, because we know that there are two other 

members on that particular party, not sitting here right now, 

who are leadership candidates. And one of them who, by 

chance, happens to be a well-learned, educated man that’s 

running, you know, Mr. Erin Weir just in case I had to, you 

know, differentiate. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The economist. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — The economist. So, you know, another good 

point, Mr. Speaker, on this individual, Mr. Weir. He’s a 

front-runner because you know what . . . And I give him, I 

respect him because he’s gone out now, and he’s actually made 

a statement. I don’t agree with his statements. I don’t think I . . . 

I don’t know if anyone on this side does about supporting Mr. 

Weir on how he agrees with Mr. Mulcair. In fact, you know, in 

the Leader-Post article of May 14th of this year, it’s interesting 

how he actually came to the defence of Mr. Mulcair. And he 

says, quote, “It was a good point with his Dutch disease 

diagnosis.” So at least Mr. Weir has taken a stance. He has now 

put himself in a box, and we respect that. You know what, Mr. 

Speaker? We know where he stands. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s wrong. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — So he’s wrong. You know what, Mr. Speaker? I 

have to agree with my colleagues. He’s wrong on that particular 

point. 

 

I don’t understand how an economist would be able to actually 

sit back and agree with Mr. Mulcair. And I don’t know Mr. 

Mulcair’s background. I am assuming he’s very educated as 

well. But if an economist who’s running for leadership of a 

political party who would know about supply and demand, 

chain value, market issues, and those kind of related matters 

would take a stance that a Dutch disease argument is a good 

point, I don’t know if I would want that individual to lead my 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

party. And I can sure say very, very succinctly, I don’t want 

him leading my province. 

 

That’s for sure, Mr. Speaker, because right there and then, he 

has now put himself in a situation where he doesn’t support the 

people, doesn’t support the women and men who work day in 

and day out in the mining sectors, don’t work . . . that he 

doesn’t support the men and women who work in the support 

sectors that drive your local economies, who in the hotels and 

the restaurants, the car dealerships, those kind of things, Mr. 

Speaker, those individuals that actually put their foot forward, 

and they invest their own hard-earned dollars to expand their 

companies to supply goods and services to the sector as well. 

 

So Mr. Weir, I have to say, he’s respected because he’s come 

out of the box. He’s put himself in a box with a statement. And 

he goes on to support, you know, he goes on to support Mr. 

Mulcair. That’s fine. I get the allegiance, supporting your 

federal leader. I get that. I think that’s an interesting argument 

to go forward. I mean we will always support our Premier, our 

leader because you know what, Mr. Speaker, when a person, a 

leader of a party comes out with a strong vision — and we saw 

that release prior to the 2007 election, Mr. Speaker, with a 

document for the vision of this province — then we see a 

Premier, a leader who doesn’t just sit back on his laurels. He 

goes out and he now looks at the future. 

 

[12:30] 

 

And you know, I’m like him, Mr. Speaker. I have children who 

are about the same age as his kids. I know I did this job for one 

reason: to make this province better when I leave, for my 

children and my children’s children. Because you know what? 

Because, Mr. Speaker, no one in this room should run for 

office, get elected, and then sit back and just collect the 

paycheque. No one on this side of the House does it. I don’t 

think anyone on the other side of the House does it, Mr. 

Speaker. They serve their constituents. 

 

But when you have a leader of a party who wants to challenge 

his members — all of them, including yourself, Mr. Speaker — 

to come up with ideas to provide a futuristic document, a goal, 

a vision, but then he goes out to the public. He wants the people 

of this province to be engaged. He asks us as the MLAs to have 

your own ideas. What are you hearing back home? But before 

you come and bring me those ideas, I want you to talk to your 

constituents. I want to know what the people of this province 

have to tell us. There are some of us who got bad comments. 

Most of us, I think, got good comments. 

 

They want to keep telling us to pay down the debt, keep that 

vision forward, don’t slow down. Stay out of the way of 

business though, because we see things happening with you, 

because they’re growing the economy. You know what, Mr. 

Speaker? A provincial government shouldn’t grow an economy 

and shouldn’t do it based on jobs alone. We let the private 

sector do that because that increase in jobs from the private 

sector results in the government getting more revenue in. Then 

we have to support the sector through, and the previous debate 

today was on the Crown corporations protection Act and some 

good comments made by members on this side of the House 

about how we have SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel, SGI. 

Everyone supports these, the growing economy, because there’s 

demands for their services, Mr. Speaker. This government will 

always look at that as a mechanism moving forward to sustain 

this growth. But to sustain the growth, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

with a vision of deeming us to have a disease. I mean I think 

that just sets a bad example moving forward, and it puts a . . . 

The people down east, Mr. Speaker, I think, would have 

something to say about this because . . . I still want to get back 

to this report. I’ve digressed. I’ve gone off on a tangent as I 

have fun doing, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Because I will say one thing. I would wish that in the time up 

here and when I’m speaking today and in the future, I’m 

hopeful that the member from Regina Rosemont and/or the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place have a seat in this 

House and listen and maybe speak to this point. Because if they 

want to take part in this debate, I gladly put that challenge out 

to them, Mr. Speaker, because we know that to this point in 

time, they remain silent on this point. When asked by the media 

for a comment on Mr. Mulcair’s statements, they are evasive in 

their answers. They won’t give a yes or no. I’m thinking that, 

boy, if I was running for leader of a party, I’d want to have my 

platform. I’d want to be taking a stance. 

 

And it just shows that I don’t believe any of those two men 

over there, those two members, understand the depth and the 

breadth of this particular comment, this statement by Mr. 

Mulcair. They need to stand up for Saskatchewan. They need to 

put their best foot forward. If they don’t do that, Mr. Speaker, 

then I think it’s going to be another message as well, moving 

forward, that they aren’t sticking up for the people of this 

province. And the resource sector is helping this province grow, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s shameful. 

 

But back to this report. So you know we heard that Mr. Mulcair 

. . . And I also want to say through some of the research, that 

former premier of Ontario, Mr. McGuinty — who you know, I 

have never met the man but I followed him in the media 

extensively — you know, he has the best interest of his 

province in mind, I agree, as most, I think all premiers do. I 

won’t say most; all premiers do. But one thing that Mr. 

McGuinty also said was that this was hurting, this disease, this 

Dutch disease was hurting the economy, the manufacturing jobs 

in Ontario. 

 

And I’m a little shocked as to why he would say that because 

this document goes on at various avenues to look at over 25 

years, 2010 to 2035, these two learned individuals who 

authored this document talked about, just in generally, that 

Ontario alone will see over 882,000 person-years of 

employment directly related to the resource economies of our 

country. Not just Saskatchewan, this is across different 

provinces who mine and extract resources for consumption 

locally, but also consumption in the global economy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know, and to correspond to that, I mean I was surprised a 

bit when I read this. British Columbia is a lovely province. I 

know that it’s got some great opportunity moving forward. 

They of course have the waterfront, the harbour system that we 

would want to look at using within this actual pipeline 

development we’re hearing about to Kitimat. But even in 

British Columbia, they will actually see over a 25-year cycle, 

426,000 person-years of employment, Mr. Speaker. 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

Now that’s interesting because in and of itself everyone thinks 

that it’s Alberta. And of course Alberta does supply a lot of the 

resources. We look at oil and gas as their biggest production. 

But Saskatchewan now is coming into its own right with the 

massive increase in land sales, the exploration that we’re seeing 

in the oil patch. The potash mines are expanding as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we’re seeing these economies that drive the resource sector, 

as I’ve already stated, support other provinces because they 

produce particular goods that are required to support the mining 

industry, the resource sector. So we may not see men and 

women in BC who are actually working on the rigs doing their 

job, or in the mines down in Saskatchewan, but guess what 

they’re doing? They are producing value-add to the actual 

system because they have to produce the equipment. They have 

to put together the very specialized tools that these men and 

women use in these mining sector, resource sector jobs. That is 

what is going to . . . that’s what these numbers mean, Mr. 

Speaker. It doesn’t mean they’re actually working on the rigs, 

working the derricks, and they’re down below ground, or 

they’re mining uranium. They’re actually supporting the 

economy, the economies of the resource sector. That’s 

something that cannot ever be, you know, forgotten, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And you know, it’s interesting, I’m going to go back and forth 

with some other stuff to move back and forth in arguments. So 

you know, what’s interesting is that we go back to the 

statements by Mr. Mulcair that this particular disease, this 

resource that’s booming the economy, that’s lifted the Canadian 

dollar value, is hurting the manufacturing jobs down East. You 

know, Mr. Mulcair has never been, and I’ve got to make it very 

clear I hope he never is, the prime minister of this country 

because it scares me, it scares me if he’s having those kind of 

thoughts already. But you know what? It’s interesting when an 

individual leader of a party comes out with those kind of 

statements. I think it gets under, gets under the skin of other 

individuals who have led the country, who have actually been 

in that position as a prime minister, you know through, across 

different political stripes, to stand up and take notice of that 

particular statement because interestingly enough I was very 

pleased. 

 

And you know, we go back as political aficionados in our 

various rights and mechanisms and ways. And some of us 

actually have studied, some of us have not been able to read all 

the comments made in the past by other . . . and watch the other 

political parties federally and everything they’ve done. But 

every prime minister I know wants to do what’s best for 

Canada. And they have, within their own political caucuses, 

they have opinions and they have processes they want to 

employ and put into place to assure that the economies are 

working well. They always want to do that as a prime minister. 

 

So what happens when Mr. Mulcair, a potential prime minister, 

a future prime minister — and I hope he’s not, but he definitely 

wants to aspire for that, I’m sure — makes a statement that he 

is pitting the West against the East. Well he should have 

thought that maybe a couple of former prime ministers like Paul 

Martin or Brian Mulroney might actually have something to say 

on that comment about this becoming this whole Dutch disease 

situation. And I want to quote from Canadian Press from June 

of this year, June 11th: “The reason our dollar is high is we 

have a good balance sheet. and we want that.” That’s from 

prime minister, former Prime Minister Paul Martin, who was a 

former Finance minister as well under the Liberal government. 

 

Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, when that individual steps 

out of what is now a non-political role — he’s away from 

politics as I understand it but he makes time, takes time from 

his busy personal and professional life — to make this 

comment. He is recognizing, I will say without having spoken 

to the man, and one day hopefully I will, I will ask him this 

question, I’m pretty sure that he meant by that quote that he 

recognizes that the entire economy of Canada that we see 

happening and this resource boom that we see in the West — 

yes, in the West, but there is some development in the East as 

well, but more so in the West — floats all boats, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s spurring on the economy, the prosperity across this country. 

So when you have a former prime minister make that statement. 

He comes out of his, what I believe, now is a very busy life as a 

businessman or as a speaker or consultant. I mean that sends a 

message. But yet again Mr. Mulcair still holds on to this 

process, this visceral reaction to a resource sector that he thinks 

is cutting and hurting manufacturing jobs down east. 

 

Well it’s not the case at all, Mr. Speaker. And I would love to 

sit down with Mr. Mulcair and have an argument or a debate 

with him on this one. It’s an amazing process to research for 

these speeches. When you pay attention to the media and you 

have learned colleagues that can advise you on some of the 

data, but when you get into the actual, into the nuts and bolts, 

into the trenches of what some of the data, the research that’s 

produced, you gain a real strong respect, position moving on, to 

defend a topic that becomes near and dear to your heart, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’ll talk more about that in later times and why I 

am. 

 

You know, it’s interesting though when I talk about another 

individual who had great success, who was a former prime 

minister. When he comes up — and this was not solicited by 

any means as far as I know from anyone in this House, I would 

doubt; anyone in the West, to be honest with you — because 

this particular former prime minister has a very thriving . . . I 

think he’s still in the practice of law, has a partner down East. I 

might be wrong with that. But I know one thing, Mr. Speaker, 

that he is a well-respected former prime minister. 

 

And here’s what happened in a comment, and here’s what he 

said to the National Post on June 7th. That’s even before Mr. 

Paul Martin, the former prime minister Paul Martin made this 

comment. Former Conservative prime minister Brian Mulroney 

said this, and I quote, this is in response to Mr. Mulcair’s Dutch 

disease comment. I quote: “And I think that for any political 

leader to deliberately sow divisions or suggest that one part of 

the country is not prospering because another is, is wrong.” Mr. 

Speaker, wrong, wrong. 

 

And you know what? Now we’ve got two well-respected, 

learned individuals who were former prime ministers who are 

now — and I believe, unsolicited — came forward upon being 

requested by the media to provide an opinion to Mr. Mulcair’s 

visceral and viral comment about this being a Dutch disease 

and divisive. They are now standing up for the position they 

held before. They’re standing up for their country, Mr. Speaker. 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

That’s what every leader and former leader should do — stand 

up for the people of a country, people of the province, and 

make a stand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So after that, Mr. Speaker, it goes on. It’s actually very 

interesting as we look at some of these interesting comments 

that come forward. Just in September of this year, we have a 

federal party who wants to actually talk about a Dutch disease. 

They want to see us not boom. They want to see the resource 

sector not thrive. It’s shameful. Because they believe it impacts 

the actual manufacturing jobs down east, they want to choke 

out the West for the East. Now I was a young man back in the 

day, but I seem to recall some divisiveness in this issue as well 

with the resource sector and the oil patch versus the East. And I 

know that’s come to . . . A lot of us have thought about that 

through this conversation that Mr. Mulcair has had. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? What really bothers me is 

that then the leadership candidate, then leadership candidate 

from the NDP party federally, who I know supports his leader 

right now, they talk about carbon tax. They want to tax people 

based on carbon consumption. And you know what? They’re 

not only taking this argument from a stance of, you know, that 

this is a Dutch disease and it should be choked, it should be 

funnelled slower, it should be, the brakes should get put on it 

because, oh my God, Mr. Speaker, the manufacturing jobs in 

the East are being impacted; which I will go on to prove later 

on, they aren’t. And in fact, they’re going to thrive and do 

better because of this. 

 

But then we have the whole talk about, you know, this cap and 

trade. And it seems like the federal NDP have this plan to just 

completely quash, to strangle out the resource economy of this 

country. And they don’t realize, Mr. Speaker, that when it 

comes to the overall country, as I’ve already stated, by the 

person-years that’ll be deployed and employed in the sectors 

and across the manufacturing and the service sector jobs, and 

notwithstanding, of course, men and women working in the 

mines and the resource and the oil patch as well, Mr. Speaker, 

they now look at, they want to talk about taxes. 

 

And we know for a fact, we know for a fact . . . Again I’ll go to 

Mr. Erin Weir, the front-runner in the leadership race for the 

provincial NDP. And you know what he does, Mr. Speaker? He 

talks about how he doesn’t believe that our structure of 

corporate taxation moving forward is the right way to do things. 

We want to see, we want to maybe look at our corporate tax 

being up from 12 to 10 per cent to make us competitive with 

our neighbours in the West. 

 

And you know what’s interesting is that, again, I give Mr. Weir 

credit. Within his box, within his silo mentality I’ll call it, he 

sees a need to take a stance on any kind of corporate taxation. 

He also talks about taxing the small businesses, mom-and-pop 

operations to drive the economy. And you know, as a party, Mr. 

Speaker, as a government, we thought that that was completely 

wrong, and we lowered that small business tax from 4 to 2 per 

cent. So you know, Mr. Speaker, that was a smart move on our 

part. That’s where the jobs are, and those are the jobs that are 

driving the economies right now in the resource sector, driving 

the businesses. It’s those operations that are supporting the men 

and women working in the resource sector. So this is a much 

more . . . It’s a bigger pie. It’s a complex issue. 

[12:45] 

 

I think Mr. Mulcair . . . and I stand again to say Mr. Weir now 

understands and supports his federal leader. Good on him for 

doing that. But again I want to reference the fact that we don’t 

have the two sitting members from the NDP in this province 

who are running for the leadership — Saskatoon Massey Place 

and Regina Rosemont — saying anything about this yet. Just 

even to make a comment that it’s under review within my 

actual . . . my party, my platform development. But nothing. 

Not a single thing coming forward. And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? Again it goes to the fact they have a few months yet 

to run. I mean, March next year is when they’re going to have 

their vote. And I wish all the four members who are running 

well. And I wish them all the best. But again we don’t see any 

direction from two members who sit in this House.  

 

And one, by the way, is a Finance critic, the member from 

Regina Rosemont. And you know what? He doesn’t agree with 

how things are portrayed. I know that by listening to him during 

question period and some of his scrums he’s had about we 

actually do with our finances. But in the end, not one member 

of that side, I believe, could stand up and say that our province 

hasn’t done better today because of the resource sector than 

without it. I mean, they have to be honest, Mr. Speaker. I mean 

really. 

 

And it goes to a fact to prove or to point out here, Mr. Speaker, 

is that the potash industry has taken it upon themselves to do a 

massive investment in the mining operations for expansion 

because they see the potential of what their particular resource 

can do for the world. And we agree. It’s in more demand than 

any time before for fertilizer. The potash industry is investing 

their dollars, hiring more women and men. Again, it’s so clear, 

Mr. Speaker, that a booming resource sector supports the 

economies across different sectors in manufacturing, goods and 

service support, and hospitality, those kind of things, as I said 

before. 

 

It’s just too much information to actually, you know, talk about 

in one day. I look forward to getting up and speaking again to 

this point, Mr. Speaker. I look forward to supporting the 

argument moving forward. And again I think it’s interesting 

that, as I move through the different resources, we’ll see how 

all resources are developing in this province and in the West, 

how they impact other jobs and other industries across this 

country. 

 

But you know, to go back to some of the other statements that 

I’ve talked about already with, in regards to this first study I 

want to reference today. You know, we’re seeing some 

interesting data come forward as well within the actual . . . And 

I’m going to talk about billions now, Mr. Speaker, billions of 

dollars that are actually provincial GDP [gross domestic 

product] dollars that these particular learned individuals have 

extrapolated from previous studies and are moving forward 

within this economic modelling. 

 

Now I have to say too, Mr. Speaker, that today we see oil prices 

are down. Okay, we see that. But they fluctuate, and we 

understand that there’s going to be an ebbing and flowing of 

that as we move forward. But a lot of this study that was done, 

Mr. Speaker, they reference the fact that this is done on the 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2012 

demand in the world for oil. And they reference oil as one of 

the biggest factors. They also recognize other parts of the 

economies as well, resource sector mining jobs. But as they 

move forward, Mr. Speaker, they recognize this: that the price 

of oil is going to be set by consumption demand. Simple supply 

and demand economics, right? We may not have it all. We may 

not use it all in this country, but they’re going to be using it 

somewhere else. So they’re extrapolating this. 

 

They talk about the expansion of using the data for the 

Keystone XL and for the Northern Gateway pipeline. And what 

they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, this is interesting. Some people 

might think when you have a pipeline system in place that’s 

going to, you know, flow the oil from the oil sands and 

Saskatchewan’s booming oil industry as well to the world, there 

would be a glut of that in the market. And you think that by 

supply and demand economics, you’d have too much supply. 

Demand would wane and the prices would drop. 

 

These two individuals do not see that as a potential possibility. 

They see it as just supporting more production, Mr. Speaker, 

because to drive the global demand for oil specifically — I’ll 

talk about uranium and other things later on as I continue this 

speech in the days and weeks to come — but you know what, 

Mr. Speaker, we look at . . . Again, I want to focus on Ontario 

and Quebec because Mr. Mulcair has gone out of his way, I 

think he got bad advice from some of his people to come out 

with a statement that this is Dutch disease. His advisors, I 

guess, Mr. Weir as an economist would’ve been one of those 

individuals that would have advised him on this particular . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Front-runner. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Front-runner again, and there we go. Mr. Weir 

is connected closer to the federal party, maybe than some of the 

other people running. But I think he advises Mr. Mulcair 

because he supports him. 

 

So one thing that’s interesting and moving forward that these 

two authors found out is that this is billions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker. Now I’ll start with trillions just to give you a 

highlight. These two individuals predict that the oil sector jobs, 

oil sands and the oil patch production in Alberta alone from 

2010 to 2035, will result in provincial GDP increase of 2 

trillion, over $560 billion. That’s Alberta. Now we get that, 

right? Because Alberta, we understand, has got the oil sands but 

Saskatchewan’s got some too. Let’s not forget that. That’s an 

important point here too. 

 

Saskatchewan’s oil sands, maybe not as easy to get to, but 

that’s in development, Mr. Speaker. And I think we’re going to 

see that particular industry move forward. But as we look at this 

particular study, to take it to some other provinces, again I’ll 

focus on Ontario and Quebec. Ontario alone, Ontario will see in 

25 years, Mr. Speaker, from 2010 to 2035, their provincial GDP 

will increase, because of the oil sands and oil production in the 

West, $149 billion provincial GDP because of the oil sector 

jobs in the West. Billion dollars. 

 

You know, and we hear a lot about how Mr. Mulcair, I know 

that he thinks that the East isn’t just Ontario, it’s Quebec as 

well. I think, Mr. Speaker, that particularly his Canada is 

Ontario and Quebec. But even Quebec, Mr. Speaker, even 

Quebec is going to see almost a $49 billion increase in 

provincial GDP because of the boom in the West, Mr. Speaker. 

And it surprises me that, after all these figures are out there, 

that Mr. Mulcair still clings to, he still has his fingernails 

digging deep into this thought and this statement, this is a 

Dutch disease. And it has to be tempered. It has to be treated. It 

has to be annihilated, Mr. Speaker. It’s got to be dealt with. 

 

And I don’t know, I’m thinking Mr. Mulcair, we haven’t heard 

much from him on this particular topic over the last few weeks, 

months maybe. But I’m hopeful that maybe someone from 

Ontario, from his caucus is listening today to this particular 

speech how the Sask Party government in Saskatchewan is in 

complete disagreement at that particular damning statement on 

how it will impact and could impact without the right vision. 

Moving forward, it could impact industries in the resource 

sector, but not in Saskatchewan, not in the West, Mr. Speaker, 

because every Premier in the West, and I think every Premier in 

Canada, maybe even now Dalton McGuinty . . . [inaudible] . . . 

the Premier of Ontario, maybe the new leadership runner there 

and the new Premier will understand this and will see these 

results as I’m seeing them. 

 

You have an opportunity in the East to support the West. 

Choose the opportunity. Be a leader in your province. Support 

the development of the resource sector in the West, but not so 

much it just isn’t jobs to build the industry out here. You have 

an opportunity, as this report also talks about, to move forward 

and support the demand internationally and globally. There is a 

need for process facilities. There is a need for pipelines in the 

East as much as the West to move the oil and the resources that 

way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They have the Great Lake systems and have the shipping lanes 

to the East, to international markets, just as BC has it to the 

West, to the Asian markets, Mr. Speaker. I’m hopeful that 

though the Premier of Ontario, the new Premier of Ontario in 

the future, will understand this and recognize that this is an 

opportunity as Saskatchewan and Alberta has embraced, more 

so Saskatchewan than Alberta because Alberta had it before. 

We have seen this opportunity now. We’ve worked with the 

private sector. Industries have developed this. They’ve grabbed 

onto it, Mr. Speaker. They’re moving into the province. They’re 

expanding. We have companies here that are drilling like no 

other time before. Land sales are up in the oil patch, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re seeing that potential moving on. And even 

though the low dollar, we still see companies starting here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We had a problem last year with the floods down in the 

Southeast, but now that the water’s subsided we’re seeing 

drilling activity. We know that the Southwest is seeing the 

activity as well. The Southeast is working well. We’re seeing 

this time where it’s a problem with growth. Oh my gosh, we’re 

seeing investment dollars into the province. We’re seeing 

people . . . Annual wages are higher than any time before. And I 

would argue, and I know that the Minister of the Economy has 

stated, weekly earnings on average are up every week. And we 

know that there is a direct correlation between that and the 

resource sector jobs, whether they be direct or indirect, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s a very exciting time for this province. And we 

want to see that grow. Hence our document, our vision, our 

growth plan for 2020. 



November 1, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

We will never, ever lay down and be the whipping boy for the 

East. I will say that right now, Mr. Speaker. We will defend 

Saskatchewan. We will defend its people. We will defend those 

women and men who want to drive the economy based on their 

expertise. They see that there is untapped resource wealth still 

in this province they want to work with, they want to get to, Mr. 

Speaker. The Bakken play down south, we see how it’s there as 

well. We see there’s oil shale. There is the whole issue of, you 

know, still that whole tar sands, or the oil sands I want to call it, 

up in the, I believe it’s the Northeast of the province. So we 

have shale gas and shale oil in the Northeast by Hudson Bay, I 

believe. So you know what, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

government is very strongly supporting this motion. 

 

I would ask the members opposite to take a stance at least, Mr. 

Speaker, and step out of their box. If they truly believe like we 

do, that this province’s better days are still to come, Mr. 

Speaker, as our Premier has said, that you know what, Mr. 

Speaker, that they should stand up for this province. They 

should step out of their comfort zone, speak up against their 

federal leader. Take a stance for this province, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what we want to see. Hopefully they will. Hopefully 

they’ll vote in favour of this motion. I truly believe they will. 

So that’s very important for us to do that. 

 

Because they have to see, they have to know that they have 

women and men in their constituencies who have family 

members who are working in industry, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

putting dollars back in the resource sector. They’re working the 

sector. They’re in the mines. They’re in the oil fields, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re working every day and night to support their 

families, to make this province the best it ever has been and the 

best it will be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to standing up here in the 

next few weeks to talk about this. I’m very passionate about 

this. I challenge the two members opposite, or the leadership 

candidates, to come out and say something now, Mr. Speaker. 

Because you know what, Mr. Speaker, if they stay within their 

actual psyche of not sticking up for the province, that’s going to 

hurt their chances. I want to thank the member for Riversdale 

for stepping up today and taking part in this debate from her 

seat. I believe she truly believes that her children’s future truly 

is going to be related and going to do well based on the fact that 

the resource sector booms because that’s going to be great, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s lots of other data we 

should look at. I mean, there’s going to be various sectors of the 

mining that is going to support Saskatchewan, but we know that 

happens in other provinces too. So we see the opportunities 

going forward. 

 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, I think that the issue that we talked 

about today, I mean, again I’ll go back to the two former prime 

ministers who have taken a stance outside of, I believe, their 

professions right now, their lives, that weren’t necessary. They 

weren’t solicited to make those comments by this government, 

but they truly believe in what’s happening right now is 

supporting the entire country, Mr. Speaker. That’s the important 

factor that can’t be lost. 

 

Two former prime ministers, two different political parties, two 

different philosophies within their caucuses. I am sure, Mr. 

Speaker, when they were leaders, they still see that the resource 

sector supports Canada, even though it’s from the West, for the 

most part, Mr. Speaker. That’s a critical part that cannot be lost 

here right now. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker, is that we will now, I want 

to take some time to talk about Mark Carney. I think some of us 

know who he is. I know the two members opposite that are 

running for leadership sure know who he is because I was able 

to talk in a member’s statement this week about why aren’t they 

sticking up, why aren’t they agreeing with Mr. Carney and 

going against Mr. Mulcair. But they wouldn’t. They’re not 

saying yes or no. They’re evasive in their responses to the 

media on this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know what? Mr. Carney was in Alberta back in 

September, and he took part in a think tank, a forum, Mr. 

Speaker, moving forward. And he had some interesting 

comments about Mr. Mulcair’s statement as well. And you 

know, in time I plan to get to more of them. But you know, he 

says in the September 7th article from the Spruce Meadows 

round table “Most fundamentally, higher commodity prices are 

unambiguously good for Canada.” 

 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s important today that we look 

forward as I move this motion on that, and I will in the next few 

weeks, as we get closer and closer to the end of this particular 

debate, to bring up more comments, more anecdotal evidence of 

men and women I’ve met in Saskatchewan who work in 

industry who in fact are now really driven to stay in industry, 

want to see a boom because they want to keep their children 

here as well. Right, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to move the motion: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its disagreement with NDP 

Leader Thomas Mulcair’s contention that the western 

Canadian energy and resource sector is responsible for the 

decline in central Canada’s manufacturing sector which 

Mr. Mulcair has referred to as Dutch disease [Mr. 

Speaker, Dutch disease]. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again Mr. Carney, which is interesting, his . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of . . . Oh, got to 

read the motion? Okay, moved by the member from P.A. 

Carlton: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its disagreement with NDP 

Leader Thomas Mulcair’s contention that the western 

Canadian energy and resource sector is responsible for the 

decline in central Canada’s manufacturing sector which 

Mr. Mulcair has referred to as Dutch disease. 

 

It now being after the hour of 1 o’clock, this Assembly stands 

adjourned to Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:01.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1713 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1713 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1713 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1713 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1714 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1714 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1714 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1714 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1734 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1714 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1714 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1715 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Down Syndrome Awareness Week 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1715 

 Children’s Hospital Foundation Fundraiser 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1715 

 Project Red Ribbon 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1715 

 Avenue Community Centre Awards 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1716 

 Estevan United Way Reaches Goal 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1716 

 Regina Minor Football League 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1716 

 Company Promotes Environmental Stewardship 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1716 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Asbestos in Public Buildings 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1717 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1717 

 Public-Private Partnerships 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1718 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1718 

 Information Services Corporation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1719 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1719 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1720 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1721 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1721 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Potential Sale of Information Services Corporation 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1722, 1732 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1724 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1725, 1731 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1727 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1728, 1731 

  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1730, 1732 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1731 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1732 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1732 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1732 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1733 

 

 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and Resource Boom on  

 Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

  Hickie ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1733 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


