




















































Hansard: March 26, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 21B  MONDAY, MARCH 26, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 745 

 March 26, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, the House stands in 

session. I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. I 

believe before the supper break there, Mr. Speaker, I was 

talking about affordable housing here in the province and the 

incentive we’ve put for the tax rebate on multi-unit starts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s one thing for me to say that, but 

stakeholders have also let their opinions known. Jim Scarrow 

said, and I quote here, “We are very happy. Five stars. Home 

run for the rental initiative.” 

 

Bill Madder is from the Association of Saskatchewan Realtors. 

I quote: 

 

The rebate on business income tax puts Saskatchewan in a 

leadership role nationally. Tax treatment of rental 

investment and income has been a major federal-level 

problem. Here we see Saskatchewan stepping outside the 

box to come up with a home-grown answer. 

 

In all, Mr. Speaker, $309 million in the next four years towards 

housing, and that, we think, will bring some balance to the 

housing market here in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many young families out there in our 

province, more and more each day, who are finding their way 

here in the new Saskatchewan. Of course I have a young family 

myself. I’ve mentioned this before. My three young boys, 

Nicholas, Ryan, and Blake, are certainly the highlight of my 

life, and they make their dad proud. And you know, I guess 

that’s why we get into this business or any business we do, Mr. 

Speaker. We do it for our kids, if we have them, or our 

grandkids, and that’s why we work hard and do our best. And in 

this job, we want to leave the future better than or things better 

than what we found it. And of course there’s many young 

families in Regina Dewdney, and this budget has several 

measures to address their needs. 

 

One of them, the active families benefit, Mr. Speaker, has been 

extended to kids to 17 years of age and under. This is one of my 

favourite measures, not only that this government brought in in 

’07 but to ramp it up even more in this budget. I’ve been 

involved in sports all my life as an athlete and a coach for many 

years, and I’ve seen what sports and what activities can, they 

can be for kids here in our province. It’s certainly a portal to 

learn, interact, work hard, and be a proud part of their 

community. Time and time again, over and over, I’ve seen, well 

peers of mine, students of mine, and just kids that I’ve coached 

get so much out of sports. And they grow. My own kid, he’s 

just grown so much socially since he’s been involved in sports, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s great to see, and all the kids in Saskatchewan 

have benefited from this $250 tax credit, that it really goes a 

long way for accessibility so all kids can have that opportunity 

to participate. 

 

The PST [provincial sales tax] exemption on clothing has been 

extended to those under age 17; $6 million net increase for the 

children and youth agenda, including $1 million for autism 

therapies; $600,000 for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder; 50 new 

pre-kindergarten programs; $600,000 to support EAL [English 

as an additional language] students. There’s going to be 500 

new child care spaces in this budget, Mr. Speaker, as part of the 

campaign promise to add 2,000 in four years. 

 

You know, tax savings are a big part of what we’ve done here 

in government, Mr. Speaker. Quite simply, here in 

Saskatchewan we have the highest threshold before you pay 

taxes anywhere in Canada. And what that means for families in 

our province, Mr. Speaker, a family of four with an income of 

$50,000 in 2007, they had to pay to the government 3,382. This 

year, in 2012, in this budget they’ll only be paying $744, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That’s a change from the NDP [New Democratic Party]. That’s 

a lot for the families in our province, a savings of $2,638. Now 

that’s good news for the people of the province, for families. It 

helps with affordability. Their money, they can decide on their 

own what to do with their money rather than government 

spending it for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know one of the big pluses in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, for children, my kids, future kids, grandkids out there, 

one of the truly . . . things makes this budget so good — that 

this budget is balanced, Mr. Speaker, on a summary financial 

basis. In its own terms that’s a great thing, but when you 

compare it to others, it really does stand out, Mr. Speaker. 

Many governments have simply spent more than they have 

taken in over time. They have no qualms, I guess, about kicking 

their problems down to the next generation financially. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, that leads to systemic unsustainable debt on 

their operations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, some governments, it seems that they have a 

situation where it’s like a person. They have a credit card, and 

they take out another credit card just to use that credit card to 

pay the interest on the original credit card. And you have to 

wonder, what are the consequences of this over the long term, 

Mr. Speaker? Will these countries have any say what they do 

domestically, and what are their policies going to be as a result 

of that? How will future citizens possibly pay this debt off, and 

what will their standard of living be as a result? I imagine it’d 

be a little bit lower than it is now certainly. And if interest rates 

go up, that’s certainly a situation as well. Well we see the 

situation with Greece that Germany has sort of dictated what 

they could do with their own treasury, Mr. Speaker, so they lost 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

some of their sovereignty there, I think. Certainly not the whole 

problem, but that is certainly some of the problem we’re seeing 

in other parts of the world. 

 

And of course we see some jurisdiction, they’ll start the printing 

presses — right, Mr. Speaker? — and that helps make debt 

cheaper. But provincial governments, we don’t have a central 

bank or a printing press, so we have to be even more careful 

that spending does not get out of control. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, I don’t mean to lecture other 

jurisdictions on what they do within their own borders, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s just . . . And I take no pleasure in pointing this 

difference out, you know, but they are critics of this budget. 

And government is about choices. And it doesn’t mean we can’t 

do more or we can’t be diligent but, as a comparison, you know, 

well I often hear from the members opposite about our 

neighbours to the east. They say, Manitoba has this; they do 

that. But, Mr. Speaker, they also have over a $1 billion deficit. 

Now I know some of that has to do with flooding, no doubt. 

But, Mr. Speaker, well I am kind of partial to the Saskatchewan 

advantage. It doesn’t surprise me a whole lot the NDP would 

promote this model based on their multi-billion dollar election 

platform spending spree. 

 

Ontario has a $16 billion deficit and a $250 billion debt. They 

will have to make very difficult decisions in the very near 

future, Mr. Speaker. You know, we could do a lot more if we 

wanted to run a $1 billion deficit as well. But the people of 

Saskatchewan, they didn’t want that, Mr. Speaker. And we saw 

that on November 7, 2011. Here in Saskatchewan we chose a 

different path. We’ve taken a different path here in 

Saskatchewan. We’ve actually paid off debt in the GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] by 44 per cent since 2007, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t really recall any other western country, western 

democracy doing anything close to this in the last several years. 

It saves hundreds of millions of dollars in interest costs. 

 

I find it interesting when you watch other budgets, other finance 

ministers stand up and say, we promise to cut the deficit — and 

of course everything has to go perfectly — by 2019, by 2021. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have that problem in 

Saskatchewan. We’re very lucky. You know, by being cautious 

now and making some tough decisions, we will not have to 

avert a crisis like many places around the world will soon have 

to do. 

 

Back to our friends to the east for a moment, you know, don’t 

ask me about our choices to live within our means. This past 

weekend the Winnipeg Sun said, and these are quotes here, 

Saskatchewan is “kicking our butts.” We have the Jets, meaning 

in Manitoba, “But on the financial, tax and prosperity front, our 

Prairie cousins to the immediate west are teaching us a hard 

lesson in Economics 101,” Mr. Speaker. And further to that, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has transformed itself. These are 

quotes. Saskatchewan has transformed “. . . itself into a lean, 

competitive province that has done a bang-up job attracting 

industry, skilled labour and capital.” The article finished by 

calling the difference between the two provinces . . . Now I 

liked most of this article, Mr. Speaker. This next sentence, and 

you’ll see in a second why I don’t like it as much, but “[It’s 

been a] . . . stark contrast. I’d say we could learn a lot from our 

banjo-pickin’ cousins to the west. At least when it comes to 

managing taxpayer dollars.” 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? I want the best for my kids and 

my grandkids. I don’t want a legacy of uncontrolled debt to be 

hung on them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

While I think I’m getting a little better at being a politician, I’ve 

managed to be more and more long-winded. So I’ll just wrap 

up. I know a lot of my colleagues will want to enter in this good 

budget debate here. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll end by saying this. 

We now have a AAA credit rating. We’ve fulfilled our 

campaign promises. We’ve helped families and seniors with 

affordability. We’ve improved access to health care, all within a 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. That’s how you keep the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

On behalf of the people of Regina Dewdney and my family, I’m 

going to be supporting this budget, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

very pleased to stand today to participate in the budget and to 

dismiss all the rhetoric and all the revisionist history that we’re 

hearing from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. And let the . . . I 

think the most important thing, I think people out there in 

Saskatchewan know one thing, Mr. Speaker: that this budget 

doesn’t do anything for the future. It doesn’t do anything for the 

vision that the people of Saskatchewan expected, and it 

certainly hurt the people that were the least advantaged in our 

great province. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to explain how that 

works. 

 

But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few 

comments on a few of the points raised by the member from 

Wood River. He’s talking about the Meadow Lake pulp mill, 

Mr. Speaker, of how they spent $800 million, I think was the 

figure he raised, to save a seat. And I’m trying to figure out, Mr. 

Speaker, where did that come from, Mr. Speaker, $800 million 

to save a seat in Meadow Lake? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what that member ought to know, and had he been 

here just a bit longer he would have known, that that deal was 

structured by Grant Devine — all right? — and there’s many 

other deals in this province that were structured by the former 

premier. And, Mr. Speaker, what was really, really amazing is 

how that member tried to hook that onto the NDP, saying this is 

what they’ve done. This is what they spent to save a seat. And 

what that member should do is study the history, Mr. Speaker, 

study the history on who structured that particular deal. 

 

I would suspect, Mr. Speaker . . . At the time, the minister from 

Meadow Lake at that time was George McLeod. And I think as 

the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] — I think he 

was the minister of Health at one time — I think he bought in 

the company to set up a pulp mill up in Meadow Lake. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers were 

on the hook for that pulp mill, and we paid many, many, many 

years for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was a contract that was designed and set up by the former PC 

[Progressive Conservative] government that this government, 

the NDP government of 1991 and on, had to pay every single 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

year, Mr. Speaker. And if my memory serves me correct, I think 

the deal was that any cost overruns and any managerial fees that 

were due to this particular company that came in and set up . . . 

I think the company was Mac Millar, the company president at 

the time, and the pulp mill was Millar Western Pulp mill. That 

was the partnership, and the deal was that any costs for 

management, any overruns as a result of the pulp mill coming 

in to Meadow Lake, that the province of Saskatchewan would 

pay those costs over a defined period of time, Mr. Speaker. I 

think the bill was for 15 years. 

 

So before that member from Wood River tries to rewrite 

history, he ought to know that that’s about how long, of the 16 

years that the NDP took control of this province, 16 years, it 

took us about 15 of those years to clean up that Tory mess in 

which that member was a part of in those days. So what he 

ought to do is start, maybe, perhaps reciting history correctly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s the most amazing thing about these guys is they’ll 

say things that is absolutely false, something that people out 

there in Saskatchewan know is false, and yet they keep saying 

it. And they keep saying it, and they’re hoping that people will 

say, oh what the heck, you know, if that’s what they’re saying, 

it must be true. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I tell the people out there in Saskatchewan, 

that is not factual. They ought to look back. And you ought to 

research what he’s speaking about because, Mr. Speaker, the 

facts will clearly point to his right wing ilk, and that’ll show 

that it was their deal. They consummated that deal, and they put 

the province of Saskatchewan, which included the NDP 

government at the time, on the hook for almost $1 billion for 

that pulp mill in Meadow Lake, almost $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, 

for that pulp mill in Meadow Lake. And he has the audacity of 

16 years later getting up and saying, why did you guys do these 

certain things? Why didn’t you do some of these things? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it once and I’ll say it again: but at 

the 16 years that the NDP were in power, Mr. Speaker, it took 

them about 14 or 15 years to clean up the last Tory mess, Mr. 

Speaker. And just when things were starting to get better, the 

people of Saskatchewan lost patience with the NDP, and they 

obviously looked for another choice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I want to point out on the budget itself, Mr. Speaker, 

is that it’s an amazing scenario to watch how the people that 

could least afford it were attacked by this Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, the people that could least afford it. 

From my perspective as a northern MLA, I was hoping things 

would really turn around for the people of northern 

Saskatchewan. And some of the things that people in southern 

Saskatchewan take for granted, like a housing market or home 

ownership, these are some of the things that were ripped out of 

the budget and told, and told to the people of northern 

Saskatchewan that you don’t count any more. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, what happened was the seniors, the seniors 

were also told, you’re going to pay more now for your 

medicine. You’re going to pay a lot more for some of your 

ambulance costs. And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

And what also happened, Mr. Speaker, is that northern forest 

fires crews were cut by that particular government, down one 

member for each crew. And, Mr. Speaker, that is an absolute 

shame. 

 

And you look at the highway commitment, Mr. Speaker, for 

northern Saskatchewan: no new money for highways, no new 

construction for highways, Mr. Speaker. And that is absolute, 

an absolute shame. And we look at some of the challenges that 

people have to travel with, travel some of the roads that people 

have to travel on. You can see that northern Saskatchewan, is it 

any wonder that they’re very upset at the Sask Party 

government? And that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, 

that they have let their voices be known, and they certainly give 

me a lot of information that I wish to share tonight in the 

Assembly. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing less social support for 

the people that desperately need that support, Mr. Speaker. And 

yet in northern Saskatchewan, there’s one thing northern people 

are very proud of. They’re proud of the fact that a lot of their 

northern resources are used to create a great number of jobs in 

southern Saskatchewan, that the resources of the North, 

uranium in particular, Mr. Speaker, offers a great, great 

commodity to the world. And we hope that the industry will 

continue for many, many years. 

 

And what happens as northerners are sitting and looking at 

some of the economic activity happening in their area, they see 

a forestry truck zip by. They see some of the northern mining 

products drive by. And yet you see the condition of our roads, 

and you see the fact that seniors are paying more, and there’s a 

lot less support for northern Saskatchewan. And the worst part 

of it is that the fact that northern roads are really not being cared 

for at all, Mr. Speaker. But that’s my perspective from northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And what people ought to know is that . . . And I’m happy. For 

a certain extent, I’m happy that people are speaking up, and 

they’re really bringing forth some of their concerns. You see 

some of the activity in the Assembly today with the film 

industry. They came here, and this industry was really upset. 

Why would they do this, Mr. Speaker? Why would they do 

something that’s contrary to what I think is a great idea and a 

great concept and that’s stimulating the industry in the 

province? And yet they turn a deaf ear on some of their 

concerns. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to read a particular quote here from a 

March 24th, 2012 article. And this is not from the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. This is not a revisionist historian that’s going to be 

changing how he or she perceives history. This is actually 

Bruce Johnstone of the Regina Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. And 

what he says, Mr. Speaker, is quite amazing. And he talks 

about, Mr. Speaker, and I will quickly read out what he has said 

when he’s talking about the industry itself, and I quote: “But the 

industry says the program has generated $623 million in 

production work since 1998 — a more than six-fold return on 

the government’s investment of $100 million.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are people that have watched budgets 

over the many, many years. They’re probably more intelligent 

and probably a lot more trained to look at how these things 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

unfold as each budget is unveiled. And you look at the headline 

that he has put under his column and it says, “Penny wise, 

pound foolish,” Mr. Speaker. And this is Bruce Johnstone, who 

is a respected journalist in the province, and he writes for a very 

large paper. And the list goes on in terms of some of the other 

headlines, Mr. Speaker. And this is not the NDP saying it, Mr. 

Speaker. These are journalists and the media in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So we can take the revisionist history that the member from 

Wood River likes to do, or we can listen to the neutral folks in 

the media. And that’s what I encourage people at home to do is 

to look at what the media is saying, what the people are saying, 

what the industries are saying about what is wrong with this 

particular budget and what is wrong with this particular 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I pointed out at the outset, that look at the issue of how 

they have taken so much away from the film industry, that 

they’ve increased costs for seniors. And the list goes on as to 

what they have done terribly wrong with this budget. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what have they proposed? The savings that they have 

in those areas, they’re going to add three more MLAs and 

they’re going to build a statue, Mr. Speaker. That’s their grand 

plan for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is what people in northern Saskatchewan, I think 

people throughout the province are going to say: why didn’t 

you tell us that on the doorstep? Why didn’t you tell us that on 

the doorstep that your plan was to add three more MLAs? Why 

didn’t you tell them on the doorstep that your plan was to cut 

the film and tax credit so the industry begins to suffer, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

They wouldn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. They wouldn’t do that 

because they knew they would not get elected, Mr. Speaker, to 

the extent that they had, and that there’s trouble brewing on the 

horizon. And they hid that from the people of Saskatchewan, 

what is unfair of this Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Now I’ll also point out, Mr. Speaker, there is another article 

here we have from Murray Mandryk, who is another journalist 

that talks about some of the . . . Again he’s being very neutral. 

And what he points out, Mr. Speaker, and what he points out — 

and Mr. Mandryk is neutral, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Mandryk is 

neutral — and what his headline on the budget, Mr. Speaker, 

the headline reads, “Sorting out the budget hypocrisy,” Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That’s what he said and that’s exactly what we perceive within 

the NDP, is that these guys are not managing the money and the 

finances properly. They were handed a booming economy, Mr. 

Speaker. They were handed a great surplus within the bank 

account of the people of Saskatchewan, and things were moving 

in the right direction. And what do they do, Mr. Speaker? Again 

as we pointed out, is they’re starting to do creative ways on how 

they’re going to handle our financing. And people out there in 

the media are certainly paying really close attention to how 

these guys are managing the money. 

 

Now again to the rookie MLAs that are here, we understand 

from the opposition’s perspective that your job is to primarily 

read the notes handed to you, and you put the best spin as you 

possibly can. But the real story comes from the media and 

certainly comes from the groups that come to this Assembly to 

express what some of the concerns are and what some of the 

challenges are and how this government has turned their backs 

on key critical areas, Mr. Speaker, on key critical areas. 

 

And I would point out from the northern perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, at one time there was a program which allowed people 

that rented their homes for 10, 12, 15 years the opportunity to 

actually buy out that home, that they would do an assessment 

on that home and determine, based on the housing market, that 

your home would be worth this amount of money, therefore 

would you like to buy the home and therefore you can become 

more independent. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re hearing now that 

that program is ended, that all these people, all these families 

that had the opportunity to actually purchase their home and 

begin the process of home ownership, that they can have an 

asset and a value, that they can actually do something with this 

particular home, they are being told now, oh sorry, we’re 

changing our mind. We’re not going to offer that to northern 

residents, therefore you’ll be renting forever. You will be 

renting forever. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is a shame because part of the process of 

building up hope for families is to give them that opportunity 

and the possibility of home ownership. And right throughout 

this land, throughout Saskatchewan right now, Mr. Speaker, 

there are tens of thousands of young people that’ll never realize 

that dream of owning their own home because that 

Saskatchewan, the dream is gone because of the expense and 

the cost of houses are so high that nobody can ever afford to 

buy their own. So there’ll be many people beginning to rent for 

the rest of their lives, Mr. Speaker, for the rest of their lives. 

 

Now they’ve extended that to northern Saskatchewan where 

there is no housing market. There is no housing market, Mr. 

Speaker. And yet this government says, okay, for the area that 

has no housing market, guess what? We’re not going to give 

you an opportunity to own your own home, and we’re not going 

to give you any opportunity to have that pride in your own 

home ownership. From now on you’re renting forever, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s a serious breach of a contract in 

general because people out there expected that opportunity. And 

this government, this Sask Party government ripped that 

opportunity out from underneath them. And there are many 

young families, single mothers that really wanted to continue to 

build their future for their kids and working poor people that 

wanted to actually own their own home, that opportunity was 

ripped off. It was ripped out from underneath them by the 

Saskatchewan Party government. And that is an absolute 

shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, you look at the cuts to the 

northern forest fire program, the cuts to the northern forest fire 

program. We already know northern Saskatchewan has 

challenges when it comes to jobs and employment and 

opportunity in these northern communities, Mr. Speaker. We 

know that those problems exist. And what did this government 

do, Mr. Speaker? It started cutting jobs in northern 

Saskatchewan under the one area where we think it’s really 

important, and that was of course to protect the forestry 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

industry, protect the communities, protect the lives. But what 

they’ve done is reduce the northern forest fire fighting group 

and the different crews out there. They’ve cut them, and they’ve 

gutted them right throughout the northern part of the province. 

And that is not fair to the northern people. 

 

And I would say one thing, Mr. Speaker, is why in an area that 

has the greatest economic challenges, why in the area that has 

probably the highest unemployment rate, if not in Saskatchewan 

right across the nation, why would they go there to cut jobs and 

take away essential programs like home ownership, Mr. 

Speaker? What was the intent behind that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So I think what’s really important for the rookies out there to 

understand, and I appreciate that, home ownership is good. It’s 

really nice when you go there and you see young families move 

into new homes, but that dream is probably only for a select 

few. There are thousands of people out there being affected 

adversely by this government, by some of the decisions and 

some of the choices that they made, Mr. Speaker, and they 

continue to make. So how is it that most disadvantaged people 

in this province have to pay the highest price when it comes to 

things like home ownership or employment in their own 

community, Mr. Speaker, and a sense of opportunity in their 

own land? 

 

And they weren’t done there yet, Mr. Speaker. They weren’t 

done there yet. Then they went after the enterprise regions, 

which was their concept to begin with. They began slashing the 

enterprise regions, saying no more are we going to look at the 

economic opportunity, the economic opportunity for northern 

Saskatchewan people. We’re going to pull away from these 

enterprise regions that we set up, and we think that that’s 

enough of that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you have to look at that notion of why do that 

in an area that desperately needs as much of the support as we 

possibly can. And they not only ripped the opportunity from 

people’s dreams of owning their own homes, but they also 

aren’t going to do anything to help them economically. Plus 

we’re going to also cut jobs and we’re not going to fix your 

roads. 

 

And yet at the same time, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, we are 

now going to keep hauling out of a lot of the resources out of 

the North. And in the meantime, you guys just sit and watch the 

trucks drive by that are hauling out pulp or hauling out logs or 

hauling out a number of goods from northern Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. The people in northern Saskatchewan see that, and 

we tell the people all throughout the province that this is not a 

fair Saskatchewan unless it’s good for all of us. That is not fair 

in any way, shape or form, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So not only does the budget do a lot of nasty things to our 

seniors, it does a lot of nasty things to young families. It does a 

lot of nasty things to Aboriginal people, and it really, really 

penalizes northern Saskatchewan, an area where they need more 

support, not less, Mr. Speaker, not less. And that’s the message 

that the people are sending here on a continual basis, that we 

need investment in the North. We need employment 

opportunity in the North. We need home ownership 

opportunities in the North. And all of those were taken away by 

one budget by that Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. And I 

say shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet the worst part of this all, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 

they’re hauling out all kinds of resources out of northern 

Saskatchewan. And as Aboriginal people and non-Aboriginal 

people who call the North their home watch this, they say, why 

don’t they at least fix up our roads so that the trucks that are 

hauling out all these goods can have an easier drive out? And 

they won’t even do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what does this mean? What does this mean? It means that 

they simply do not care, Mr. Speaker. They do not care. So this 

whole notion of the fact that they put these programs in place, 

and they take programs out from the budget, and they don’t 

realize all the misplaced priorities they have put on against the 

North or onto the North, that how dramatic and how negative of 

an effect that that has on many people’s lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to talk a bit about the northern forest fire fighting 

program, Mr. Speaker. They are an excellent, they are an 

excellent bunch of people, men and women, that do a fantastic 

job of protecting northern forests, Mr. Speaker, not only for 

threats to communities and to lives but also to the industries 

such as tourism and forestry, Mr. Speaker. These guys that fight 

against the forest fire threat to many of our northern parts of 

Saskatchewan, they do a tremendously good job. And the 

reason why I know, Mr. Speaker, is you do the comparison on 

what Alberta pays versus what BC [British Columbia] pays 

versus what Manitoba pays and versus what Saskatchewan 

pays, and you will see, out of the four Western provinces, that 

Saskatchewan’s probably got the lowest cost of fighting these 

fires than any other jurisdiction. And that’s a tribute to a lot of 

these northern forest crews that do a tremendous amount of 

great work. And it’s a very good bunch of people that do their 

service well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Many times, many times they put their lives on the line. Many 

times they leave their families and they go out and they do a job 

for the government. And now how does this government repay 

them? Well we’re going to cut your program more, and you’re 

going to get less equipment. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a slap in 

the face for a great amount of good work that was done by these 

crews throughout northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And the question you’ve got to ask is, why? As you’re hauling 

out the uranium, why are you firing our forestry protection 

officers? As you’re hauling out the logs, why are you stopping 

home ownership from becoming an opportunity for people? 

And as you’re hauling in tourists and hauling them out again, 

why is it not fair to ask for fair treatment of our elders and not 

have them pay more for their medicines? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the points that was raised by my 

colleague is many people in northern Saskatchewan, the elders 

in particular, they were quite pleased when that $15 charge was 

put on their prescription, and yet they still had a difficult time, 

Mr. Speaker. They still had a difficult time in trying to do the 

rent, the power bill, the food, and the list goes on. But yet with 

the increase in the prescription cost now under this government, 

they’re going to have a greater and a more difficult time trying 

to make ends meet. And these are the people that developed 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

northern Saskatchewan — our pioneers, our elders — and this 

government shows them how much they have respect for them 

by cutting these programs and increasing the cost of medicine, 

which is an essential need for many of our elders. And they 

increased those costs, Mr. Speaker. So what’s going to happen 

is many of those elders will now not buy the prescription. 

 

So I look at the budget itself and the implications, Mr. Speaker, 

and some of the challenges that this government put before the 

North, and I tell the northern people one thing: that one of the 

problems that we have is that we’re not going to Regina enough 

and bringing groups of people and organized people to this 

Assembly to show this government that we mean business when 

we don’t want to be pushed around any more on our own land. 

And some of the resources that you have taken out of the North, 

why don’t you put it into meaningful, visionary things that 

mean a lot for the future of our province, that gives us as 

northern people more independence? 

 

It’s about social and economic justice, Mr. Speaker; that’s what 

this is about. And this government doesn’t get it. This Sask 

Party government has no idea what it’s doing when it does 

harmful cuts like that and, Mr. Speaker, the people of the North 

are getting angrier and angrier and they simply are not going to 

take it any more. And I encourage them to come to Regina, to 

come to this Assembly and voice their opinion and their 

displeasure as to how this government is treating them, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would encourage anybody listening tonight to 

get organized and start rallying against this government. 

 

And so I again, out of respect for the fact that the rookie MLAs 

have no choice but to read the script in front of them, I’ll ask 

them to dig deeper at what that particular government is doing, 

what they’re saying, and what they’ve done with this budget. 

Have a look around and ask the questions: is home ownership 

being supported by our government? 

 

The answer would be a flat no because there’s hundreds of 

families, young families, that’ll never afford a home in 

Saskatchewan, that Saskatchewan dream that many of us have 

and have had for our kids and our grandkids. That’ll never 

happen again, Mr. Speaker, because the prices of houses are 

going through the roof and young people and young families in 

this province cannot afford to buy a home, or the down payment 

to buy a home. And that’s all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, not just in northern Saskatchewan. We hear that 

steady. We hear grandparents that are continuing to work to try 

and make ends meet. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, home ownership is a key thing. It’s a great 

thing to see. I’m not arguing that point, nor am I disputing that 

sentiment. I’m just saying that it’s getting more and more 

difficult for young working people to be able to have that 

Saskatchewan dream of owning their own home, Mr. Speaker. 

And about all they can look forward to is sky-high rents, 

without the possibility of owning their own home. And that’s a 

shame, given the fact that this government is bragging about all 

the money that they’ve got, Mr. Speaker, bragging about the 

booming economy and all the great opportunity that they have 

in this land. 

 

When we start seeing roads being paved to First Nations 

communities, when we start seeing home ownership being 

supported to the northern communities, when you start seeing 

benefit sharing of all the resources in northern Saskatchewan 

and the same quality of life that you enjoy in southern 

Saskatchewan and some sectors of the province, then and then 

and only then will we feel from the northern perspective that 

we’re part of this province, Mr. Speaker. But the treatment we 

got from the Saskatchewan Party in this last budget is shameful, 

Mr. Speaker, at best. It is shameful, and the worst thing is 

they’ve been bragging about all the money they’ve got and 

they’ve been bragging about the economy that they supposedly 

built, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They inherited that, Mr. Speaker. They inherited that. And I 

would challenge any member across the way to do a history 

check, do a history check and they will find out that every time 

the economy was going great and things were happening and 

people were working and things were really moving forward, 

Mr. Speaker, guess what? The NDP were in charge. And that’s 

why the people of Saskatchewan are always proud to support 

the NDP, Mr. Speaker. That’s why I’m proud to stand here as 

an NDP member, Mr. Speaker. But every time things went 

south on the economy or anything happened to . . . [inaudible] 

. . . in the province, guess who took over? The conservatives, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the message we have today is that you’ve got to be careful 

that you don’t mess this up. You’ve been given an opportunity, 

an opportunity never afforded to the NDP government under 

Romanow in 1991. We were paying $2 million per day on 

interest alone, Mr. Speaker, on interest alone left by the Tory 

government of the 1980s. And if you think for one minute — 

for one minute, Mr. Speaker — of the things we could have 

done if we didn’t, the things we could have accomplished in the 

long term if we didn’t have that huge debt covering or over our 

heads, Mr. Speaker, we could have done wonderful things. 

 

Now what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that you look at . . . Look at 

the history again. I think that the interest payment alone on the 

debt left by the Conservatives — left by the Conservatives — I 

think it was twice the amount given to all the school boards in 

the province. It was twice the amount of the education budget, 

Mr. Speaker. That is an amazing challenge to meet that debt if 

it’s twice the amount of your education budget. And that is an 

amazing thing that people out there, in the history of 

Saskatchewan, they look at how that was managed, of how the 

NDP chipped away at that debt problem and then began paying 

down the debt itself so it resulted in lesser interest, Mr. Speaker. 

It took a lot of time to get there, Mr. Speaker; it took many, 

many years. And that’s why I say today, when this government 

took over, when this party took over, Mr. Speaker, they had two 

and one-half billion dollars in the bank. They had a booming 

economy and the population was on the rise. So really, Mr. 

Speaker, they had very little work to do except spend money. 

 

So my argument today is, when we say to you to manage that 

economy and that money very carefully, the lessons are from a 

party that went through the repayment of debt left by your 

predecessors, your cousins. We had to take some very tough 

positions and make some hard choices to begin to recapture 

Saskatchewan so it’s not purchased by the people of Wall 

Street. And actually Saskatchewan came into its own after years 

and years of very careful management and certainly some good 

vision attached to it, Mr. Speaker. 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

Now I obviously want to give credit to where credit is due. 

Tchorzewski was the minister of Finance at the time and they 

called him Eddie T, and certainly he was one of the builders. 

He’s one of the people that rebuilt hope and rebuilt our 

finances. It wasn’t the member from Wood River; he wasn’t 

around then. It wasn’t the member from Kindersley. He took off 

when the tough work started, Mr. Speaker. It was people like 

Eddie T. It was people like Romanow. It was people like Eric 

Cline. Those are the people that we should thank today, Mr. 

Speaker, because they were a good government. They brought 

back Saskatchewan from the brink of bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s why today, when you hear these guys do the spin, 

spin, spin, keep talking about the good things and well let’s do a 

different story of how the history unfolded here; and we say it 

enough, we say it enough, the people of Saskatchewan will then 

believe us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know one thing. 

They know that the economy of Saskatchewan was hot and will 

continue staying hot for a long time. They know regardless of 

which party is in place, it will continue staying hot and will 

continue building, Mr. Speaker. And the third thing is, they 

know one thing for certain, they know one thing for certain, that 

these guys didn’t build the economy. It was handed to them, 

Mr. Speaker. That they know, that they know. 

 

So overall, Mr. Speaker, I would say that some of the members 

out across the way here may have been convinced by their 

colleagues in the backroom, you just say this, follow these 

notes, don’t deviate from the notes because that’s going to be 

our spin for the next two years, that’s what they’ve got to tell 

people. And if we all say it, if we all say it then maybe some 

people will believe us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, to me I think that’s very . . . That is not the 

proper way to do things, Mr. Speaker. That is not the correct 

way. That is not the right way. There’s no question in my mind 

that what they often tell their members is look, we got this great 

opportunity, we have to work hard to build a new vision for 

Saskatchewan. Instead, Mr. Speaker, they have not done 

anything except claim credit for something that they have not 

done, Mr. Speaker. They have claimed credit for something 

they have not done. And that’s why I sit here today and look at 

some of these headlines and I say to myself, you know, without 

those really gifted people that we enjoyed having in our 

company in those tough, tough years, that this government does 

not know what they’re doing, not with the economy. They don’t 

know what they’re doing with the budgets. They don’t know 

what they’re doing with the opportunity that’s before them 

because this is their first opportunity that they’ve ever had. 

 

And some of the other points I would point out, Mr. Speaker, as 

well, is that you look at the whole notion of this paydown of 

debt. That was one of the things, that was one of the things . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Belanger: — And right on cue, Mr. Speaker. Right on cue, 

they applaud that. And you know why they do that, Mr. 

Speaker? They say, look what we’ve done. We’re paying down 

debt; applause. You see how it’s all orchestrated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact of the matter is there was no incoming government in 

the history of Canada that enjoyed the surplus, the opportunity, 

and everything going on the upswing than the Sask Party did in 

2007, Mr. Speaker. History will show they are the only 

government that had all the booming economy, the money in 

the bank, and everything was moving forward. Everything was 

moving forward. They inherited that, Mr. Speaker. They 

inherited that. And that’s why today when they say, oh, after 

two years, after two years of really tough slugging it out and 

really having a tough time, we managed to pay down 40 per 

cent of the debt after two years, and everybody in the finance 

world had to kind of hold themselves from laughing themselves 

silly. 

 

Because people in Saskatchewan know. People in 

Saskatchewan know that when it comes to economic building, 

when it comes to making sure that you manage your money 

properly, when it comes down to making sure that you have a 

future that includes everyone — people of the North, the elders, 

people of all backgrounds, that you want to be inclusive of all 

people — the only person, the only group that really does that, 

Mr. Speaker, is the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People in Saskatchewan know that, Mr. Speaker. And there’s 

no question in my mind that the NDP is going to be coming 

back, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to be coming back in 

greater numbers. Because sooner or later, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan will have them figured out, and they’ll 

realize that all they did was spend money and spin. Spend and 

spin, Mr. Speaker, spend and spin. They’re great pretenders, 

and that’s one of the reasons why we don’t, on this side, for one 

second believe anything that their Minister of Finance brings 

forward as a balanced budget. And the point that he raises, we 

have $15 million to the good. Well, Mr. Speaker, last year it 

was a $310 million deficit as our Finance critic pointed out — 

$310 million deficit. And who said that? It wasn’t the NDP. It 

was the media. 

 

So once again this year we’re going into deficit again, Mr. 

Speaker. And yet they keep spinning and they keep spinning 

and they keep spinning. And I tell the people of Saskatchewan 

one simple message: when they spin like that, always remember 

that only the truth will set them free. And that’s why, that’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, they will not speak the truth about how 

they’re managing the money and how they’re making sure the 

budgets are balanced because they are not, Mr. Speaker. They 

are not. And that’s the unfortunate reality of this particular 

government and of these particular members of that 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I’ll go back to my point about northern Saskatchewan, 

the place where we needed the most help. And I think that 

Saskatchewan people are very generous and kind people and 

understanding people in general. I’ve met many of them, Mr. 

Speaker, all throughout the land. And they understand, they 

understand a number of key values in the province is also caring 

for your neighbour and making sure everybody is part, part of 

this great economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would point out that northern Saskatchewan is being 

excluded, as many other groups are being excluded, and that is 

shameful, Mr. Speaker, because northern Saskatchewan does a 

lot for the province. So instead of just pulling out all the 

resources — uranium or logging or the tourism industry — why 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

don’t you put some back? Put some back instead of pulling and 

cutting and taking away from the northern part of our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So again I point out, as we sit here today and listen to the 

budget debates, I’ll tell the people at home basically the 

argument is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They’ve got three or 

four members on their side arguing with one member on our 

side, which is not fair, Mr. Speaker. It is not fair because they 

need, they need 12 Sask Party MLAs against one NDP, and 

that, Mr. Speaker, would make it a half-decent fight, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s my point. It would make a half-decent fight 

over the values, over the history, and over how to govern this 

province right. 

 

So they’re short over there, Mr. Speaker. They’re short on 

history. They’re short on how to manage the money. They’re 

short on being truthful with the people of Saskatchewan. And 

then the last four or five years, Mr. Speaker, the last four or five 

years, they have been pretending to be the government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And they can say, and they can say what they want about the 

New Democratic Party and about the history of people like 

Lorne Calvert and the history of people like Roy Romanow, 

Mr. Speaker. But thank goodness we had those guys in charge, 

Mr. Speaker, because one took back our province from the 

brink of bankruptcy, which was Romanow, and Calvert built the 

economy and started building hope for our people. And guess 

what? That economy and that hope spread all throughout the 

province — northern Saskatchewan, southern, everywhere, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So as much as those guys want to pat themselves on the back, 

people of Saskatchewan know. People of Saskatchewan know 

you can’t repay debt 40 per cent after two years of being in 

government. I don’t even know if it was two years, maybe 18 

months, and the Premier gets up with great fanfare: hey you 

guys, we’re paying down the debt 40 per cent. And everybody 

says, okay, okay. And what he didn’t say was, well the NDP 

left that money there. So, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t want to say 

that. 

 

They should always have — and that’s what I always say — 

always at the end of your speeches say but. And the reason why 

you should say but is, you say, but we want to thank the NDP 

for that, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they should say. 

 

But do you know what happens in right wing thinking, Mr. 

Speaker? In the right wing thinking they say, okay let’s wait for 

the opportunity. We see Saskatchewan’s star is rising in 2001, 

all the people saying Saskatchewan’s economy is building. 

They’re doing the right things in Saskatchewan, and things are 

moving in the right direction. These right wingers sensed an 

opportunity, so they came along and they started working 

together with the federal Conservatives, the Reform Party. They 

formed this alliance in the dark of night, and they said, let’s all 

go after the NDP, they said. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, after six years of paying down debt, making 

some tough choices of rebuilding this economy, of course there 

is many people within the NDP that had to pay a price in terms 

of having all this energy, Mr. Speaker. It takes a lot of work, 

hard work, hard work to rebuild the economy, Mr. Speaker, and 

many of the MLAs that served under those administrations, Mr. 

Speaker, worked very, very hard. And after 16 years of that 

thing, they too can get tired, Mr. Speaker. They’re only human, 

and that’s the most important thing. 

 

And these guys come along, and now the best thing they can do 

whenever they get in trouble, whenever they get in trouble, 

there’s two things they’ll do, Mr. Speaker. They’ll go back to 

their spin. Of course that’s what they do, and they’ll start 

patting themselves on the back. And they’ll make an 

announcement, some kind of announcement that’ll try and 

change the channel on what they’re doing wrong, on what 

they’re doing wrong. And the other thing when they get into 

trouble, Mr. Speaker, they say, oh but you guys done that. They 

right away, they go against, they talk about the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know why they do that, Mr. Speaker? Because they don’t 

have a history in Saskatchewan, according to them. They’ve 

been in government for five years. What is their history? They 

say, oh we’re not Conservatives. We’re not Reformers. No, 

we’re not Reformers. We’re not Liberals either. We’re not sure 

what they are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the point is, the point is, the point is, I say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, thank goodness that we had good leadership 

under the NDP to build this economy, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

goodness, Mr. Speaker. And the same qualities of that 

government come from some of our opposition members, in 

particular the critic for Finance when he tells people we are, we 

are going in deficit, when he sounds the alarm bells that we’ve 

got to build a better strategy for the money we have now. It’s 

called a legacy fund. We’ve got to make sure we protect the 

environment, the workers’ rights. These are all things and 

values that are important to the New Democrats, Mr. Speaker. It 

is not important to them. 

 

And I predict, Mr. Speaker, I predict that within the next five, 

six, seven years that half of that caucus will be on some of the 

boards that they’re giving all the resources to, the board of 

directors, and the people of Saskatchewan will be left holding 

the bag. And that’s why it’s important, that’s why it’s important 

we argue now about the future of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Some of those guys are just visiting. They’re just visiting, Mr. 

Speaker. Mark my words: they’re just visiting. And I tell the 

people of Saskatchewan one simple thing is that whenever they 

talk about the NDP or they self-congratulate themselves or they 

try and fool you, go back to your history and remember the 

history, and it will show very clearly which government, which 

party built this economy and brought hope to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They are still doing it to this day, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why 

when four of them get up and start patting themselves on the 

back, us here — the nine members right across the way, Mr. 

Speaker — we quietly hold our confidence because we know, 

Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day the people of Saskatchewan 

will know the truth. The boom was coming. The resources 

industry were going to come. People were flocking to 

Saskatchewan. They just simply inherited. 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

Now they say it’s a great right wing experiment that worked, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what they claim. And we say in 

Saskatchewan that people know the boom was coming. And 

what we would have done differently, Mr. Speaker, we would 

have taken care of the people that need it the most. We would 

have made sure that everybody shared in the opportunity of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And all we’ve seen from these guys, Mr. Speaker, was cuts to 

the areas that could least afford it and that’s northern 

Saskatchewan, to the Aboriginal people and to our seniors, Mr. 

Speaker. That is a shame. It’s an absolute shame. And I’ll point 

out, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan will certainly 

review and they will judge this government accordingly. And 

when that time comes, Mr. Speaker, I point out in many of my 

discussions, that they will not put the people of Saskatchewan 

in debt like they did last time because there’s too many people 

that are watching what they do. They are too many people that 

are watching what they are doing. 

 

We are sounding the alarm bells now as we speak. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I hope and I pray that there’ll never, ever be a 

government that has a $15 billion debt in the Crowns, in the 

General Revenue Fund, to try and rebuild from that. The NDP 

did it. The NDP did it because we had a great leadership at the 

time. And, Mr. Speaker, no matter what those guys say across 

the way they’ll never, ever take that away from the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s why I’ll stand up here for the next four years 

opposing any budget they bring forward. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is my privilege to rise in the House and take part in 

the budget debate. Mr. Speaker, there was an MLA once said, 

when you’re in opposition, you can say anything you want. And 

I think we just heard a magnificent display of exactly that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in the House all day today, and I’ve 

listened to the members opposite contribute through the day by 

way of members’ statements, by way of their participation in 

the budget debate. And one of the things that I have found 

absolutely fascinating today, not because of what they said 

because there’s usually not much in there that usually, that 

warrants a lot of interest, but what I found interesting is what 

they didn’t say Mr. Speaker. 

 

The news this weekend was dominated by the federal NDP 

leadership debate. It went on and on, debate after debate, vote 

after vote, issues with how the voting system worked. And you 

would have thought, you would have thought that one of the 

Saskatchewan members of the NDP B-team would have got up 

and would have congratulated Thomas Mulcair, would have got 

up and said something, that they’d gone there or participated or 

something. But nothing, not a bit. I don’t know whether they 

take no pride in it. I heard the member opposite talk about the 

legacy of Calvert and Romanow, but nothing about their federal 

brethren. Just nothing at all. I don’t know whether this is 

because the legacy of Lingenfelter lingers on in their lonely 

lives or whatever is taking place over there, but I found it 

absolutely fascinating that not one of the nine over there would 

get up and congratulate their new federal taskmaster, Mr. 

Speaker. Anyway I leave it to them to decide what’s important 

or not important in their lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the member from 

Canora-Pelly for doing what no other provincial Finance 

minister in Canada has been able to deliver this year. Our 

Finance minister has tabled a balanced budget focused on 

keeping the Saskatchewan advantage of sound fiscal 

management, sustainable spending, and a strong economy. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say right now I am going to be supporting 

the motion and not supporting the amendment that came by way 

of whatever handwritten epistle came out of them earlier today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, usually when members get up and speak, they 

usually have some personal comments to make. I didn’t speak 

earlier in the House when the House opened and would like to 

make a few thank yous now. Mr. Speaker, my mother turned 90 

earlier this year, and a very active follower of politics. And I’ve 

usually incurred a bit of personal humour at my own expense at 

it, but I will say that she followed the provincial election very 

closely, hosted a tea party for the various candidates who were 

there. She met the current member from Saskatoon Nutana 

when she was over there and passed a comment to me after the 

member . . . [inaudible] . . . She’s not Pat Atkinson, but I think 

she’s going to win. She may not win this poll, but she’s going to 

win. My mother, being 90 years old, was exactly right as to 

what happened in that constituency. So my congratulations to 

the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

An Hon. Member: — She’s a lovely lady. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I heard her say that she’s a lovely lady, 

and I’ve thought so for my entire life. She’s been good to me. 

Very politically astute, I don’t think she’s ever voted the other 

way, but she certainly recognizes the competition from over 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to advise as well my mother-in-law, 

Sandy’s mother, also is well into her 80s and has recently 

become a SaskTel Max customer. So to the folks at SaskTel, 

they have now got a new convert. It took no end of time and a 

trip out there so we could teach her how to use the remote 

control, but it’s working fairly well. And she wants to commend 

the folks at SaskTel for . . . [inaudible]. 

 

She lives in Rosetown. The member from Rosetown, I know, 

has been a good MLA. I hate to admit that out loud, but he 

certainly has been. And my mother-in-law is a supporter of his 

and has voted for him in the past, so I thank him for the good 

work that he continues to do, looking after his constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to acknowledge some of the 

people that I have the privilege of working with who provide 

support and assistance. I’m incredibly fortunate to have many 

great people working with us in the office and in the ministry. 

In my constituency office I have Gordon Rutten, who in another 

life is the mayor of Martensville, and Dustin Bisson, who work 

very hard. And Dustin is also a university student and I 

understand is going to be working in this building. 

 

In this building I have an admin team of Jean Watts and Laine 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

Goertz. I have a communications assistant who is off on sick 

leave right now, Judy Langford. And I have two very 

resourceful, hardworking ministerial assistants, Mathew Glover 

and Marina Willimont. Marina is new and is working out 

incredibly well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment briefly on my chief of 

staff, Denise Batters. She has been with the Ministry of Justice 

since we formed government. She recently returned from 

Ottawa where she spoke before the House of Commons 

standing committee on health as it considered Bill C-300, the 

Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention Act. I think we’re 

all incredibly proud of the work that she’s done and the role that 

she’s taken in prevention of suicide. She is not just an asset to 

my office but an asset to our government and to the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to recognize deputy minister of 

Justice, Gerald Tegart, and the very good people that work at 

the Ministry of Justice. I’d like to specifically recognize ADM 

[assistant deputy minister] Susan Amrud who is off recovering 

from surgery and want to wish her a speedy recovery and hope 

that she gets back to work soon. We are also fortunate to have 

deputy minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety, 

Mike Carr, and the very hard-working employees that work in 

that ministry as well as the fine folks from the Workers’ 

Compensation Board. All of these people do a great deal to 

ensure the safety and well-being of the workers in our province. 

 

I think as a province we’re very fortunate to have a 

professional, hard-working, knowledgeable public service, and I 

think all MLAs would want to congratulate and thank them for 

the good work that they do. Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I 

didn’t recognize and thank the individuals who work in this 

building, legislative staff, Pages, and the people that do the 

outstanding job of keeping the building looking very well. 

 

I know that I’m recognized as playing the odd prank, and one of 

the people that had been my victim in the last year or so is 

Robert Park that works in legislative services. He is the person 

that sends out the email notices as to when meetings start, and I 

would reply back, “When does the meeting start?” when it was 

the headline in there or “Where is it?” when it was right in it. 

And then I would reply back that I wasn’t going to go unless he 

guaranteed that supper was going to be served, or what was the 

dress code? 

 

Anyway he sent back a reply to me when I had asked what 

supper was going to be served, asked me what I wanted. I told 

him that I wanted a ham and Swiss. He met me outside the 

committee room door with a cart, with a white linen tablecloth, 

a flower, a bottle of Perrier and a ham and Swiss sandwich, 

with a white tablecloth over his arm. So anyway, I thank him 

for that. But the reason I want to specifically recognize him, he 

and his wife, Kendra, had a baby, Robert Harrison Park, on 

March 15th. And that’s their first one, and I would like to 

congratulate them on behalf of all members. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we just finished a campaign. It was a significant 

hard-working . . . And I had a great campaign team and want to 

recognize just a few of the people: Henry Dyck, Lynne Agnew, 

Gene and Pat Humeny, Rene Stock, Ronnie Meyers, Rita 

Flaman Jarrett, Earl Priddle. And, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t 

recognize and thank my wife, I would be in great trouble and 

would spend a lot more time sleeping in Regina because I 

would not be allowed home. I want to thank and recognize 

Sandy for not only being good and hard-working but also 

putting up with a lot of my bad jokes and ill humour. So I thank 

her. She’s been wonderful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk now about some of the budget 

things and things that offer my home community of Saskatoon 

. . . My constituency of Saskatoon Southeast, like communities 

all across Saskatchewan, is growing incredibly fast. My 

constituency had 16,000 voters. Not that I want to recognize 

any other constituencies, but I would point out Saskatoon 

Centre had 7,000. And anyway, I’m glad to see that we’re going 

through the redistribution. 

 

Saskatoon will see municipal revenue sharing increase to 

$42.14 million. This is an increase of 11.3 per cent from the 

previous year. More importantly this is an increase of 137 per 

cent from 2007-2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud to be leading the country in so many 

areas, and this budget is designed to ensure that everyone in our 

province is able to benefit from the Saskatchewan advantage. In 

this period of global uncertainty, it’s about making prudent 

choices and sustained value programs. We’re making life more 

affordable for Saskatchewan people. At the same time, we have 

to ensure that our government’s spending is affordable and 

sustainable, and sometimes it means difficult choices. 

 

This year we are forecasting 2.8 per cent economic growth. 

That is the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. Speaker, a 

combination of sound fiscal management, sustainable spending, 

and a strong and growing economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a very few minutes to tell the 

members present about the things that are taking place in the 

Ministry of Justice and Attorney General to build on the 

Saskatchewan advantage. Our budget this year will support our 

province’s growing economy through legislative amendments 

that increase protection for investors and consumers and 

promote a favourable business environment in our province. We 

will continue our efforts to reduce crime and improve public 

confidence in the justice system through a three-pronged 

approach of prevention, intervention, and enforcement. 

 

The capital budget of the Ministry of Justice and Attorney 

General is $14.5 million. The bulk of that money, $11.4 million, 

will go towards the renovations of the Saskatoon’s Queen’s 

Bench Court House in order to accommodate the transfer of the 

family law division to that facility. It is an example of our 

government’s commitment to ensure that everyone who uses 

our courthouse facilities in the province can do so safely and 

have access to the programs that they need. 

 

We are moving ahead with plans to install a new computer IT 

[information technology] system in the maintenance 

enforcement office. The staff in that office does a tremendous 

job of helping children in our province by getting money into 

the hands of custodial parents, who collect over 90 per cent of 

the money that’s due to them. 

 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

Staying with the technology, we’re also going to continue the 

implementation of the criminal justice information system, and 

we’re going to expand our video conferencing facilities for our 

courts. The use of video conferencing saves both time and 

money by allowing some court appearances to happen without 

the accused actually having to be physically present in the 

courtroom. This benefits both victims and witnesses by 

allowing them to sometimes deliver testimony without having 

to be in the same room as the accused. 

 

Members of this House will also recall earlier when our 

government made the decision in 2008 to raise the victim 

surcharge collected on provincial offences. That increase has 

helped hold offenders more accountable and has provided us 

with more funding for important programs and services. The 

surplus in the Victims Fund is allowing our government to 

expand our successful victims services programs to 100 per cent 

of the province. It was my pleasure to announce that expansion 

just last week at a Saskatoon conference of victims services 

workers and volunteers. The announcement was received very 

well by that audience.  

 

Up until now we have been proud to support 18 police-based 

victims services programs serving only 87 per cent of the 

population. This will increase it to the remaining 34 police 

jurisdictions and 100 per cent of the population. It comes at an 

additional cost of $1.2 million, which is paid for entirely by the 

Victims Fund. No money for that will be coming from the 

General Revenue Fund. Mr. Speaker, this brings our 

expenditures on police-based victims services to $3.5 million a 

year. Mr. Speaker, we increased that surcharge so that victims 

would get the services that they very much need, and by doing 

so, it allows us to help victims of crime across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our ultimate goal is of course to lower the rate of 

criminal activity, and therefore victims of Saskatchewan will be 

better off. We’re investing in that area, Mr. Speaker. We will 

spend an additional $700,000 to expand our high-risk violent 

offender response initiative to the communities of Prince 

Albert, Melfort, and Meadow Lake. By working with their 

colleagues in adult probation and police services in the 

respective communities, our team is targeting violent offenders 

both before and after they enter the so-called worst of the worst 

category. Saskatchewan people have told us clearly that they 

want protection from serious high-risk and long-term violent 

offenders. Mr. Speaker, we are listening — but not just 

listening; we are taking action. This is a phased-in platform 

commitment. We are keeping our promises to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to switch hats and tell the 

members about some of the highlights of the budget from the 

Ministry of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety. This 

budget contains an increase in funding for the ministry of 

$529,000, or 3.1 per cent over 2011-2012, which will address 

some of the past operating shortfalls in the areas including 

salaries and information technology expenses. It will allow the 

ministry to maintain focus on the very important work that we 

do for the people of Saskatchewan.  

 

The ministry is firmly committed to its mission of ensuring 

safe, healthy, and productive workplaces. This is especially 

important for Saskatchewan’s continued economic growth and 

prosperity. Mr. Speaker, we have a specially high risk in areas 

of construction, oil field work. These pose an usually high 

challenge because of the rapid growth in this area. We need to 

commit additional resources to those particular areas.  

 

The initiatives outlined in the ministry’s plan speaks to this 

year’s budget theme of keeping the Saskatchewan advantage by 

fostering a competitive and productive labour environment and 

encouraging healthy, safe, and fair workplaces and ensuring that 

our labour policies are up to date and competitive and managing 

our programs and services in the most efficient and effective 

manner possible to ensure the best use of public funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Labour Relations and Workplace Safety is 

committed to eliminating workplace injuries and deaths through 

strengthening The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 

through inspections, investigations and enforcement of 

workplace standards. We are also committed to important 

public education initiatives and partnership such as our 

collaboration with the Workers’ Compensation Board on the 

further development of injury prevention strategies through 

WorkSafe Saskatchewan. 

 

We will continue our efforts to improve service delivery in the 

needs of our clients, especially with timely resolution of labour 

standards complaints and WC [workers’ compensation] 

compensation appeals through the office of the worker’s 

advocate. We will continue to assist workers in the province 

who have filed a workers’ compensation claim and who wish to 

explore an appeal of a decision on that claim. We will continue 

to provide conciliation and mediation services to collective 

bargaining processes where required. Our government 

maintains its focus on eliminating workplace injuries and deaths 

and will continue to make occupational health and safety 

inspections, investigations, and education a priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would have you believe that 

this budget is not what the people of Saskatchewan want. 

Really, Mr. Speaker, if the members of Saskatchewan . . . want 

to discuss what the people of Saskatchewan don’t want, I would 

like to just ask them to reflect back on November 7. I’d say the 

people were very clear about what their intentions were on that 

day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is a chance to vote for something 

positive. It is a chance not to be negative. What I would like to 

do, Mr. Speaker, is encourage the members opposite to 

seriously consider voting for something rather than merely 

voting against something. Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that the 

members opposite can and should vote for. If not collectively, I 

would like each one of the nine members over there to sit down, 

have a look at this budget, and decide whether or not they can 

support it. Because, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of this budget 

that’s very, very good, and there is nothing in this budget that is 

not in the best interest of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a government that is truly in touch with the people 

it serves, it has a responsibility. It has a responsibility to provide 

important services and, Mr. Speaker, this budget goes a long 

ways to doing those things. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

responsible, carefully crafted budget. We’re not going to make 

promises that we can’t keep. We’re not going to go overboard 

and spend money that’s unnecessary.  



756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

The people of this province place their faith in this government 

to live within their means. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly 

what we’re going to do. We’re not going to fall into the 

economic trap that has snared other governments. We’re not 

going to make false and unnecessary promises like they did 

across the way. We saw what happened to them during the 

election. They promised billions of dollars of unnecessary and 

unaffordable things. The people of this province will not be 

fooled by that kind of games. We’re going to keep our spending 

sustainable and affordable. And, Mr. Speaker, we will keep the 

Saskatchewan advantage. I will not be supporting the 

amendment. I will be supporting this budget. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

stand here today to join in this budget debate. 

 

Last week I had the privilege to attend my first budget, thanks 

to the constituents of Saskatoon Sutherland. In my first five 

months as your MLA, I’ve tried to represent the diverse group 

of people that are part of the constituency of Saskatoon 

Sutherland. It’s an honour to be here representing you. I have 

met many constituents since being elected in November, 

whether it be in my office or at community events. It’s a 

privilege to be here to represent you here today in this 

legislature. 

 

Before I begin, I would like to extend my thanks to some very 

important people: my wife Leane, for allowing me to be away 

from home four days a week while I’m serving in Regina; our 

kids Courtney, Carter, Kassidy, and Keely for helping out at 

home while I’m not there. Also my parents, Ted and Marie, 

who are watching and tuning in while on vacation in Palm 

Springs. I’d also like to thank the people who had contacted me 

to discuss the budget and their positive feedback. I would also 

like to thank the Premier, the Minister of Finance, Treasury 

Board, and all the ministers and staff that have worked to keep 

the Saskatchewan advantage in this budget. I’d also like to 

thank my CA [constituency assistant], Danielle, who has helped 

me with my transition into government. 

 

The message I took from the budget was to allow sustained 

economic growth while living within our means. This is an 

important point, Mr. Speaker, because no decision was taken 

lightly within this budget. The programs are sustainable and are 

focused both on the short- and long-term benefits for this 

province. We are unique in that our province is able to move 

forward with a balanced budget — the only one in Canada. 

 

This budget is all about keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

What exactly is the Saskatchewan advantage? It’s an 

opportunity for my children to see the world and then to call 

this province home — a province that has all of the 

opportunities of everywhere else in this great country but still 

the uniqueness of our culture and our people. 

 

As a government we have some great strides forward in this 

province. You may have heard the phrase, we have more work 

to do. That’s why I am joined by my 14 new colleagues here to 

assist the Saskatchewan Party team to keep the Saskatchewan 

advantage that started back in 2007. 

 

Our population is at an all-time high, Mr. Speaker. Just last 

week Stats Canada released its population estimates, putting 

Saskatchewan at an all-time high of 1,067,612 people. Never 

before have we seen so many people in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We have not seen our population increase this much 

since 1953. While the residents of this country are experiencing 

net losses, Saskatchewan is one of only two provinces in 

Canada to maintain a net in-migration. That means, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have more people coming in than going out. 

 

I remember, Mr. Speaker, the days young people were fleeing 

the province in droves in search of greener pastures, when every 

young family was faced with the question, do we move away, 

or do we stay here and persevere? Well I am glad to see that 

now the world is bearing witness to the potential of this 

province that I saw many years ago. 

 

[20:15] 

 

What attracts people to our province? In last week’s edition of 

Bridges, I read a story of Ian and Lisa Corrigan who moved to 

Saskatoon from Ireland in 2011. According to Lisa, they came 

here because of the quality of life and the opportunities that 

Saskatchewan presented. This budget maintains a high quality 

of life here in Saskatchewan by keeping our economy strong, 

sustainable, and continuing to grow to attract people from other 

provinces and other countries. That’s the Saskatchewan 

advantage that we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is also about keeping our promises. In 

the last election campaign just a few short months ago, we 

promised first-time homebuyers tax credit. We are keeping this 

promise by delivering $1,100 non-refundable tax credit. Mr. 

Speaker, many of us remember purchasing our first home. It’s 

overwhelming at times to deal with all the costs: a down 

payment, lawyer’s fees, moving expenses, property taxes, etc. 

This new tax credit will help alleviate some of the pressure for 

first-time homebuyers. 

 

We are keeping our promise to provide up to $2,000 over four 

years to new high school graduates — the new Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship. This 2,000 will help new post-secondary 

students with their tuition payments here in the province. Mr. 

Speaker, I have a daughter in high school right now, and I am 

so pleased that she will be able to take advantage of this 

scholarship. I know many Saskatchewan high school students 

and their parents are happy to hear about this announcement. 

 

We want Saskatchewan to be the best place in Canada for 

persons with disabilities. We promised to increase the monthly 

benefit for people under the Saskatchewan assured income for 

disabilities or SAID program. This budget includes $17.8 

million to enhance this program. What this means, Mr. Speaker, 

is individuals enrolled in the SAID program will be receiving 

more money every month to improve their quality of life. In 

June 2012, couples living independently will receive $230 more 

per month and single individuals living independently will see 

$200 more per month. These increases will make a huge 

difference in the lives of the people in the SAID program. 

 

We will also increase the number of individuals eligible for this 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

program through the new assessment process. This will open up 

the door for over 7,000 new people living independently to 

become eligible for the SAID program. I am so proud to see our 

government standing up for those most vulnerable in our 

society. 

 

We promised to increase the seniors’ income plan, a 

supplement that will help low-income Saskatchewan seniors. In 

the 2009-10 budget, our government raised the maximum 

monthly benefit from $90 to $190 for single seniors, more than 

doubling the amount that was set under the previous 

government, an amount that had not been increased since 1992. 

In this budget we have committed an additional $50 per month, 

with another $10 per month every year after that for the next 

three years. This means by the end of the term our government 

will have tripled the amount low-income seniors receive every 

month, Mr. Speaker. Again we are standing up for society’s 

most vulnerable people. 

 

One of the most important components of the budget that will 

have a very positive impact on Saskatoon Sutherland, will be 

the investment of affordable housing. Because of the diverse 

demographics in Saskatoon Sutherland, finding affordable 

housing can be a challenge, as it is across the province. We 

have committed to addressing this issue, and I think of no better 

way through initiatives announced in this budget. 

 

We introduced a new corporate income tax rebate on new rental 

housing in the province. This means that more people will be 

building rental units, increasing the supply of affordable 

housing. This income tax rebate removes a huge barrier for the 

development of rental housing. 

 

This budget also includes a $2 million funding increase for 

rental construction incentives and the affordable home 

ownership program and $9.2 million for the rental development 

program to develop an additional 200 rental units in 

communities where long-term housing is needed. This results in 

12,600 new affordable homes of which 10,000 are rental units. 

By taking this responsible route, we ensure the sustainable 

construction of affordable housing in our province. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, Bill Madder at the Association of 

Saskatchewan Realtors had this to say about the initiatives: 

“Over many years, we have had a real shortage on the rental 

side, so I think this is a big help. I think it’s a potential home 

run for the provincial government.” Steve McLellan, president 

of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, said that the 

housing move was a positive one, stating that “One of the 

biggest challenges of our growth is lack of housing for new 

people, immigrant, and new people moving home. But overall, 

they’ve struck a good balance.” 

 

This budget also includes innovative health care spending. Mr. 

Speaker, we know someone at sometime who has had to wait 

for surgery. It’s hard to watch a loved one suffer when we know 

the surgery is going to alleviate their pain. That’s why our 

government has increased the health budget. We are putting 

patients first, and we want to ensure that no Saskatchewan 

resident waits more than three months for surgery by 2014. The 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency was given an additional $16.9 

million in this year’s budget. CEO [chief executive officer] 

Scott Livingstone said it will allow us to maintain, improve 

access to cancer services over the next year. 

 

One thing Saskatoon Sutherland constituents should be aware 

of is the amount of provincial income tax they will pay in 2012 

is substantially less than five years ago. For example, a family 

of four with an income of $50,000 will save $2,638 per year in 

2012 compared to 2007. This works out to about $220 per 

month, which a family of four, means a lot. This extra money 

could mean that children who were not able to participate in 

activities can do so now. 

 

Keeping the Saskatchewan advantage is exactly what the 

budget does, Mr. Speaker. This is a balanced budget that keeps 

our promises. Our spending is sustainable to keep our economy 

growing. All Saskatchewan citizens, whether they have been 

here their entire lives or just the last seven months like the 

Corrigans, enjoy a life second to none. 

 

Here are just some of the positive headlines that we have seen 

in the news. Global news, January 9th, 2012, “Sask leads 

Canada in non-residential construction.” The Leader-Post, 

February 8, 2012, “Sask leads pack in building permits.” The 

Canada Newswire, March 20th, 2012, “Saskatchewan to lead 

the provincial economic growth rates through 2013.” This is not 

just luck that our province has one of the strongest — it is the 

strongest — economies in our nation. It is in part due to the 

government’s fiscal responsibility through sustainable 

spending. It is also thanks to the good people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I previously mentioned our unique culture and people. We share 

a distinctive spirit, one of hard work, dedication, and pride in 

where we live and where we come from. We can keep 

Saskatchewan’s momentum going and continue to lead the 

country in coming years. After years of being a have-not 

province, Saskatchewan citizens deserve to be where we are 

today, leading the nation in so many different ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is my time I’ve been allotted. I spoke to the 

items of the budget which have a positive impact on our lives, 

our Saskatoon Sutherland constituent families and our province, 

most vulnerable. Before I finish, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

say that I am disappointed in the reaction from the members 

across the floor. My disappointment is that all of their 

comments have been negative. They have yet to say one 

positive thing about this budget. I don’t expect them to support 

the entire budget, but there must be something in there that they 

see as good for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is why I will 

be supporting the motion put forward by the Minister of 

Finance. This is why I will be supporting this year’s budget. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to rise today and 

join the debate on our 2012-2013 Keeping the Saskatchewan 

Advantage budget. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was delighted to be 

able to sit in this Assembly and listen to our Finance minister 

lay out the financial plan to keep Saskatchewan moving 

forward, keeping our budget balanced, keeping spending 

sustainable, and keeping our economy growing — basically, 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, doing all the things we promised in our 

campaign. 

 

But before I get back to the budget, Mr. Speaker, if I may, I 

would like to take this opportunity to thank the people that are 

most important in my life. And of course that is my family. To 

Dallin and Janelle, Carla and Broc, Calvin and Jess, and 

certainly to my wife, Linda, I thank them for all that they have 

done for me, for the support they have given me, and the 

dedication and for covering for me when I am gone for so much 

time. I thank them all very much. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to take this opportunity to 

thank my CA, Lillian, who has just embarked on a new job, as I 

have. And as of January 1, she took over the office for me in 

The Battlefords and she has done a remarkable job. And I 

would like to take this opportunity to thank her, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to recognize some very 

hard-working and dedicated people from my constituency. On 

Thursday, March 22nd, we held the annual general meeting for 

the Saskatchewan Party, The Battlefords constituency 

association. I would like to recognize and thank the people who 

have agreed to let their name stand for the directors and for the 

executive of our constituency association. Glenn, John, Theresa, 

David, Ron, Gregg, Gary, Ed, Dale, and Dave will be our 

directors for the next year. 

 

Terry Lynn Cann will be our president again, and I thank her 

sincerely for all the work that she has done and will continue to 

do, I’m sure. Shane Murdoch is our vice-president; Carolyn 

Pernitsky, our secretary. Al White will be our treasurer again 

this year. Our council rep is Dennis Cann and membership 

Chair is Harvey Walker. Once again, thank you to each and 

every one of them for all of their dedication. They are a great 

team. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we heard our Finance minister talk about 

the budget that was delivered here 100 years ago, the size of 

that budget or the lack thereof, and the significance of how our 

province has grown since that time. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 100 

years ago, this province was growing. Politicians of the day 

were optimistic and were planning for growth. Today, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we are again experiencing dramatic growth. 

The latest figures show 17,000 people in the last year alone, the 

greatest increase since 1953. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

our Sask Party politicians are again optimistic — and they’re 

rightfully so — and are planning for growth. And that is why 

this government has brought down another balanced budget, a 

budget that will keep the Saskatchewan advantage and keep 

Saskatchewan moving forward. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the next few years, we are going to 

be able to celebrate many, many 100th anniversaries because it 

was around 100 years ago that this province was being 

developed. And we are fortunate now to be able to enjoy all that 

this province has to offer because of the hard work and the 

foresight of our forefathers. And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

why we need to keep moving this province forward with 

balanced budgets and be ever vigilant to ensure our spending is 

sustainable, and that we undertake programs to keep our 

economy growing. 

And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our future generations, our 

great-grandchildren, our great-great-grandchildren will be able 

to enjoy 200th
 

anniversary celebrations all over this great 

province. And that is what keeping the Saskatchewan advantage 

is all about. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, of particular interest to me and to the 

constituents of The Battlefords is that finally in this budget we 

have a line that sets out funding of $5 million for planning and 

redesign of the North Battleford Saskatchewan Hospital. I say 

finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the previous government 

gave us promises and photo ops, but never a budgetary 

commitment such as we now have. I know the residents, the 

patients, clients, and staff of our existing hospital will join me 

in thanking this government and our Health minister for this 

long overdue commitment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, since this budget was announced last 

week, we have heard comments from many sectors of our 

province, some stakeholders that sometimes have not always 

been pleased with the provincial budgets but who realize that 

this budget is about keeping our economy growing, about 

ensuring that our programs are sustainable into the future, and 

that our budget is balanced. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, here are a few of the comments that we have 

heard. From the Canadian Home Builders’ Association, 

“Saskatchewan 2012-2013 budget keeps momentum going, 

helping communities grow.” They strongly support our plan for 

affordable housing, a plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will help 

develop approximately 12,600 new homes for Saskatchewan 

people. This development will be made possible through such 

programs as our plan to reduce corporate income tax by 10 per 

cent on revenue from rental property constructed under and 

qualifying for this program. Other programs like the assisted 

home ownership plan, the rental construction incentive, 

first-time homebuyers tax credit, Habitat for Humanity, and the 

rental development program all combine to help build more 

homes for our growing population. These programs, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, are all outlined in our budget and our funding 

commitment. Our investment in affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan people is $344 million. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

is keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my constituency alone in the past few 

months, we have seen the construction of 44 low-income rental 

units and affordable housing 21-unit condominium. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that’s taking action to create level entry and affordable 

homes for our Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, two other comments I’ll highlight now 

are: firstly, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, who 

welcomed the priority placed on education in the provincial 

budget; and then secondly, from the Saskatchewan School 

Boards Association, who said they were pleased to see that 

education was recognized as foundational to the province’s 

growth. They were of course, Mr. Speaker, referring to the 

commitment we made in this budget, a commitment of $1.74 

billion of funding to school boards in this province — a 5 per 

cent increase over last year. 

 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my own constituency alone, this has 

resulted in an increase of funding to our two school boards of 

$3.27 million. As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our education 

funding will also include $112 million for major capital 

projects, funding for 500 new child care spaces, bringing our 

total to 13,240 spaces. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is our 

commitment to our young people, our commitment to the future 

of this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, two more comments we have heard are 

from the vice-president of cities for SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association], Jim Scarrow, who said: 

 

The continued investment of one point of PST revenue in 

municipal operations acknowledges the provincial interest 

in the services our [municipal] governments provide to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Or from Dave Marit, SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] president: 

 

. . . the substantial increase in revenue sharing for 

municipalities is demonstrative of the Provinces’ 

appreciation for the growing demands on municipal 

governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these increases in funding have been an increase 

of $165,000 for the city of North Battleford and an increase of 

$84,000 for the town of Battleford. Over the past four years, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the per cent of increase for these two 

administrations has been: for the city of North Battleford, 127 

per cent increase in four years; and for the town of Battleford, 

it’s been a 100 per cent increase — double what it was at that 

time. That is our commitment to municipalities, to keep 

Saskatchewan moving forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget increases our spending on 

agricultural programs by $13 million to a total of $430.8 

million. Almost three-quarters of this amount will go to risk 

management, like AgriStability, AgriInvest, and crop insurance. 

We have increased crop insurance, for example, to a record 

$174 per acre — that’s almost double what it was in 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is fully committed to continue 

funding to these very important ministries — Municipal Affairs 

and Agriculture — as we very much value their importance to 

the people of Saskatchewan and their contributions to our 

economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is our time. Time for Saskatchewan to take its 

rightful place as a leader in this great country, a leader in 

agriculture production with the recent announcement that we 

have now surpassed $10 billion in agricultural production and 

taken the lead over Ontario, a leader in the percentage 

population growth with 17,000 new residents in the last year, a 

place among the leaders in employment opportunities, health 

care initiatives, potash production, oil and gas production, in 

uranium production, and in caring for our youth, our seniors, 

and those with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is our plan to ensure that we continue 

to lead this country in so many ways and to keep the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank the Minister of Finance for his 

tremendous job in preparing this budget and the Minister of 

Social Services for seconding it. And I will not be supporting 

the amendment. I will be voting to adopt this budget. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

great pleasure to stand in the House yet again for another 

budget debate, the fifth balanced budget that we’re going to put 

forth, we put forth, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

You know, before I get into the whole, the premise of the 

debate and all the great things it’s doing for the province, I want 

to thank some people. You know all the ministers have great 

staff, I know, and I’m blessed to have some great ministerial 

assistants: Graham Stewart and Dustin Clark, a new member of 

my team and my office. And together those two gentleman are 

going to do great work, case work for the communities and the 

municipal leaders in this province and for the MLAs in this 

province. 

 

I also wanted to recognize Linda Roy, our new senior admin 

assistant that joined us upon the retirement of the former senior 

admin assistant, and Linda’s doing a great job. I was able to 

lure her, bring her into my office from the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. I gave her 

a different job opportunity that she’s thriving and doing very 

well in. And lucky for me that she kept the Minister of AEEI 

[Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration] well 

informed, great timetable. She’s always done that with me, 

giving me my schedule for the day, so I wanted to thank her for 

that. 

 

And then of course I want to now thank the chief of staff of my 

office, Angela Currie. She’s an amazing leader in the office. If 

people listening tonight and for all the MLAs should be aware 

of this, of course, there is this new revenue-sharing calculator 

that’s on the MA [ministerial assistant] website. It’s a website 

cabinet chose for 2007 to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yeah it 

works. Good point. Yes, it actually does. It really is a game 

changer, one that actually shows the real figures. It really does. 

From 2007 to 2008 until this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Angela came up with the idea working with the Ministry of MA 

and some ITO [Information Technology Office] staff to put this 

particular piece on, that everyone can do a drop-down screen 

and look at their municipality, look at their town, village, city, 

whatever it might be to see exactly what the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And it works. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — And it works. It does. It works great. 

Thank you. 

 

And it’s one of those kind of tools that the municipal leaders are 

going to be able to show to their stakeholders — they are 

ratepayers like we are — what in fact is actually out there right 

now for revenue sharing, how in the last short while, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, from us taking on government, in the last year 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

of the NDP government to this year, Mr. Speaker, is about $110 

million increase in revenue sharing, 87 per cent lift in this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s money that the 

municipal leaders are using to keep our overall mill rates down, 

our tax lifts to a reasonable level, unconditional funding that 

they can use as they see fit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for things like 

infrastructure needs as well. 

 

So we turn to the municipal leaders in this province for their 

great dedication. And it’s not the elected officials as much as it 

is the actual staff that work day in, day out in the municipal 

offices to listen to the ratepayers, to focus on the needs of their 

communities. And I want to thank them as well tonight for their 

great work. 

 

I have to take time to thank my constituency assistant as well, 

Lora Hunter, who is dedicated to the job of keeping me and the 

constituency of Prince Albert Carlton in touch, focused on the 

needs of our constituents. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s one of those 

things that, in the last election, just a few weeks ago, what 

happened for Prince Albert Carlton was a pretty phenomenal 

thing. In 2007 I won. I was blessed to win by 61 votes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Only. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Only 61 votes. After all the hard work. 

Yes it was. I know it was an uphill battle, but I took that 

constituency from a long-time NDP riding from, you know, a 

particular party that was very strong in that city. However in 

this last election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again with a great team 

on my side, I won by almost 1,700 votes this time. Yes, 1,700 

votes. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that was because of actually one 

person, the Premier of this province, his vision. I give him full 

credit for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under his leadership and 

the Finance minister that I work with in Treasury Board, our 

former member from Melfort, Rod Gantefoer, and the current 

Finance minister now that has put this budget together and the 

last couple of budgets. 

 

We see people turning to this party because of our fiscal 

stewardship. We are very strong on making that 

recommendation, and we move on to balanced budgets, 

sustainable spending, being very proud of that record, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because it’s one of those things that the 

taxpayers in this province recognized for our first mandate, 

which I say helped me get elected with even a stronger majority 

this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s a good point . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . No. No. It was not me. It was the 

team of men and women that I work with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I’ll tell you what. This is the strongest team I have ever 

been a part of. I played in many, many great sporting teams: 

football, hockey, and such. But this particular, this bench right 

now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is some of the strongest I’ve ever 

had to work with. 

 

And I’ll tell you what. Going forward in the next four years 

with the leadership of the Premier and the leadership of the 

ministers we have today — and those that will come after us, 

for sure — we’re going to see this same focus going forward, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a very strong, balanced budget, 

sustainable spending, and making sure the people of this 

province get exactly what they asked for in the last election: a 

government at the time with a campaign commitment platform 

which showed limited spending for sustainability but still 

maintaining the promises that we wanted to make to the people 

of this province to move Saskatchewan forward, part of the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

I’d like the party opposite that had some wild spending spree, 

something somewhere, I don’t know, between 5 and $8 billion 

— I’m just kind of a ballpark — 5.5 billion that they couldn’t, 

they had no other way to make it sustainable without tax lifts, 

tax increases to the people of this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That’s why the people of this province sent this party 

back in for a second mandate, and I believe we’ll have a lot 

more mandates to come, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I’ve touched on the revenue-sharing piece as the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs and what it brought to the province over the 

last number of years under this government. And one thing back 

before the 2007 election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that there 

was a need for predictability for the municipal sector when they 

had to wait every year, budget after budget, for the previous 

NDP government to lay a budget down to know what they got 

for revenue sharing. And it was a very small amount compared 

to what the NDP claimed was a big surplus money in their bank 

account. In the last couple years, they sure never got much, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But they wanted a predictable, measurable 

tool, and they asked for that one point of PST. We delivered 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So now today, they know that they 

have 9.5 per cent lift in this year’s budget, and they know it’s 

15 per cent more next year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that’s 

predictability that the municipal sector asked for. 

 

One thing about the riding of Prince Albert Carlton is it’s a very 

progressive riding. A lot of families live in that riding, but I’m 

also blessed to have a high school, Carlton high school, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s got the largest enrolment in the province 

for a high school. And it’s like many of our schools that over 

time that the NDP, previous NDP government left in a state of 

somewhat disrepair, never looked to the leadership of the 

school boards and school leaders there to give money to, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So what happened in the last budget? We had money forwarded 

to do functional planning for the Carlton high school 

gymnasium. And in this year’s budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

money will come now to actually build that high school 

gymnasium, to be able to give the opportunity for all these 

students in this school to take part in extracurriculatory sports 

along with having provincial level of sporting activities at that 

school. So I’m very proud of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There’s a few more things, of course, that this budget allows us 

to do. Of course by being measured and being balanced, our 

spending has been to the point where we still have a surplus, 

which is what this government wants to do, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But we also have what’s called a Saskatchewan 

advantage. We’re seeing people move back to this province like 

no other time before — 17,000 more people than we had last 

year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So one of those things now we’re 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

seeing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is there’s a need for an influx of 

cash for things like our advanced education to ensure that we 

have opportunities for our students and for those people that 

want to take in part in that, for immigrants moving to this 

province. 

 

There’s one part of this budget I’m very, very happy with. It’s 

somewhat self-serving from myself as a father who . . . I should 

step back. I’m remiss in not thanking, recognizing my family. I 

love my wife, Charlene, and my two daughters, Alyssa and 

Mackenzie. Alyssa this year will be graduating, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m lucky that she has a very high average in high school. She’s 

going to, she’s already been accepted conditionally to the 

University of Saskatchewan, my alma mater. I’m very proud of 

that school. And she’s already got guaranteed a $500 entry 

scholarship. So as long as she stays with the high marks and the 

great distinction honours, she’ll get more money to go to school 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The Minister of Advanced 

Education has recognized, like so many of my colleagues do, 

that she takes after her mother, Mr. Speaker. Thankfully, 

because if she was after her father, she’d be barely getting by 

and scraping with a 65 average to try to get in Arts and Science 

like I did back in many, many years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:45] 

 

So I can say now as well that my younger daughter, Mackenzie, 

is also an honours student at high school right now, and I’m 

looking forward to her goal. She wishes to be an engineer and 

work in the, actually of all things, she wants to work in the 

space program. So I’m very proud of that, that goal she has. 

 

My older daughter is going to start in Arts and Science next 

year in Prince Albert. She’s not sure what she wants to do yet. 

She has mused with her uncle to be a lawyer, a corporate 

lawyer, which I’d be very proud of, of course. But anything she 

wants to do, my wife and I will be definitely supporting her in 

that endeavour. And I’m sure she’ll take what she’s learned in 

high school from the great teachers at Carlton into the 

university endeavour, Mr. Speaker, and she’ll do very well 

there as well. 

 

The one thing about my daughters I talked about in many of 

these budget debates is this government looks at the future of 

our children. But I’ve always talked about the future of our 

children across the aisle here as well, our grandchildren and 

stuff as well, nieces, nephews. The most important thing that a 

government can do is build upon a strong economy to ensure 

that the future of our children’s time in Saskatchewan, if they 

wish to stay here — and they will be because we see more 

people coming back to Saskatchewan — will be strong for them 

as well. 

 

And I know one thing is that we’re hearing from economic 

leaders across Canada that we’re set to lead the nation again yet, 

Mr. Speaker, next year. So these are private forecasters as well 

that are telling us great things. So we don’t have to just talk 

about the great things we do. We have private forecasters telling 

us this. We have financial institutions telling us this as well, Mr. 

Speaker. So it’s one of those things that we bring with this 

budget debate — endorsements. 

 

We’ve heard from the municipal leaders, SARM and SUMA to 

date, that in the media are talking about the revenue-sharing 

piece for sure. We’ve had my mayor from Prince Albert talking 

about the rental incentive as well. So we’re seeing that we’re 

getting these other endorsements from other groups. 

 

The STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], the SSBA 

[Saskatchewan School Boards Association] have talked about 

the funding formula for education, Mr. Speaker. And it’s one of 

those things that as a government — and this is our fifth budget, 

like I’ve said, balanced budget, Mr. Speaker — that as we move 

forward, we continuously look for the stakeholders that we 

serve in this province, not just the ratepayers and taxpayers but 

the stakeholders, to tell us if we’re doing a good job. 

 

There is still work to do, Mr. Speaker, to be sure, on that one, 

but we look to our stakeholders that give us very strong advice 

and counsel every year as we prepare the budget in our 

consultation phase, moving forward from this point on to next 

year’s budget as well, that tell us how good we’ve done, what 

has to still be worked upon to make it better. And the one thing 

we’ve heard from some of the stakeholders, of course, is within 

a strong province comes a strong health care system. 

 

And the Minister of Health has done a great job in his tenure so 

far that — not just so far; he’ll keep doing it, I’m sure, as well 

— that we’ve seen continuously increasing budgets for health, 

but that’s money that has been put to good use. The regional 

health authorities are seeing an increase this year, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s money that can be used into all the different services that 

have to be fulfilled. We have the Saskatchewan surgical 

initiatives, which is a $50 million increase alone, which is going 

to see less and less wait times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one thing I am very proud of, that the Minister of Health 

and I were able to take part in a fundraiser out in Calgary many 

years ago for the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 

system. We were invited out there. And to see some of the great 

women and men out there that have that board, their focus to 

serve the people of Alberta. Now we have that here in 

Saskatchewan with the STARS helicopter ambulance, Mr. 

Speaker. So we’re going to see another $5.5 million increase 

this year. And, you know, it’s Dr. Powell and his lovely wife, 

Linda, I believe, that we see them on time and occasion in 

Saskatchewan. They’re very strong supporters of this program 

and they speak of the fact that a government has finally seen it, 

and to see the province as we’re seeing it now, booming, 

expanding, that this need can still service this province and 

augment our land ambulance systems already in place, as well 

as our air ambulance system already that we have in this 

province as well. So it’s one of those things that, as the 

province is growing, we see the Ministry of Health under the 

leadership of this minister as well as the Premier, focused on 

what’s best for the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, there is one other thing I think that’s . . . It’s been 

talked about a bit today, is this colorectal screening program 

province-wide of another $4 million. Now you know, as a man 

who is getting up there in age, it’s one of those things that we 

have to talk about these kind of things, Mr. Speaker. It’s good 

to have that kind of support system in place for us, for early 

detection, because there’s many men in this province that need 

to have that service provided, along with women as well. We 

know that. But we need to have this . . . [inaudible interjection] 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

. . . Much more comfortable. 

 

The things that we’re looking at, the idea is that this province is 

providing services to the population, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll 

see this whole issue of longevity based on new health funding 

moving on. That’s going to have an improved quality of life 

which is all part of the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, there’s many more things in this budget that we’ve 

done — I’ve touched on the Carlton High School gymnasium 

— but we should also focus on some of the new projects that 

we have. We’re going to fund some new schools this year. 

We’re going to fund some previously announced schools in last 

year’s budget as well, and some of the communities that have 

seen some increase in population, Mr. Speaker. So it’s again a 

province that’s focused on building this prosperity, building this 

province to be the best place it possibly can be, Mr. Speaker. 

Because I know I want to stay in this province. I don’t want to 

see my daughters move and have to start somewhere else and 

hopefully . . . and then, of course, stay out there and I’ve got to 

move to them. I’d rather have them stay in Saskatchewan if 

everything, opportunities, arise here for them to build their 

families and get their careers going. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I think that as we move as a 

government . . . And hopefully we’ll vote a lot more mandates. 

We don’t take anything for granted on this side of the House at 

all, Mr. Speaker. We work every day to ensure that we conserve 

this province and the people that have voted us in to ensure that 

we build that trust. We take it for granted never, Mr. Speaker. 

We will make mistakes; we’ll always learn from those 

mistakes, Mr. Speaker. But the most important thing in the 

budget is that we maintain a balanced, focused budget. We also 

have the Saskatchewan advantage which is maintaining our 

election promises still, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to keep our 

economy strong. This is the focus of this year’s budget under 

the leadership of our Finance minister. We saw that budget 

tabled just last week. 

 

We saw a very strong message, Mr. Speaker, that this budget 

did have some spending issues with it. We had to make sure we 

had sustainability moving forward. And as we move forward 

with this planning for next year’s budget, we’ll see stakeholders 

asking us for certain things. But everything has to be balanced 

in the context of sustainability, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why this 

budget achieves the goals set for the province in the campaign 

of 2011, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We set, in the first couple of weeks of the actual election 

campaign, we were announcing something new every day. And 

then we didn’t have anything more to announce because we 

gave a very strong mandate to move forward within a fiscally 

responsible government and we wanted that message to come 

on very loud and clear during the election campaign. So we 

didn’t give lofty promises. We want to tell the people of the 

province that we’re going to be fiscally responsible stewards of 

their money, Mr. Speaker. It’s their money that we have to be 

very cautious of. It’s the money that comes in from all the 

resources, as well, that pay for the services in this province. 

And they want to see, I believe, they want to see year after year 

a government and a leader, a premier who and a Finance 

minister who is showing that we have this focus still moving 

forward within a context of a strong province moving forward, 

population increase rising, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I guess, Mr. Speaker, I see my time is coming to an end 

now. So I would love to go on. I have many more volumes I can 

pull from, quotes and stuff as well, Mr. Speaker. But there are 

many, many members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 

that want to talk and speak about the budget and how it relates 

to their ridings and then thank all the people that got them 

elected and they work for. So, Mr. Speaker, I will take my seat, 

and I will be supporting this budget. I will not support the 

amendment by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this evening to join in the discussion on the budget that we 

received last week in the Assembly. 

 

First off, Mr. Speaker, I do want to take this chance to thank my 

constituents. I do get a chance to speak to different pieces of 

legislation from time to time, but at budget time it’s always nice 

to be able to pause for a moment and say thank you to 

constituents for the support that they have placed in me as I’m 

doing my best to represent their interests here in the Assembly. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, of course want to say thank you to my 

friends and family for their support over the last few years, Mr. 

Speaker. And of course I would also like to thank my wife, 

Ruth, and our daughter Ingrid for their support over the last 

years that we’ve been married and the years that Ingrid has been 

around. And I appreciate that members in the Assembly are also 

appreciative of the support that my wife and daughter provide 

to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget was a budget of mixed-up priorities. It 

was a budget, Mr. Speaker, where members on the other side, 

Mr. Speaker, put supports on positions I know that don’t sit 

very well with Saskatchewan people — some questions, Mr. 

Speaker, about where this government actually sits when it 

comes to helping Saskatchewan people whether they be seniors, 

whether they be people in the North, whether they be 

individuals employed in the film industry, Mr. Speaker — a 

number of problematic positions that we see coming forward 

from members opposite. 

 

Now just before I rose to my feet, Mr. Speaker, the Health 

minister was saying, well you don’t talk about all the good 

stuff. Well, Mr. Speaker, when you’re spending billions, when 

you’re spending billions, they will inevitably get some things 

right, Mr. Speaker. That’s the nature of a budget this big. But 

when we look at the detail, when we look at the examples that 

members opposite are putting forward, what they are asking of 

Saskatchewan people, I think there, Mr. Speaker, we have some 

problems. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about one change that 

the members opposite have brought forward, and that’s changes 

to the drug plan, changes, Mr. Speaker, that will require seniors 

in this province to pay more, actually a 33 per cent increase, 

Mr. Speaker, in their prescriptions per month. I know many 

individuals in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, who are seniors. 

And after this change came down, they’ve been calling me and 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

talking to me about how this would most certainly affect the 

bottom line in their household as they’re living on fixed 

incomes; how there’s two individuals and that, two seniors in 

their relationship, in their household, and they’re each on 

prescriptions, a number of them, and how this will have a real 

effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see another take from seniors and that’s 

increasing the rates for hospital trips through an ambulance or 

trips in an ambulance, Mr. Speaker. And right there, we see an 

increase of up to $275 per trip. Another place, Mr. Speaker, 

where members opposite are asking to take from seniors is 

those that are living in long-term care facilities, for hygienic 

supplies. And we see there, Mr. Speaker, that the saving that 

they will be taking by expanding this is $854,000. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to ambulance trips, taking more from 

seniors, they’re taking $675,000. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if it was these two items, Mr. Speaker, I 

could understand . . . Well I couldn’t really understand because 

it’s about treating seniors in the province well. But then in the 

same breath, Mr. Speaker, in the same session as we debate 

legislation, as we look at the legislation the members opposite 

bring forward, we see them expanding the number of politicians 

in the province, Mr. Speaker. We see them see wanting to 

increase the number of politicians that are here in the province 

at a cost of millions of dollars. 

 

So the problem we have here, Mr. Speaker, is members 

opposite are more than happy — more than happy, Mr. Speaker 

— to take millions more from seniors through programs asking 

them to pay more. But then, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 

taking some of their own advice, they’re more than happy to 

add to the number of politicians in the province at a cost of 

millions of dollars. And I know that is not sitting well with 

many Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we were in the adjourned debates discussing 

electoral boundaries and the one, the topic was to increase the 

number of MLAs in the province and I said, Mr. Speaker, this 

was puzzling to me because I haven’t heard about it, Mr. 

Speaker, from Saskatchewan people. In the previous election, I 

went door to door, as all members in this Assembly did. That’s 

what you do. Not once, Mr. Speaker, not once did I have 

someone on the doorstep say to me, you know what, I want to 

pay more for prescription drugs in the province and while 

you’re at it, could you also spend more please on adding to the 

number of politicians in the province. Not once did I have that 

conversation with someone, Mr. Speaker, in this province. 

 

So my question, I asked members in adjourned debates, I said, 

Mr. Speaker, I said to members opposite, please find these 

individuals and bring them to the legislature so we can all see 

who these individuals are, Mr. Speaker, that want more 

politicians in the province. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because I don’t 

think they really exist. Well a few of them may exist, Mr. 

Speaker, but they happen to be the members on the front bench 

right there. Because people in Saskatchewan do not want more 

politicians. They do not want to spend millions more, Mr. 

Speaker, on politicians. 

 

And what, Mr. Speaker, is most troubling, what does not sit 

well with Saskatchewan people is when members opposite tell 

them that they need to pay more for prescription drugs. Mr. 

Speaker, then they are also in the same breath, in the same 

breath telling Saskatchewan people that they need more 

politicians at a cost of millions. That does not make sense. That 

does not sit well with Saskatchewan people. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw North does not like this 

conversation, Mr. Speaker, because he knows his constituents 

don’t want more politicians. And I know he has, I know he has 

a problem with that. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, he was the one that 

took this to the inner circle and told them that they should add 

to the number of politicians in the province at a cost of millions, 

despite telling seniors in the province that they need to pay 

more for their prescription drugs. But, Mr. Speaker, that is 

something that the member opposite will have to take to his 

constituents and hear from them. 

 

We also see, Mr. Speaker, in the area of advanced education, 

we see, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite are asking 

Saskatchewan students and apprentices to pay more. We see, 

Mr. Speaker, tuition going up in the province at the same time, 

Mr. Speaker, as the government says they don’t have the 

funding in order to keep tuition at levels which would be, which 

would provide accessibility for students. Then they asked, Mr. 

Speaker, for more funding. They asked for millions of dollars in 

order to increase the number of politicians in the province. 

 

[21:00] 

 

And this is the contradiction, Mr. Speaker, that members 

opposite have in their positioning here. They talk about, in so 

many instances in this budget, Mr. Speaker, where they want to 

take more from Saskatchewan people, where they’re asking 

Saskatchewan people to give more to them, either through 

prescription drugs or through tuition as two examples, Mr. 

Speaker. But then in the same breath, Mr. Speaker, they say we 

also need to spend millions more on politicians in the province, 

something most Saskatchewan people do not agree with in my 

opinion, Mr. Speaker, and something that members opposite, 

they need to explain to the public why they’re going down this 

path of asking Saskatchewan people to pay more. The members 

opposite saying they don’t have the funding for programs in 

order to put off increases such as members have suggested 

through this budget, but then at the same time asking for 

millions more for more politicians, I think that is a problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also, as has been discussed extensively today 

in question period and there was activities in the rotunda, we 

also see the elimination of the film tax credit, Mr. Speaker, and 

how this affects hundreds of families here in Saskatchewan and 

how, Mr. Speaker, the existence of this program has been very 

beneficial to Saskatchewan people, to the Saskatchewan 

economy. And, Mr. Speaker, there is a very sound argument to 

be made for the existence of this program from an economic 

perspective, understanding that for dollars spent it’s bringing in 

far more into the province, and the multiplier effect and how it 

helps businesses in Saskatchewan. There’s the economic case to 

be made. And for the individuals that are employed here, for the 

families that live here, for the people that pay taxes and buy 

services in the province, that is a good thing. And I know, Mr. 

Speaker, many members, perhaps not the most vocal members, 

but I know many members on the opposite side understand and 

appreciate that as well. 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

But there’s also the cultural argument, Mr. Speaker, that the 

film industry plays in the province, the important role that it 

plays in the province in telling our stories and in providing a 

good profile to the province. And we can think of, I mean, the 

prime example that people have been talking about in the last 

few days is Corner Gas, Mr. Speaker, and how we’ve had the 

people closely involved with that program saying it would not 

have happened, it would not have taken place, Mr. Speaker, 

without the credit. So we know there is a strong economic and 

cultural case, argument for having the film tax credit here in the 

province. 

 

So on the one hand, Mr. Speaker, we have members opposite 

saying we don’t have funding for this program. It’s not 

something that we are able to afford at this time. But then again, 

Mr. Speaker, they turn around at the exact same time and say, 

we want millions more for more politicians in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. They say . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member 

from Moose Jaw has complained again. He sure has a lot to say 

from his seat, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to his 

participation in this budget debate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we know that it will cost millions of dollars 

in order to have more politicians in the province. We know, Mr. 

Speaker, that members opposite have said we don’t have the 

funding, we don’t have the dollars to have the tax credit 

program for the film industry even though, Mr. Speaker, there is 

a strong economic and a strong cultural case for it to be there. 

But in the same breath, they’ve got millions for more politicians 

in the province; something, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t sit well 

with many Saskatchewan people, especially those that are 

closely involved in the film and the tax industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also in my own neighbourhood, something that 

I’ve been talking about a great deal is the need for a new school 

in Hampton Village. Mr. Speaker, whether it’s parents that are 

living in Dundonald or parents that are living in Hampton 

Village, we know that there is significant pressure on St. Peter 

School and Dundonald School. And this is something that I’ve 

been speaking about in this Assembly for some time and 

through the committee process as well. Mr. Speaker, in this 

budget there’s not support for that Hampton Village school in 

order for it to be established, or schools, a public and a 

Catholic, as the two divisions will be working on that and 

coming up with a plan that is appropriate for the people of the 

area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there isn’t funding in this budget for a school for 

Hampton Village, something that my constituents need. But 

there is, Mr. Speaker, what we hear from members opposite, 

what we hear is their priority is adding to the number of 

politicians in the province at a cost of millions of dollars. I 

know my constituents, Mr. Speaker. I know the people living in 

my community, Mr. Speaker, would most certainly prefer that 

the resources that would be spent on the additional politicians 

that members opposite want, that those be put towards Hampton 

Village school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is full of mixed-up priorities. We see 

members opposite here where they’re asking Saskatchewan 

people to give more. They’re asking Saskatchewan people to 

put up with less. But at the same time they’re happy to spend 

millions more on politicians, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s 

mixed-up priorities. And for that reason, I won’t be supporting 

the budget. I’ll be supporting the opposition’s motion to the 

budget. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 

to join the debate tonight in this illustrious House, a place at 

which many long and engaging debates have happened 

historically. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded that this June it 

will be 13 years since I first walked into this building. And I’ve 

had the opportunity to witness some very engaging debate on 

the floor of this House. I’ve participated in a few of those, and I 

hope tonight I can leave my mark one more time on this very 

important subject of the debate of the government that we are 

discussing here tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to offer to you my congratulations on your 

election as Speaker. I know that this is a job that you have 

prepared yourself for over a number of years of involvement in 

this House. You’ve played a wide variety of roles. You’ve had a 

particular and special interest in the rules of this House. You’ve 

gone so far as to order and put in your library obscure 

collections of legislative rules and historical precedents. I know 

that you’re anxious to use as many of those as you can, and so I 

will keep my remarks fully above board so you don’t have to be 

tempted by any of those arcane rulings that have happened from 

time to time. 

 

I’d also like to offer my congratulations to our new Deputy 

Speaker, who has sat in the chair for a while this evening. And 

he heard I was going to be speaking next and, as he is also my 

seatmate when he’s not in the Chair up there, he decided that 

discretion was a better part of valour and decided to do 

something else more important than listen to me speak. We’re 

going to get even with him at some point, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

looking forward to the opportunity. I heard the Justice minister 

talking about his penchant for practical jokes, and maybe we 

can send the Justice minister after the Deputy Speaker to unfold 

some chicanery of some sort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget has as its title Keeping the 

Saskatchewan Advantage, and while I will address my 

comments to the budget and some of the specific characteristics 

of this budget that I think are really important for the province 

and for my constituents because I haven’t been able to speak 

too often previously, I do want to digress a bit to talk a little 

about the election of this past fall. I have some thank yous that I 

of necessity need to express on the record tonight. But I also 

really want to focus on the important part that people play in 

my life and any successes that I may have enjoyed as their 

elected representative. 

 

I can’t and I ought not to omit the very important part that my 

family play in my life. I’ve heard it said, and it’s true by my 

own experience, that politics can really create a lot of pressure 

on a family and because of the time commitments, the travel 

commitments, the obligations of the job, we don’t get to spend 

enough time with our families. And my wife has been a real 

trouper over these number of years. She has a job in a 

community a long ways from Regina, so she spends most of her 

time at home in the community of Eastend and from time to 

time comes to Regina. And about the time she’s coming here, 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

I’m going back to the constituency to attend to events that I 

have been invited to or constituents who’ve made arrangements 

to come to my office and wanted to meet with me. Whatever the 

requirements are in my constituency, I put a high priority on 

that, and it has come at the expense of my family. And I want to 

thank my wife publicly, who is probably sleeping right now in 

anticipation of going to work in about two hours. But on the 

record, I want to say thank you for her faithfulness and her 

support as I have played this role on behalf of the constituents 

of Cypress Hills. 

 

The other people in my family, of course, are my son and 

daughter-in-law and my two grandchildren who live in Red 

Deer. And my son has gotten involved politically in that 

community. He has attached himself to a constituency 

association there and does some fundraising and organizing on 

behalf of the MLA in Red Deer-South. And that’s really been 

an interesting and eye-opening experience for him because it’s 

given him some appreciation for the kind of work that goes on 

behind the scenes to make elected office possible for people 

who choose that avenue of vocation. And I’d like to recognize 

my son and my daughter-in-law and my grandchildren, Aimee 

and Jachin, who are growing up much too fast and who I don’t 

see often enough. 

 

I have a daughter who has gone to Ontario to pursue 

post-secondary education, and she shows a little bit of political 

interest too. In fact she was writing an essay the other day and 

emailed me quickly and she said, I have a 12-page paper I have 

to have in tomorrow morning and, just like her dad, she’s left it 

to the last minute. And so I gave her some topics that she might 

pursue, and I think she was up all night researching the paper. 

But it was on Canada-US relations, if you can imagine that. 

And I think that’s a pretty broad topic, and I think she found 

enough material to fill 12 pages. Nevertheless, I miss her. And 

she’s a good kid. She worked here in the legislature for a while. 

She worked on some campaigns on behalf of colleagues. And I 

hope that her future is not politics necessarily, but in the area of 

music performance which she loves and is studying right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the election results just last year were so flattering 

and so embarrassing, I almost don’t want to comment on it. But, 

you know, the people of Cypress Hills were among the very 

first people in this province to support the Saskatchewan Party. 

And they have never waned or flagged at all in their support for 

this party and this government. 

 

And I personally have been the benefactor of that support. And 

I’m pleased to report tonight that in every successive election 

since the by-election of 1999, the support for this government 

has gone up in popular vote. We started out at about 52 per 

cent, and in this most recent election, we ended up at 83 per 

cent of the vote — just a hair below that. Now if I was going to 

run again, my seatmate from Arm River here is suggesting we’d 

be going for 100, but I may not get that opportunity. 

 

However, having said that, I guess what it suggests to me is that 

the people of Cypress Hills are very pragmatic, pragmatic, 

sensible, common, down-to-earth people. And they don’t want 

flash. They don’t want hyperbole. They don’t want 

exaggeration of information, of fact and so forth. They don’t 

want spin. They want solid, sustainable leadership. And I 

believe that this budget has represented those very principles, 

those characteristics of the people of Cypress Hills in such a 

way that they have found this budget and this government 

completely appropriate to their support. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that this particular document is not 

only going to be well received by the people of Cypress Hills. I 

think it will represent their characteristics, their best interests, 

and their desires, Mr. Speaker. They want leadership that is in 

the best interests of the province. They want practical solutions 

to tough problems. They don’t want a government that runs 

away from issues or tries to hide their head in the sand. They 

want government that will lead with a firm hand and in a 

pragmatic and prosperous direction. And so, Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to represent the constituents of Cypress Hills, but I’m 

pleased to report their support for this budget in this House 

through this opportunity on the floor tonight. 

 

[21:15] 

 

You know, basically there are two or three things that are really 

important to the people of a large rural constituency like the one 

of Cypress Hills. They want to know that the important services 

that they have come to rely on are going to be available to them. 

And they want to know that they will be provided in a 

cost-effective measure and that governments will take those 

elements and create programs and funding for those programs 

in a way that is sustainable for not just this year, not just next 

year, but for years to come. 

 

When I look at what are the principal concerns of my 

constituents, they boil down to two or three or four items every 

time. And first off, I think, would be sustainable and reliable 

infrastructure, highways in most instances, but secondly the 

delivery of health care services. That is a very important area of 

concern for people in small communities, as the ones of 

Cypress Hills would be a great example. And so those two 

issues, I think, are dealt with in a very straightforward and 

pragmatic way in this particular budget. And for that reason 

alone, Mr. Speaker, the people of Cypress Hills would find this 

document really quite acceptable. 

 

The highways spending — and I’ll start there because I have 

some interest in transportation issues that are relevant to this 

particular jurisdiction — highways spending this year in the 

$581 million range amounts to the second highest budgetary 

allotment for highways since this government came to office in 

2007. We spent a lot of money on highways in the first year or 

two of our administration. We tried to catch up some of the 

backlog of repair work that was so desperately needed, and 

even though we put our best efforts forward, mother nature had 

a different idea and washed away some of our success or 

undermined some of our success. So in our first term of 

government, we ended up spending $2.2 billion or a little in 

excess of that on the highways of this province. 

 

The government has made a commitment in this term to match 

that $2.2 billion. And that is a lot of money. It’s going to be 

very well spent. There is an urgent need for expenditures in 

highways, and we’ve seen some of those urgent needs realized 

in the constituency of Cypress Hills over the last couple of 

years. And so for the most part, we have benefited from some 

government expenditure.  

 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

We got a project done — and I’d like to thank the current 

Highways minister for this project — the road from Highway 

21 from the community of Leader north to the South 

Saskatchewan River. That road was a terrible mess, and it got 

done this past year, much to the satisfaction of the people in the 

immediate area of Leader and across the river in Eatonia and 

some of the surrounding communities. That was a very 

important link for those road travellers that depend on that 

particular highway. As you know, Highway 32, which was 

identified as one of the worst roads in the province, was 

completely rebuilt by our government in the first three years of 

our mandate. And we’ve had some work done on other 

highways in the Cypress Hills constituency. 

 

But the point I’m trying to make is even though $2.2 billion is a 

lot of money, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to rebuilding TMS 

[thin membrane surface] roads, of which we have about 5400 

kilometres to repair yet at a cost of about $700,000 per 

kilometre — if you’ve got a calculator in front of you, just 

punch those buttons in and see what the total comes to — 

you’re looking at about a three and a half billion dollar 

expenditure just to improve the thin membrane highways of this 

province. And you haven’t even started to spend any money on 

twinning projects, passing lanes like there’s been promised for 

Highway 10 from Balgonie to the Qu’Appelle Valley. You 

haven’t spent any money on maintenance or wages. You 

haven’t spent any money on snow removal. That $3.5 billion 

would be just to rebuild thin membrane highways in this 

province. 

 

And so the challenge before us is great. And that’s why it’s so 

important that you lay out a plan of action and an expenditure, 

so that not just the ministry knows how much money they have 

to work with but every contractor in the province who does road 

work has a pretty firm idea as to what kind of work and what 

level of work they might expect and whether or not they should 

buy new equipment or maintain their employment quotient at 

the existing rate. They should be able to plan very effectively as 

a result of knowing this going forward. So having seen in this 

budget the commitment to highways at the second highest level 

ever in the history of this province, is a very important signal to 

the people of Saskatchewan, to the people of my constituency, 

and to all those involved in the road building business that 

we’re serious about addressing this infrastructure deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on health care, this is an enormous field. You 

know, we’re spending record money in health care again. And 

yet there are some very specific initiatives that I think the 

people of Cypress Hills will see as critical to their own personal 

health care needs. We’re going to see an increase in funding to 

the rural health districts, and those districts are kind of closest 

to the delivery of services in the various communities around 

the province. They know what their needs are, and this extra 

funding should help them address some of those needs. There 

aren’t very many health regions that can’t find a way to 

properly and appropriately spend that additional apportionment. 

And so I think that’s very helpful. 

 

I think the way we’re going to be spending money to provide a 

locum pool of doctors for relief in rural communities is 

absolutely critical to the ongoing delivery of health care 

services in towns that so often find themselves sort of at the 

whim of the existing doctor or at the emergent needs of an 

existing doctor who has maybe dedicated days on end to 

providing medical service and through exhaustion needs some 

time away or, because of his limited time with his family or her 

family, they need a break. And without their presence, health 

care may come to a standstill; health care delivery might come 

to a standstill in many of these small communities. So this 

locum pool is so important to the ongoing delivery of service in 

towns like that. It’s a great idea, and I’m looking forward to 

seeing that accomplished successfully. 

 

The money going to additional surgeries, you know, the chronic 

complaint I heard about health care was around hip and knee 

surgeries and the issue of getting into a clinic in a timely 

manner. And I remember several examples of people who were 

absolutely crippled up and rendered incapable of doing virtually 

anything because they were either on a cane or on a crutch, 

supporting themselves as they gimped around on a bad knee or 

a bad hip. And so anything we can do to shorten the agonizing 

wait time for patients that are suffering from those orthopedic 

disabilities is absolutely critical, not just to their physical 

rehabilitation but to their emotional and mental benefit as well 

because so many people, when they’re immobilized with that 

kind of pain and discomfort, lose all interest in so many of the 

other activities of life worth enjoying. And so I think this is one 

area that is so vital to the successful delivery of health care to 

residents of the province. 

 

I’m really pleased to know about the children’s insulin pump 

program for young people 17 to 25 years of age. As you know, 

Mr. Speaker, diabetes is becoming a much more common 

ailment in the population of this province. And having that kind 

of capacity available to young serious diabetics is critical, not 

just to their health but to their enjoyment of life as well. 

 

I think the almost $17 million increase to the Saskatchewan 

cancer care agency for drugs and for medical and operating 

costs and funding new patient referrals for chemotherapy 

treatments and mammograms is really an outstanding 

contribution to longevity and the addressing of the increasing 

prevalence of cancer in our society. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think some of these areas of expenditure 

have been largely overlooked, I think, but they’re absolutely 

critical to the enjoyment of life for the people of our great 

province. And this budget has accomplished some very 

important increases in these vital areas as well. The list is quite 

long in terms of specific money to very clearly specified areas 

of health care concern in this province. And so I would like to 

congratulate our Minister of Health for his attention to those 

areas. 

 

And we talked a little bit about some of the other spending 

that’s happening in the constituency of Cypress Hills. I focused 

primarily on highways. But I know for a fact that there are a 

couple of capital projects that are going to be undertaken in the 

constituency. 

 

We, the Minister of Health and I — it’s close to three, maybe 

three and a half years ago — went to Maple Creek and told the 

people there that they were going to get a new long-term care 

facility. And in the intervening time, that project was expanded 

to become a much larger health care delivery facility. It’s 

known as the southwest integrated health facility, and in this 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

budget there is funding to start the construction of that project. I 

understand the tenders for that particular facility are only a 

matter of maybe days or weeks away, and the whole community 

is excited about this. I’m going to be in Maple Creek on Friday 

to look at the initial designs for the new facility that are being 

offered up by the architect and the planners. So there is money 

in the budget for that project, and we expect to see a start of 

construction in the very near future. 

 

I understand that the Education ministry has put money aside 

for a project in Leader for a significant improvement to the 

school there. And that has been long-awaited, and they’re quite 

excited about that as well.  

 

And you know, the Education ministry has spent hundreds of 

millions of dollars on capital projects that were in need of 

completion, were in need of attention for almost a generation 

under the previous government. We had schools throughout this 

province where roofs leaked so bad that whenever it rained, 

students had to move to a different part of the school. And we 

had mould issues in community schools throughout the 

province. And we’ve had temporary and portable classrooms 

utilized in so many communities where something serious 

needed to be done about the infrastructure, and it was ignored 

by the previous administration. And I’m pleased to say tonight 

that we’re seeing that investment in schools and capital projects 

in schools all around the province. And it’s a real, real benefit 

to those communities and those students. 

 

Not only are we seeing an increase in spending in terms of 

capital projects, but this budget provides a solid base of support 

for educational funding in the schools for the benefit of the 

students themselves. And I know the critic for Education and 

the Finance critic have stood in this House repeatedly and said, 

this budget shortchanges education. Well the STF doesn’t think 

that. There’s several quotes that I could provide on the floor of 

the House tonight from the STF that express appreciation for 

the commitment to education in this budget. They apparently 

weren’t consulted by the opposition on their position, but 

nevertheless that is the reality. 

 

The Saskatchewan School Boards Association have taken a 

very strong stand in favour of this budget, and I would be happy 

to repeat some of their comments if it’s necessary for the 

edification of the opposition. We may get to that yet if I don’t 

run out of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, well let’s see. Maybe I can find just one here. I 

hope it’s the best one of several here because we did see quite a 

few of them in terms of education. Well here’s one. Here’s one 

here from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation news release. 

It says: 

 

The STF Welcomes Priority Placed on Education in 

the Provincial Budget 

 

The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation welcomed the 

provincial government’s pledge that Pre K-12 education 

is a priority in this year’s provincial budget. 

 

Let me quote Steve Allen, the president of the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation: 

 

The increase to funding is welcome and the fact that 

education is placed as a priority for the government. We 

think education is an investment. It’s an investment in not 

just infrastructure but in other things. It’s an investment in 

children, in people in the province. That’s very important. 

We do welcome the increases that are there. 

 

Steve Allen, president, Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 

 

[21:30] 

 

I’ve got, frankly, I’ve got pages here of positive comments from 

a variety of sectors, including the municipal sector, including 

the heavy construction sector, including other people in 

education. Boy, the list is really quite extensive, Mr. Speaker. 

Well I wish I could read them all if I had time, but maybe what 

we’ll do is just table the document, and then it’ll get on the 

record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign last fall, this 

government was very careful not to promise more than it could 

deliver. In fact we took a very prudent and careful approach to 

promising the people of Saskatchewan anything for future 

implementation. That was in direct contrast to the promises of 

the NDP who never met a spending commitment they didn’t 

like. And, Mr. Speaker, I think my colleague from Prince Albert 

Carlton indicated that it was about a $5.5 billion list of spending 

priorities — and maybe more, maybe less — but somewhere in 

that range. 

 

Out of the number of commitments that we made, I just want to 

indicate for the record tonight that I have a list of 26 campaign 

promises made by the Saskatchewan Party for a very 

inexpensive amount of money. And I looked at this whole list. 

And every one of those, every one of those 26 commitments 

that were made have already been acted on by this government. 

It was either in this budget document or in our Throne Speech 

earlier in the year. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the hallmark of a 

government that can be trusted, a government that keeps its 

word and does what it says it will do. And this is another 

example of how critical keeping the trust of the people of 

Saskatchewan is to the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Party government that was elected in the fall 

election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we set a pretty high bar after the election in 2007 

because, at that time, we had about 125 or so election promises 

we made. And over the course of the first three years, we kept 

the vast majority of them, and just a few were carried over into 

the fourth year of that mandate. And when the people of 

Saskatchewan realized that we were a government whose word 

could be taken seriously, who would do what it said it would 

do, they were prepared to give us a mandate in this most recent 

election. And we’re going to do whatever is necessary to keep 

the faith with the people of this great province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to have been able to 

participate in this debate. I just, before I close, want to make a 

couple more comments. At the outset, I indicated that I had a 

great deal of success in the election. I won’t take personal credit 

for that. It was as a result of teamwork. We had an outstanding 

Premier who offered leadership to our election campaign. 

We’ve had a strong performance as government over the 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

previous four years. 

 

But there’s a team at the local level that worked very hard so 

that all of us can enjoy success. And I’d like to acknowledge a 

gentleman by the name of Norm Lavoy, who cut his teeth on 

Liberal campaigns a number of years ago but who came onside 

as my campaign manager, and he worked very hard. In fact he 

was a bit of a slave-driver. And if it hadn’t been for him, I’m 

not sure that I’d have gotten as many doors knocked as we did. 

But he had an objective, and we were going to meet that 

objective. And even if I didn’t get them all knocked, if it took 

him knocking doors with me, side by side, we were going to 

meet that objective. And so he was travelling with me every 

day, virtually, from community to community around the great 

constituency of Cypress Hills. 

 

You know, I want to recognize Norm Lavoy. I wanted to talk 

about Jay Meyer and Jillian Stevenson, Dennis and Sherry 

Webster. And of particular importance are Beth Humphrey, 

Glenna Gordon, and Carol Wiebe, Kristen Koester. These are 

people who . . . I’m sorry, I said Carol Wiebe. I meant Carol 

Miller, Kristen Koester. These are people who came to my 

office every day and worked on that campaign. And we had 

volunteers in communities all throughout the province . . . I’m 

sorry, all throughout the constituency. And without that kind of 

support, without that kind of help, no campaign can be 

successful. And so I want to recognize those people tonight for 

their help. 

 

In conclusion there’s been quite a bit of debate in this House 

about whether or not we need three more elected members in 

this august Assembly. And I know what the arguments are in 

favour and against. And I also know that with the increase in 

population in this province, there is going to be a need for 

additional representation at some point. And we can do it now, 

or we can do it, you know, five years from now and deal with it 

then. 

 

But here’s the reality for constituencies like mine, large rural 

constituencies. Today I represent one voter per square 

kilometre. It’s pretty easy to be critical of increasing members 

when you are sitting in an urban constituency, or one very near 

Regina, where you can get across the constituency in 10 

minutes and think that that’s the reality for everybody. 

 

But in my case, in several of my colleagues’ cases, their 

constituencies are large. They’re remote. They’re a significant 

driving time away from Regina. And it’s not that technology 

doesn’t allow those people that we represent to contact us. We 

do have telephones, surprisingly enough. We even have email 

addresses that work. But that’s not the issue, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

not whether my constituents can get to me — because they can 

if they want, even if it takes a couple of hours of driving time 

— but it’s whether I can get to them when they need me in their 

community. The question is: can I get to them in a timely way? 

 

And you know, the closest community to my home base is 20 

minutes away. But if you drive to the far end of my 

constituency, it’s a two and a half hour drive up to the 

community of Leader. I spend a couple of hours in the 

community at whatever function they’ve got. I drive home for 

two and a half hours. I can’t do that every week. I can’t do it 

every month. I have 25 distinct communities in the constituency 

of Cypress Hills. And if we didn’t add just two or three more 

seats to this House based on the growing population, my 

constituency could conceivably get significantly larger as 

boundaries are redrawn according to the law that’s now in 

place. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re familiar with the phrase about 

justice delayed being justice denied. Well in the case of 

democracy, access delayed is virtually access denied. And I 

worry about the argument that’s being made, you know: we 

don’t need more people here to represent this growing 

population; we don’t need the increased expense. If that 

argument had been used many years ago, we wouldn’t have had 

the kind of representation and the kind of good government that 

was provided to this province and the leadership that was 

provided to this province at a time it was critical in the growth 

and development of this great province. So it’s easy to make a 

generalized condemnation of three additional people when you 

don’t have to live with the inconvenience and the incongruities 

and the challenges of representing a large rural area. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just place that on the record 

tonight in defence of some of the things the government is 

undertaking. Because it’s important that the people of these 

rural communities and constituencies like Cypress Hills and 

Wood River and some of the others that they be given the same 

access to their elected people that those in more populated areas 

currently enjoy. And I think that when you look at that 

comparison, there is a fairly legitimate argument for increasing 

the size of representation and the number of elected people in 

this House. 

 

So having made as many points as I could in as little time as 

was given to me, Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to say tonight 

that I’m firmly in support of the budget. I will be voting against 

the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And it is indeed a pleasure to rise and participate in 

this budget debate. And according to my calculations — I used 

to be a Finance critic at one time — I think it’s the ninth time 

that I’ve had a chance to look at budgets in our province. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, the first few, the first four, I believe, were when I 

was in opposition. And at that point, I had an opportunity to be 

Finance critic, and I understand what a difficult job that can be 

at times. But, Mr. Speaker, without hesitation I would say that 

each of those budgets had many, many positive things in them, 

many things that we can be proud of in Saskatchewan. Each 

budget builds on the last one, and, Mr. Speaker, that’s indeed 

what this budget does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a great time of year in spring when you look 

forward to the great opportunities that our province has ahead 

of it, and it’s a great time for a budget such as this that shows 

the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. Speaker. That’s indeed what 

we have here today. 

 

As other members have done, I’d like to thank those who help 

me do my job on a daily basis: my constituency assistant 

Kaitlyn, Marilyn before that. Both of them have done an 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

excellent job, and I thank them for the work that they do. And 

also in my ministerial office, Marlin and Jacquie and Jared and 

Marlene and Tenille, they all work very hard to make sure that I 

have everything for question period. You know, every day you 

may forget one or two things, but they make sure that it all 

comes together here. 

 

And then you have to hope for a question, a question. And 

every day you come in here, and you hope for a question, but 

not very often, Mr. Speaker. When I first came in as Minister of 

Crowns, I used to have a question every day, and I miss that, 

Mr. Speaker. I do. I do. But they say that’s a good thing. They 

say that maybe you’re doing a good job. But I can’t use that 

logic either because my seatmate gets questions every day, and 

he’s doing an excellent job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, balanced budgets, that seems to be the topic that 

we have here today, and we indeed again have a balanced 

budget. Members opposite have posed the question: don’t you 

guys get tired of talking about balanced budgets? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the answer is, never. Because with balanced budgets 

come paying down debt, making sure that the future of the 

province is sustainable and affordable, and, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

indeed what we do. 

 

As Premier Wall has said — and all of us on this side have 

heard that many, many, many times — Premier Wall has said 

. . . I’m sorry. The Premier has said . . . Forgive me, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m new in the . . . No. It’s funny, how you’re elected 

and you’re a rookie in the first four years and then the second 

four years you’re somewhat of a veteran and then in the third 

four years you’re already a little long in the tooth, Mr. Speaker. 

Not saying that that’s happening, you know. But indeed I’m 

enjoying it. 

 

What the Premier says to us time and time again is that the only 

day that’s better than today in Saskatchewan is tomorrow in 

Saskatchewan. And that is indeed something that we all enjoy 

hearing. I’m not sure if the members opposite enjoy it all that 

much. They probably do because they probably believe that 

they will get a turn again in government. But, Mr. Speaker, we 

will do everything on this side of the House to make sure that 

doesn’t happen because, Mr. Speaker, what we hear from our 

constituents is that they are not going back. They are not going 

back to the years of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. What they want is 

balanced budgets into the future. 

 

I very, very recently had a chance to hear from a couple of chief 

economists from CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce] 

and Scotiabank. And what did they have to say about our 

budget? What did they have to say, Mr. Speaker? That we’re 

only, we’re one of only three jurisdictions in North America 

that have a balanced budget — Newfoundland, North Dakota, 

and Saskatchewan. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Absolutely. Absolutely. But I 

think, you know, Mr. Speaker, the greatest compliments come 

from your rivals. You know, when you get a compliment from 

across the way, you take that. You don’t get them very often but 

they do come. For example, and the member from Regina 

Dewdney was mentioning it, when you get a compliment from 

the land of the Blue Bombers, from Manitoba, when they say, 

“Saskatchewan is kicking Manitoba’s butt,” Mr. Speaker, that is 

indeed, that is a compliment of the ultimate sense, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, that is indeed a quote, and that is indeed in the 

Winnipeg Sun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talked about the new road, Mr. Speaker, in 

previous budgets. And I’ve said, we’ve built upon previous 

budgets, and that’s what we have here. We wanted to take the 

road that Saskatchewan residents would like to travel, a high 

road indeed, one with a better quality of life where every person 

in this province can participate in ensuring that we have a 

better, better quality of life. And now more than ever, people in 

Saskatchewan can say that because there are more people here 

— 1,067,000, Mr. Speaker. This is indeed something that we 

can all, we can all be very proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:45] 

 

And this is very evident in the growing constituency of 

Saskatoon Silver Springs. Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity, 

and one thing I enjoy about elections is going door to door to 

every door if possible and talking to people about what their 

vision is for Saskatchewan, what they would like to see 

happening. And, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it, they 

want to see growth. They want to see a positive outlook. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s indeed what our government brings to them. 

 

And even if you go down the streets in Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, you get surprised by the people that are there and 

where they’ve come from — people from Germany, people 

from England, people from Ireland, more to come I’m sure 

from Ireland. And, Mr. Speaker, that is something that indeed 

enhances the mosaic and the culture of our province, and I’m so 

proud to say that our government maybe had a little part in 

doing that. We know that it’s the private sector that leads the 

way, but, Mr. Speaker, we indeed want to make sure that we 

continue to do that. 

 

Another thing that they talk about in Saskatoon Silver Springs, 

about the growing constituency, is the need for schools. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this budget came through in spades — two new 

schools for the Saskatoon Willow Grove area in the Saskatoon 

Silver Springs constituency, something that I’m very, very 

pleased and I know that the constituents are. And I know that 

members in this House are very pleased when new schools 

come to their area. 

 

I had the opportunity of going to the Saskatoon Teachers’ 

Association convention on Friday and hearing some of their 

speakers. And one of the speakers was asked by the directors of 

education and other officials saying, what would you do? How 

would you build a new school, and what would you have when 

you walk into it? And you know what he said, Mr. Speaker? Do 

you know how lucky you are to have new schools? Do you 

know how many jurisdictions across North America don’t have 

that opportunity? And he went on to say what he would see. 

And I think that’s something that we all have to take into 

account, Mr. Speaker, because we are the benefits of a growing 

economy. We have the stewards of that, of the budget and of 

the economy going forward, and that enables us to increase the 

quality of life. Whether it’s hospitals, whether it’s schools, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re very proud when it indeed does happen. 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

Now that wasn’t always the case, Mr. Speaker. I can remember 

standing in my place in opposition, lobbying the Education 

minister at the time for a school for Saskatoon in the Arbor 

Creek area, Mr. Speaker, and it never came. The NDP had some 

pretty good times as well, and that school never came. The 

people of Arbor Creek today, they remember that that plea fell 

on deaf ears, Mr. Speaker. So I can tell you that it’s much, 

much better to have an opportunity to say . . . And schools will 

come to other constituencies as well, whether they’re 

represented by government members or opposition members, 

Mr. Speaker, because it’s the right thing to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk also about something that is very 

important when it comes to this budget, and that is indeed the 

revenue-sharing portion of it. And members earlier talked about 

the revenue-sharing model. And I don’t know about you, Mr. 

Speaker, members on this side of the House, but when I look at 

something, I like to picture it as far as a graph or something. I 

relate well to visuals for sure, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I can’t see that from here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well what it says, what it says — 

and members on this side of the House, if they’d just wait a 

minute here, I’ll be able to tell them about it — revenue sharing 

in Saskatoon has gone from $17 billion in 2007 to 42 billion in 

. . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Forty-two million in 2012. Mr. 

Speaker, what that is as a percentage increase is 137 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. And that is indeed, Mr. Speaker, something that is 

very, very important because Saskatoon is a growing city. 

Saskatoon is a city that is indeed seeing the benefits of what’s 

happening across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, what an 

increase from $17 million in 2007 to $42 million in 2012-2013, 

it enables the city to have a vision, to have more bridges, to 

have a police station, Mr. Speaker, that they’re looking at. River 

Landing is coming along, an art gallery. We do indeed, we are 

very fortunate in Saskatoon in having a very, very 

accomplished, very competent mayor, one that indeed has a 

vision. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what the residents of Saskatoon Silver 

Springs and residents across the city and across the province are 

looking for are governments that work together, whether it’s the 

municipal government, whether it’s the provincial government 

and the federal government, those that work together to 

accomplish things. 

 

And as the mayor likes to chide, this bridge that’s coming on in 

2013 took 100 years, Mr. Speaker, 100 years to come together, 

and is so pleased to see that indeed it’ll come in 2013. Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What did the Opposition Leader say 

about municipal though? We’ve got to take money from those 

guys. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — That’s right. We’ve heard that 

earlier here, Mr. Speaker, that members of the opposition said 

that we should take money from SARM, take money from 

SUMA, take money from the municipalities across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard them say it once or twice, 

somewhat quietly in the House here, but, Mr. Speaker, I think 

we’re going to hear more about that and those words in the near 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have many university students in Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. And every time I talk to them about their studies 

and I talk to them about their future plans, they talk about the 

tuition, the tax credit, and say that it’s one more reason why 

they stay in Saskatchewan, one more reason for them to look 

for that job. And, Mr. Speaker, you know what they’re doing? 

They’re finding those jobs here in Saskatchewan. They’re 

making Saskatchewan home. They’re doing something very 

differently than they did under the NDP, where they looked 

outside of Saskatchewan into different jurisdictions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The municipal revenue sharing increase to $42 million from 37 

the year before is in fact an 11.3 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 

And you know, we get in the House and we talk about our 

opinions and what our constituents . . . But, Mr. Speaker, I 

always like to throw in a quote or two, and I’d like to quote 

Mayor Don Atchison when he says, with a 10 per cent tax credit 

they’re putting in the number of homes and rentals that could 

possibly be built, I think it falls very nicely into the plans that 

the city has. Of course he’s talking about the tax credit and the 

use for affordable homes. 

 

We have seen many budgets that are just about the numbers and 

about people. It’s the second budget of our Finance minister, 

Mr. Speaker, and I think all members in this House and people 

watching at home can see the emotion that he put into it and 

how proud he was when the member from Canora-Pelly talked 

about making it a better day for Saskatchewan residents. 

 

I know I’m very thankful to live in this province, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to raise my family in the great city of 

Saskatoon, as many of us have families. They’re extremely 

busy, extremely busy households. The doors seem to always be 

revolving in our household, whether it’s to hockey or 

swimming or dance or band. And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I 

want to take the opportunity to thank my wife, Trish, for all that 

she does with our kids back at home when I’m in the legislature 

and fulfilling my responsibilities here. 

 

Our son, Carter, is 14 years old. He loves hockey. He loves 

hockey so much that I texted him about 10 minutes ago and I 

said that Dad might be on TV; you might want to watch. He 

said, Dad, I’m watching the Flames game. So he’s probably 

making, he’s probably making a good choice there. Mr. 

Speaker, my daughter, Paige, is 12 years old. She’s turning into 

a very, very accomplished swimmer, and she’s enjoying the 

Shaw Centre in Saskatoon and certainly involved in dance and 

other activities that keep her very busy. 

 

And one story that the kids and Trish always tell me is that 

when they’re out buying clothes and they come to the till, and 

every time that they meet somebody up at the till, they talk 

about the PST exemption on children’s clothes for 17 and 

under. And that again is an election promise that we made and 

an election promise that we kept, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, that 

is something that we are very proud of. 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

When I talk about people in my life, I have to mention my 

mother who also is a watcher of the legislative channel. But I 

know that the Jets are playing tonight, and I know they’re 

playing Ottawa. And the media also asked me, if it’s a choice 

between the Jets and the legislative channel, what does your 

mom do? And well I just say, you know, they can ask her about 

that sometime because I know what the answer would be. 

We’re certainly in prime-time television here, Mr. Speaker. I 

know that and I understand that, but it’s getting close to the 

playoffs, and so she might be tuned in to another channel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she’s living in an assisted living home in Speers, 

Saskatchewan. She receives wonderful care and 

companionship, and she even gets the odd visit, she says, from 

her MLA, the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. And she 

certainly appreciates that when he comes up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you talk about care, that’s something that 

relates to this budget as well, Mr. Speaker. I quoted from the 

mayor earlier, and I want to quote, and from Rosalee 

Longmoore, the president of SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses], someone who is very familiar to all members, certainly 

my seatmate. And here’s what she had to say: 

 

We are interested in the budget’s potential to work 

towards addressing patient and workplace safety, 

improving access, and reducing surgical wait times. SUN 

is looking forward to continuing our collaboration and 

partnerships with the government and the ministry to see 

exactly how these initiatives and resources can be used to 

further enhance the quality of care in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan patients. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in the past I haven’t agreed with everything 

that SUN has to say, but I can tell you that indeed that is a 

classy quote, and something that I think we’d return the favour 

and say that we look forward to working with them as well. 

 

My seatmate, the Minister of Health, has done an outstanding 

job in this regard, a record investment of $4.68 billion — billion 

dollars this time, Mr. Speaker — in 2012-13, a 4.9 per cent 

increase. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken with many 

constituents, and health care continues to be a topic that they 

bring up. They tell us time and time again and tell me when I’m 

in the constituency that they’re pleased with the improvements 

that our government has made in reducing surgical wait times. 

They are pleased to hear the key investments in this year’s 

budget for the cancer agency. They are pleased to hear of the 

expansion of the colorectal cancer screening program and the 

STARS helicopter program, Mr. Speaker, that we have heard 

about over the course of the last year. Diabetes, to name a few. 

 

And of course the children’s hospital is something that’s near 

and dear to my heart and to many members’ hearts. And to see 

it come along, to see it . . . I had an opportunity to meet with the 

board of the health region and to talk about the planning process 

and how that is coming together, and we’re certainly excited. 

And I know constituents from Saskatoon Silver Springs have 

been asked to participate in planning the facility, those who 

have had children that have stayed in the hospital, and they 

wanted to use their expertise. Mr. Speaker, all of this, what it 

does, it improves the life and well-being of Saskatchewan 

residents. We are very, very fortunate indeed to be able to do 

that. 

 

I want to touch very briefly, Mr. Speaker, on my responsibilities 

in this House and talk about the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation. For example, they spend some $766,000 on 

community sponsorships and ensuring that 42 per cent of their 

workforce is of Aboriginal descent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also have the opportunity to be Minister of First Nations and 

Métis in the province. And I can tell you that I began today with 

a very, very special occurrence where I attended the youth 

meeting of the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] and had an opportunity with my colleagues, the 

Minister of Advanced Education and the Minister of Education, 

to talk about the education and employment task force going 

forward. We’re very, very excited about it, Mr. Speaker, not 

because it’s a government initiative, but it’s something that 

leaders of First Nations and leaders of the Métis and leaders in 

government as well have sat down and said it’s something that 

absolutely needs to be done. And it’s something that will be 

done, and it receives funding in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had other members talk in this Assembly 

about the situation for First Nations and Métis. And the member 

from Athabasca — and I think we all agree he’s one of the most 

entertaining speakers in the House for sure but, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s indeed correct — you can check his facts and you check 

them closely and you’ll see that they’re off the mark by quite a 

bit. Because indeed, Mr. Speaker, what has happened for First 

Nations and Métis people in Saskatchewan is that, in this 

budget, is that they have had an increase of 2.8 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, some $4.7 million in this budget. Mr. Speaker, that 

applies to northern Saskatchewan as well, that there is an 

increase in the budget for people in the North so they can 

participate in the Saskatchewan advantage as well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that my time is drawing to a close, 

and I just have a couple of other things that I want to talk about, 

Mr. Speaker: $350,000 to support the First Nations and Métis 

engagement with the children and youth agenda. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a committee that I’ve had the opportunity to serve on, and 

I can tell you it’s a very rewarding one. At times it’s very, very 

disturbing to hear about the situations that are there across 

Canada, but it indeed is something that you feel that you can 

make a difference on. And I am pleased to have that 

opportunity. North American Indigenous Games are coming in 

2014, that’s something that I look forward to very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[22:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there is many, many other members 

that want to have the opportunity to participate in this budget 

debate. And indeed, I began by saying how fortunate I am to 

have this opportunity for the ninth time, but indeed to learn 

from people in this Assembly. And I think we all learn a great 

deal from the Minister of Finance, the member from 

Canora-Pelly. Members on this side of the House have an 

opportunity to observe him in caucus and all members have an 

opportunity to observe him in the House, and he does a 

wonderful job. He talks about the Saskatchewan advantage and 

makes sure that it does happen, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that 

Saskatchewan has grown by 17,000 people, the largest 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

population growth in one year since 1953, is very, very positive. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the member for Canora-Pelly continues to be a 

mentor of mine. He brings passion to this Assembly, and indeed 

when he delivers a budget, it is inspiring. And that’s what we 

had this year, Mr. Speaker, an inspiring budget that at a time 

when other governments are running large deficits, increasing 

debt, cutting services, our growing economy and population 

means that we can lower taxes, reduce debt, and improve public 

services within a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we are keeping our election promises. We are keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage. This budget will achieve these goals, 

Mr. Speaker. It’ll make life more affordable, improving the 

quality of life for all residents from youth to seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, and everyone in between. So with that, I would like to 

thank all colleagues in the House for this opportunity to 

participate in the debate. Of course, I will be supporting the 

budget because it has the long-term interests of the province in 

mind, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much for the opportunity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

in the budget debate. Like the member from Cypress Hills has 

mentioned, we’ve taken part in quite a few in our time. But the 

budget is a thing, when I’ve listened to all the MLAs and you’re 

following later in the night, you’ve listened to a lot of the 

speeches, and I know that the MLAs on this side are talking 

basically about the same things I want to talk about, but not 

only that, it’s why we’re doing that.  

 

It’s the same thing that the people, that our constituents tell us 

in the election, which I’ve taken part in a few over my time. 

And when I travel through the election, whether it’s in the town 

of Loreburn or two and a half hours away in my drive to 

Wynyard, the constituents talk the same thing, whether it’s on 

one side of my constituency or in the other. You know, their 

priorities are the same, which is health care, education, balanced 

budgets. They want a responsible government. They want a 

government that is going to move this province forward in a 

responsible manner. And when we’ve been talking to, when I’m 

talking to at election time to my constituents, you know, it’s not 

the MLAs that develop this budget, you know. It’s the 

constituents that have did it. It’s their ideas that they brought 

forward to us. They’re a part of this budget. They made this a 

priority. 

 

It’s the way that . . . the success that this government has had 

under our Premier is because the one thing he tells us: you 

listen to your constituents. You listen to what they have to tell 

you. You bring their ideas to the table. When we sit around the 

caucus table, it’s every member here that’s on this side of the 

House brings their constituents’ concerns to the table, and we 

work them out. That’s what helps develop this budget. So it’s 

just not the government’s budget, it’s a people’s budget, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s the people in my constituency, it’s the people of 

all the constituencies in this province that have developed this 

budget and moved it forward. 

 

And the member from Cypress also talked about the size, and 

my constituency is fairly huge. It’s a two and a half hour drive 

at least from one end to the other. I have 20 towns, villages, 

hamlets, resort villages. And the priorities with them are all the 

same, Mr. Speaker, you know, over the many years of travelling 

to them towns and going there. 

 

And one of the priorities — I’ve listened to many of the 

speeches on this side, and they’ve talked about many of the 

things I want to talk about — one of the things that hasn’t been 

mentioned yet in this budget that I want to talk a little bit about 

is the rink program. And that’s something we’ve all heard about 

over the many years that we’ve been in, you know, many of us 

that have been here in the legislature or have been elected, was 

the cost of running the local rinks. And the local rinks in a town 

is the centre of the town. I mean in the wintertime right now, 

it’s hockey right now. I spent the weekend . . . And people are 

talking to me about the budget. Because provincials are on, Mr. 

Speaker, so if you want to talk to constituents, you go to the 

local hockey games. 

 

And my constituency is pretty rife when it comes to hockey. I’ll 

just quickly mention, when it comes to provincial 

championships, I believe I have, the Kenaston Blizzards are 

Provincial D champions, the Davidson Cyclones are Provincial 

C champions, and the Drake is a Provincial B champion. And 

one good thing about my constituency is growing. So I think in 

the next year or two, I’m probably going to have a town big 

enough that we can enter in A provincials, and we can sweep all 

four of the titles. 

 

But when we talk about at the rinks, that was one of the 

programs that we brought forward. Because over the years, you 

know, the rinks just aren’t . . . right now at hockey time. In the 

summertime, what goes on there are auction sales, are family 

reunions, are homecomings, are sports days. Every rink, 

whether it’s a curling rink or the skating rink, is a hub of that 

small town in my constituency. That’s where many events, 

almost any event of any size, will take place. So when they said, 

you know, how can you help us? And so we’d come out with a 

program — $2,500 for any size of rink. So it’ll help each and 

every one of my towns that have a rink. I think right now we’ve 

said we’re roughly, we’re looking at probably 750 rinks that 

will be able to qualify. 

 

And I tell you what, Mr. Speaker. When I was going around 

there, they’re quite pleased with that program. I mean they 

know they need help. I mean the cost of everything keeps going 

up, whether it’s electricity, the power, or the natural gas, or just 

your ordinary inflation costs of running a rink. And you know 

what? The rinks, as is many events and many things are held in 

my small towns, it’s volunteers. They’re volunteers that keep 

these rinks going, that keep these small towns going, whether 

it’s the Elks Club, the Kinsmen Club, the Lions Club, 

Optimists, you know, many groups that participate and take part 

to keep the small towns rolling. So any way that we can help 

them over the time is very well acknowledged. 

 

And one of the things when I was at the rink this weekend 

watching hockey was, you know, people were talking about the 

budget. I mean they come up to you. They know you’re the 

MLA for the area, and they want to talk about the budget, you 

know. And one of the first things they always talk about, it’s a 

balanced budget because they do not want to run a debt in this 

province. They do not want . . . They want this province to 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

move forward and . . . [inaudible] . . . they know they can do 

that because many . . . All these people, whether it’s a farm, as I 

run myself . . . I was also a town councillor. You want to run a 

balanced budget. If you don’t run a balanced budget, you’re not 

going to last long, whether it’s in a business or a farm or if it’s a 

town council or an RM [rural municipality]. So we ask them 

people to run balanced budgets in the RMs, in the towns, in the 

RMs, and the varying organizations, so the most they can 

expect from us is the same kind, is to run a balanced budget. 

 

And that was one of the biggest things, even at election time 

that I’ve been running now in government for, this is the fifth 

budget we’ve presented, and they’ve all been balanced, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s one of the things I’ve heard the most at the 

coffee shops, on the doorsteps when I go door knocking is, you 

know, that they appreciate the work we did on budgets and the 

balanced budgets working at . . . but also making priorities. The 

priorities being, you know, various things whether . . . 

 

Agriculture is very important in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

Agriculture is one of the things that we’ve always committed to 

on that. You know, this is what we’ve invested another 13 

million to top up 430 million in 2012, this budget, the second 

largest agriculture budget ever announced. And the programs 

that are out there, one of the best programs out there is 

AgriInvest. That allows a farmer to actually to plan his future, 

plan through if you have a down time in agriculture, as we all 

know that can happen. We’ve been lucky. We’ve had some very 

good years in agriculture.  

 

There has been the flooding issues where we stepped up to fill 

that gap when there wasn’t funding in the budget. And the 

farmers and the people throughout the province have 

appreciated that very much, you know, because it’s a 

government that reacts to priorities, that can react to disasters 

and know that — you know what? — that we need a little bit of 

bridge funding for that, which we offered, in the flooding, 

throughout the last two years. 

 

And now we knowing that . . . We’re also introduced where you 

can get unseeded acres insurance because I think that’s a 

program we’re going to need in ongoing future. And that’s what 

farmers realize. They realize, you know what, now that . . . You 

know, they don’t like ad hoc programs. They know that you 

need to have certain programs and need to step up. And one of 

them was crop insurance, to know that there was a void that 

needed to be filled. We recognized that and the minister 

recognized that, and working with crop insurance and working 

with producers. And I know the producers that I talked to were, 

you know, those were things they brought forward. You know, 

they say, you know what? We just somehow we can enhance 

the insurance program because it is an insurance program. They 

know they have to pay into it in the good years, but it’s also that 

they can collect in the bad years. We’ve increased the funding 

up to $174 an acre, you know, this year with that and, you 

know, trying to adjust as agriculture’s growing because 

agriculture is changing all the time. 

 

You know, I’ve been in the farming industry all my life and the 

cattle industry, and you know, things have changed quite 

dramatically over the 30 years that I’ve been involved in it. And 

one of the things that I think government has to do is be able to 

react to the changing times, to keep working and adjusting the 

programs every year and trying to work with the producers, 

which we have over the time we’ve met with them, spent a lot 

of time trying to develop the best programs through crop 

insurance and other programs through the cattle industry and all 

the other industries that are involved in farming, whether it’s 

organic . . . We also have a potato industry in the edge of my 

constituency. We also have irrigation coming forward. I know I 

have a couple of constituents are growing Christmas trees and 

various, various enterprises that our people are stepping forward 

and in the agriculture scene. 

 

So agriculture just isn’t about just, you know, the old days — 

it’s just about growing wheat. It’s about the many crops that 

we’ve grown that are, have been added over the years. And 

also, you know, the steps we’ve taken to make sure that 

Saskatchewan was in the forefront of crop production when it 

comes to lentils, peas, I can remember — and they were just 

experimental crops — where, you know, one guy would just 

grow them, 80 acres, and there was very little research on them. 

And they’ve ballooned into being one of our major exports with 

the crops we develop. Whether it’s yellow mustard, we’re one 

of the, we grow most of the yellow mustard in the world. I think 

we grow 40 per cent of it, give or take, depending on some 

years. Our lentil production has been moving up every year, pea 

production with that. But we also recognize with that is, with 

the research money and the figures and the money that we’ve 

added to research development, I think is very important, Mr. 

Speaker. You know, one of the things we are addressing is, in 

research, is wheat because wheat, you know, is still a very 

important rotation crop. It’s still a very important part of crops 

as a crop to farmers. 

 

With that, and especially as the world is going to need more 

food and as the world is growing, the population in the world 

has been growing dramatically, and they’re going to need food. 

And they’re going to be looking to countries and provinces such 

as Saskatchewan to meet that need, and we’re trying to step up 

with research and working with the farmers that we can ensure 

this, that this carries on, that we are leading, leading when it 

comes to technology, whether it’s in research for crops but also 

for agriculture equipment. We’ve also moved ahead where our 

province is one of the leaders in agriculture, developing 

agricultural equipment, whether it’d be Bourgault Industries, 

the air seeder technology, the air drills, four-wheel drive 

tractors, a lot of the rotary harrows. A lot of the equipment 

that’s being used around the world has been developed and 

been experimented here in Saskatchewan, you know. 

 

And to move forward, one of the, in this budget, another 

priority that’s mentioned is highways. You know, that’s a very 

important part of the provincial budget. It’s very important to 

just about every constituent. There isn’t anybody that . . . 

Talking about highways is almost like talking about the 

weather, especially in my constituency where basically I have 

many highways intertwined through my constituency. What we 

have been doing is making highways a priority over the years. 

We’ve been working on it. 

 

One of them is what we did with Highway 15, the investment in 

that making it a long-haul corridor and, with that, the extra 

funding that’s going on. There’s going to be the start of 

construction on it this spring. And I know that since I was 

elected that has always been mentioned to me quite a bit, and 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

when’s some work going to be done on Highway 15? And I 

know when I was opposition, it was mentioned a lot. And we 

used to bring it here and, you know, well we’re just fixing the 

potholes. 

 

[22:15] 

 

So we’ve developed a five-year plan. And that came from 

constituents. They say, you know what? You need a long-range 

plan on your highway system. You know, you just can’t be 

going, just trying to fix like the previous government was, just 

fixing potholes here and there, just, you know, fixing a 

kilometre here, a kilometre there. What you need is a 

long-range plan. And that’s something we’ve developed. 

 

We also prioritized the highways that need work. And we’re 

making a list on the work, the needs, so the constituents can see 

and the people of Saskatchewan can see what we’re doing 

further down the road as we’re working towards improving the 

highways in this province. And we have per capita more 

highway miles than any place in Canada, so I mean it is a 

challenge. 

 

And with that always comes increased funding, and we have 

increased the funding quite dramatically since we were elected 

in 2007. And this year we’ve also increased the funding to 

highways, making it a priority and also trying to meet the 

twinning needs that this province has and also developing, you 

know, the centre, the hub here in Regina, also working with the 

city of Regina to develop what’s the long-range plan for how to 

move transportation, how to move goods throughout this 

province, which are the best ways to move them down which 

highway, how to . . . working with all the interested parties on 

that end. 

 

One of the other priorities, as with just about every about MLA 

here, is health care. Whether it’s long-term care facilities, we 

were working . . . Watrous is, right now, is in the stages of 

building that. That was a long time coming. That was one of the 

health facilities that was . . . When it rained, the roof actually 

leaked. They had buckets in halls that was there. When it was 

raining, the roof was leaking in the hallways and in some 

rooms, you know.  

 

And they had their funding put together, I think, since about 

’92. And I know when I was elected in ’99, they were, like you 

know, when is the government going to move forward on our 

funding? When are they going to bring their share to the table? 

We’re here fundraising every day. Every day we’re fundraising 

trying to raise money, trying to . . . Because you have inflation 

as the costs go up. So I mean every year they’ve got to keep 

raising that money. And it’s hard because the people were 

asking them why . . . You know, when is the government going 

to give you their share? We’ve raised ours, but now we’ve got 

to go back because cost of construction has gone up, because 

cost of labour has gone up, because building costs have gone 

up. And so we have to keep going back and keep going back. 

 

So when I was first elected, we also developed a plan to address 

13 long-term care facilities in this province. That was huge. 

That was one of the most important things I think that we did as 

government — these facilities. And they were all in very bad 

shape because they had been ignored for many years at that end 

of it. 

 

You know, the people of Saskatchewan, I mean, and Arm 

River-Watrous, when they see that you’re trying to work, trying 

to improve the quality of life, because that’s what we were 

elected for, is trying to improve the quality of life, trying to 

improve it for the constituents that are here. And one of them, 

that was one of the main priorities, you know. So we developed 

that, and we’re carrying forward with the funding this year. 

There is going to be some more that are being built, and in the 

next couple of years, all 13 of them are going to be built, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know that speaks to possibly the reason why, that there’s 

49 of us on this side — because you listen to the people. You 

bring their priorities here to the legislature. You develop it, and 

you develop that budget, and you develop that platform with 

that. 

 

You know, another one is doctor shortages. I mean that’s a 

challenge. That’s a challenge, Mr. Speaker, in rural 

Saskatchewan. But we’re working towards it. We’re working 

towards it. The locum pool has been very well received in Arm 

River-Watrous. You know, coming from small towns, every 

one of my facilities is struggling to keep a doctor. And they’ve 

talked to us and said, you know, how can we work together? 

And the locum pool was very well received. 

 

Another one was training seats that we needed to add, trying to 

build the capacity for doctors, also working to bring in more 

doctors from out of country. You know, those are things that 

we’re working towards that are challenges. But yet they know 

that we’re willing to face them and they know, the constituents 

out there, that we’re trying. They know that there’s challenges, 

but they can see we’re making progress. And that is, you know, 

that is one of the reasons that this budget is very well received. 

 

Like I was saying, when I was around on the weekend, I mean, 

everybody comes up to me and said, you know, this is a good 

budget. I mean, you know, you guys are . . . It’s balanced but 

you’re also identifying the priorities. You’re also working what 

I would do. I had many guys and women say, you know what? 

If I was elected, you guys are doing the same thing that I would 

be doing if I was sitting here. You’re talking about the same 

stuff and bringing the same stuff to the legislature that we were 

talking about back home at the coffee shop, you know, and 

that’s very important. 

 

The STARS program is another one when we’re dealing with 

health, you know, as talking about like in agriculture, how 

things change. One of them is health care is changing. I mean, 

it’s a great program in Alberta, and it’s something that’s needed 

throughout this province to be able to transport somebody in 

way quicker time to get the emergency there, get them to the 

hospital. They say, you know, the first 10, 15 minutes, 20 

minutes is the most critical if you’re to save a patient’s life. And 

that is how STARS will deal with it, how it has that opportunity 

to save people’s lives and to develop it. 

 

You know, like we’ve talked about our constituencies, how 

widespread they are. And I mean, they are. I mean this is a very 

huge province, you know, very huge. And it needs to be 

addressed, how to get patients to the hospital as fast as you can 



March 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

in the most critical time and to save lives. That, Mr. Speaker, is 

a priority, that’s a priority of this government. And then sure we 

had to make, when it comes to budget, you have to make some 

tough, tough cuts. But I’ll tell you what, when it comes to 

making them, the constituents say don’t make them on health 

care. Don’t endanger people’s lives. 

 

You know, the cuts we had to make, they were tough, but they 

were to put money into things that saves lives. I mean we’ve 

increased money to the Cancer Agency. We’ve also increased 

money for colorectal cancer. Those are the things that the 

people understand, that if you have to make a cut, do not make 

it there; do not make it to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 

You know that’s something that we’ve added $16.9 million . . . 

And I’ll tell you what cancer is, it touches probably everybody 

in this legislature. There isn’t anybody that you can’t talk to out 

anywhere in this province where cancer hasn’t touched their 

lives, you know. And making that, Mr. Speaker, a priority, you 

know, I’m proud of that, and I’m proud of the budget for doing 

stuff like that. And to me those are priorities. Those are the 

main things that you should be dealing with that you should be 

bringing forward in a budget. And those are things that we’re 

addressing. 

 

You know, when I’ve worked with my campaign team and I 

should thank them because having a huge constituency as I 

have: my business manager Ron Bessey, my campaign manager 

Clark Puckett, and Donna, and Lavonne, and my sister Dianne, 

and the many people that have worked with the constituency 

that large that I can hit every town. And we did. I remember 

some other member had mentioned, you know, it was a 

challenge to hit every town, and we did. There wasn’t one town 

that we did not door knock on and ask them what their concerns 

were, you know and picking up things. And I wouldn’t have 

been able to do that without that team. There’s no way. Plus 

many other people that actually just, you know, gave a day here 

or an afternoon day there. But them five people, basically we 

door knocked. 

 

Went out every day. Every day. There wasn’t a day . . . Except 

Sundays. We didn’t door knock on Sunday afternoons. 

Sundays, we took that day off. But other than that, six days a 

week we door knocked. 

 

And at nights, I attended events where I could. You know, in 

the fall there was a couple of steak fries, a couple of things 

going on along them times where you can go and you can touch 

people, talk to them, feel them out on direction. And I tell you 

what, you know, they were very happy with the first four years. 

And I was hoping that they would. I feel honoured that they 

would give us one more chance, another term because, you 

know, as the member from PA [Prince Albert] had mentioned, I 

mean it’s the constituents that are important here. They’re the 

ones that put us here. They’re the ones that expect us to bring 

this stuff forward and that and, you know, that’s why we’re 

here. And I wouldn’t have been able to do that without my team 

going out door knocking every day. 

 

My constituency assistants that basically take the phone calls 

when we’re here in the legislature every day. You know, I have 

Clark, Donna. I have Lavonne there. You know, they work 

hard. We’re here every day. I’ll get out when I can and you 

check and ask them, by phone you’re dealing . . . But they’re 

the ones on the front line that are taking the calls, picking out 

the information, trying to help the constituents, didn’t matter 

who they voted for. I mean they’re just there to help who they 

can, Mr. Speaker. You know, those are priorities. 

 

You know, some of the other priorities we made is with the 

SAID program. The SAID program is an income support 

program for people with disabilities, you know. But those are 

another priority that people like, that where you’re trying to 

help the most vulnerable of our society, that’s showing that you 

care. When you make that, you know, your priority which we 

have to support low-income families, seniors with support 

programs on income programs, those are what should be the 

priority, Mr. Speaker. Those is why the reason that we’re here. 

And this budget addresses each and every one of them. You 

know that’s why this is a good budget. We’ve had four budgets 

before that, and I think each one of them was good. We tried to 

address the priorities of this province. 

 

One of them ones is, another one is keeping promises which we 

did over our last election promise. We made 100 promises — 

over 100. We kept each and every one of them. And that means 

something to the people when you go door knocking and you 

point to them down the list of the ones that we’ve made. You 

know that that’s the reasons that there’s 49 of us, here you 

know. 

 

And as the member has said, credibility, and that you’re 

working to ensure that you’re keeping the province forward, 

you know, which we have with the economy. You know this 

province is in a boom. It’s in a boom, you know, and there’s 

people coming home. There’s jobs here, and there hasn’t been 

for many years. My towns have been shrinking except for the 

last few years. The last three years they’re actually starting to 

grow again. 

 

Population is coming back. And why? Because of our working 

with the business community, working with the municipal 

governments, revenue sharing. It was huge. I was on, like I 

mentioned, on town council. And I mean we had a pretty thin 

budget and we never knew what was coming from the 

government. And a lot of times it wasn’t very much, you know. 

Now I talk to some of my councillors back home in the town I 

used to represent, I was a councillor, and I mean they actually 

have a surplus, a very large surplus. And I was like, I can 

remember struggling from year to year, you know, because we 

hardly had any money coming on revenue sharing from the 

government. 

 

And as these towns are dealing with aging infrastructure, they 

need this extra funding to come in. And now they know what 

they’re getting, and it’s been a very substantial increase since 

2007. It was a good increase again, and they know what they’re 

going to be getting next year, and in the year after that, and the 

year after that, so they can actually plan for the infrastructure 

needs as they go on. You know, those are one of the most 

important things that municipal leaders have told us. I said, you 

know . . . And that’s why they supported us wholeheartedly, 

you know. But we’ve sat down with them, what did you want, 

what did you want to . . . How did you want to move forward 

and be able to help us? And that’s one way that we could 

actually help them move forward and grow with them. 

 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2012 

You know, I can see that my time is growing short. I want to 

make sure . . . I think, from the gist of my speech, you can 

gather that I am supporting the budget and not supporting the 

amendment, Mr. Speaker. But not only, most importantly, am I 

supporting this budget, it’s the people of Arm River-Watrous 

who are supporting this budget. When I talked to them on the 

weekend, it was them people that’s supporting this budget. 

That’s the reason why I’m here and I’m supporting it. Because 

if they told me, said, you know what, this isn’t a very good 

budget, I wouldn’t be supporting it. But I never had one person 

say that it was not a good budget, and so that is why I’m 

supporting the budget for the Arm River-Watrous constituency. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 10:30 p.m., this 

House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. Tuesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 745 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 746 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 753 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 756 

  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 757 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 759 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 762 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 764 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 768 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 772 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


