




















































Hansard: April 23, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 33A  MONDAY, APRIL 23, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1177 

 April 23, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I‟m delighted 

to introduce to you 10 grade 12 students from Miller 

Comprehensive High School in Regina, 10 grade 12 law 

students and their teacher, Ms. Patrice Krueger. Mr. Speaker, I 

look forward to visiting with these students after question 

period, and I would ask all members of the Assembly to join me 

in welcoming Ms. Krueger and her students to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join in this 

introduction of this class, Mr. Speaker, because Patrice 

Krueger, their teacher, is a very good law teacher. She actually 

worked as a lawyer with me, did her articling with me a number 

of years ago and decided that her calling should be as a teacher. 

And she‟s done an excellent job at that for many, many years. 

So I want to ask all members to welcome Patrice to the 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request for 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked leave for an extended 

introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to rise today to introduce to you and through you 

to the Assembly our victims services volunteers. In recognition 

of National Victims of Crime Awareness Week, our 

government has declared April 22nd to 28th as Victims of 

Crime Awareness Week here in Saskatchewan. With that in 

mind, I would like to introduce seven victims services 

volunteers seated in your gallery. These dedicated volunteers 

work out of the northeast part of the province, the Regina 

region, and the Saskatoon victims services programs. They are 

making their 10- and 15-year anniversaries with the programs. 

 

From the northeast regional victims services we have Linda 

Walter from Tisdale joining us today. Linda, if you would 

wave. Joanne Zatylny and Val Orb are here from the Regina 

region, and from Saskatoon, Vicki Coxford who I went to high 

school with in grade 9, and it‟s very apparent the years have 

been much kinder to her than they have to me. Marla Hartman, 

Bev Kinshella, and Cecilia Robertson, also from Saskatoon, are 

all seated in the gallery. 

 

I was honoured to have lunch with these people today, to hear 

their stories, and share in their fantastic achievement. The 

experience, knowledge, and dedication they each possess is 

invaluable. I would also like to mention Cathy Chabot from the 

Northeast, Joyce Warriner from the Regina region, and 

Rosalind Regnier of Saskatoon. Although they weren‟t able to 

attend today, they are also celebrating their 10- and 15-year 

anniversaries, and we very much appreciate the work that 

they‟ve done and continue to do. 

 

We should all be thankful for these dedicated people who are so 

willing to give their time to help victims of crime navigate the 

justice system. I would ask that my guests continue their 

amazing work that they have done over the last 10 and 15 years. 

They are shining examples of how great the people of the 

province can be, and that we hope to see them all again five 

years from now to commemorate their next anniversary. I had 

indicated to them earlier that this was not a thank you; this was 

just an ongoing recognition and that they are not, under any 

circumstances, to stop working. 

 

To show the ministry‟s appreciation for their continued effort, 

each of these volunteers is presented with a gift 

commemorating their years of service. I would like to go one 

step further and show them here in the Assembly how much we 

appreciate their commitment and ongoing support of victims of 

crime. So I‟d ask all members to join me in giving a round of 

applause to these dedicated individuals and all of the nearly 300 

victim support workers and 100 board members across the 

province as we welcome them to their Assembly today. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

join in offering thanks and congratulations to these workers 

with victims in the province of Saskatchewan. It‟s very 

gratifying to see a number of people who have been working 

with the program for many years, and when you see the 

numbers involved and the community support that‟s involved, I 

know that some of them were there early on in the program 

when I was involved as a minister of Justice. And we had many 

dreams and hopes about the program, and the kind of dedication 

that you have shown has brought forward the results that we 

hoped. And I look forward to many more years of good service 

from you. So thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to call for . . . presenting a petition calling for greater 

protection for late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy‟s law. 

And we know in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, 

Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot two times and died from his 

injuries. He was working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

unprotected from intruders. 

 

We know other provinces, including British Columbia, have 

brought several safety precautions through law, including a 

requirement that workers cannot be alone during late-night, 

early morning hours, and if they are required to work, there 

must be protective barriers such as locked doors and protective 

glass. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy‟s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to both the management and 

accounting of our provincial finances. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor‟s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who 

would like the Sask Party government to support and pass a 

Saskatchewan seniors‟ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors‟ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern for our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation 

and regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of Stanley Mission. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Grade 5 and 6 Students Care for the Earth 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

celebrate an important achievement by four of Saskatchewan 

most talented grade 5 and 6 students. 

 

Our government and SaskPower believe that caring for our 

Earth is one of our greatest responsibilities. We also believe that 

every person can make a real difference in preserving the 

environment. That is why SaskPower Shand greenhouse has 

sponsored the Energy and our Environment poster contest for 

11 years now. The idea behind the contest is to get grade 5 and 

6 students to share ideas on how we can all make responsible 

environmental choices in our daily lives. This contest reminds 

all of us — kids, teachers, parents, and even members of the 

Legislative Assembly — how important it is to make good 

environmental choices each and every day. 

 

Judging by the number of entries this year, the message is 

getting through loud and clear: 670 posters were submitted from 

38 schools. It was refreshing to see so many great ideas on 

environmental awareness, and I encourage all members of this 

Assembly to make the special effort to do their part for the 

environment today and every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Families and their Pets 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has long been 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

said that families come in all shapes and sizes. For many of us, 

the family pet is an integral part of our home, a source of 

loyalty and companionship that rivals the best of our friends. 

Unfortunately for many families already burdened by the rising 

cost of living, paying for emergency vet care can prove 

impossible. This forces thousands of reluctant pet owners into 

painful decisions involving the life of their pet. Over 1,300 

healthy and treatable animals were lost last year in Regina 

alone. 

 

However I‟m pleased to rise today to acknowledge the work of 

a Saskatoon-based organization known as the Konan Koalition. 

The coalition assists individuals and families under financial 

constraints, allowing them to make animal-care decisions based 

on the needs of their animals rather than on the difficulties of 

their budgets. The organization is the first of its kind in Western 

Canada, gaining non-profit status in September 2011, and is 

already active in helping Canadian families. 

 

Dodge is a young dog who was hit by a car in June. His owners, 

a newlywed couple with a baby on the way, were assisted by a 

donation from the Konan Koalition so that Dodge could get the 

surgery he needed. Karma, an SPCA [Society for the Prevention 

of Cruelty to Animals] rescue dog, recovered following support 

from the organization and is now back at home playing with his 

owners and their children. These dogs and more are the new 

friends of Konan, the namesake being owed to a Saskatoon dog 

reunited with its family after care at the Western College of Vet 

Med. 

 

In the short period of time since its inception, the coalition has 

been recognized as an effective provider of support for animals 

and their families in need. I ask all members to join me in 

commending coalition founder Doug Ramage for his work in 

getting this organization started and to show support for a 

worthy cause. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Municipal Leaders Prepare for New Potash Mine 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this last 

Friday I had the opportunity to attend the regional planning 

summit held in Muenster. This summit focused on the 

challenges and opportunities facing the communities of east 

central Saskatchewan, resulting from what may become the 

world‟s largest potash mine at BHP Jansen Lake site, a site that 

is in the Melfort constituency, I might add. 

 

This mine will hopefully be constructed over the next three 

years and will start production with 1,045 employees. Then the 

mine will ramp up over the following 10 years with 100 miners 

per year. Part of the presentation focused on the large — huge 

— potash reserve that the province holds. This potash reserve 

will supply the world with high-grade fertilizers for hundreds of 

years. 

 

It should be noted that these municipal leaders are looking at 

this high-growth area as challenges and not problems, and in 

many cases have already come up with innovative solutions. I 

was also invited to a smaller regional meeting held later that 

evening in Watson. Mr. Speaker, Friday was a great example of 

municipalities in Saskatchewan coming together to face these 

challenges of growth head-on. And I would like all members to 

join me in congratulating the organizers of these events for their 

outstanding efforts and their leadership. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Saskatoon Educator Named Outstanding Principal 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to 

congratulate Bob Shmon, the principal of King George 

Community School in Saskatoon, for being named one of 

Canada‟s outstanding principals by The Learning Partnership. 

Bob is the only recipient from Saskatchewan to receive this 

award in 2012. 

 

This award recognizes those who communicate a compelling 

vision, nurture their staff, engage in their communities, and are 

advocates of a strong public education system. As part of the 

award, Bob and 39 other principals from across Canada 

attended a five-day management course at the Joseph L. 

Rotman School of Management, to learn strategies to help 

enhance public education at their school and in their 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bob has taught in the public school since 1984, 

and among his teaching assignments were a great six years at 

Caswell where we worked together as middle years teachers. 

Bob says the bonus in coming to King George was, and I quote, 

“an awesome staff, everyone from the teachers to the 

administration staff, the nutrition staff, and the building 

operator. You draw on all their strengths.” 

 

Learning remains the number one priority in Bob‟s mind, as 

shown by his explanation of a great program taking place at 

King George. I quote, “We are now in the second year of our 

comprehensive reading initiative, which is meant to reduce 

some of the learning disparities that occur between community 

schools and the non-community schools.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Bob Shmon for his great work as the principal at King George 

Community School, earning him the recognition as one of 

Canada‟s outstanding principals. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Country Music Awards held in Prince Albert 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, a true sense of community was 

felt at the Saskatchewan Country Music Awards, which was 

held in Prince Albert Northcote last Saturday night. These 

awards showcase the talent of our people, a talent second to 

none. My colleague from Saskatoon Fairview and I joined in 

this celebration. It would take far too long to relay to this 

legislature all the artists that contribute to our province, so I will 

highlight just three. 

 

Donny Parenteau has chosen to come back to Saskatchewan to 

live in Prince Albert. My colleague from P.A. [Prince Albert] 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

Carlton and I could not be more honoured. Donny inspires 

young minds throughout our province with his motivational 

speaking. 

 

Samara Yung is a shining example of the youth of this 

province. Performing professionally since the age of eight, she 

has showcased her talents at events such as Big Valley 

Jamboree and the Kinsmen Telemiracle. 

 

Another highly recognized country artist, Blake Emmons, went 

to Nashville 38 years ago to further his career. A few years ago, 

he chose to move back to Saskatchewan to live in Love, a small 

community on the east side of my colleague‟s constituency of 

Saskatchewan Rivers. Mr. Speaker, Blake Emmons was 

instrumental in getting Telemiracle going in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is such an honour to highlight our country music 

artists who, through their words, actions, and deeds, make our 

Saskatchewan a better community and the best place to live in 

all of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Yorkton Hosts Gym Sask Provincial Championships 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday I had 

the honour of bringing greetings on behalf of the Premier and 

the government to the Shamrock Springers of Yorkton and area 

for hosting the 2012 Gym Sask Provincial Championships, 

which represents the national trials for women and men and 

their provincial Gymnaestrada. Parents, volunteers, and 

competitors put in great amount of time to ensure that this event 

was a success. 

 

Gymnastics are a fantastic way to keep our youth active and 

promote healthy lifestyles. The sport requires physical strength, 

flexibility, agility, coordination, and balance. All three of our 

children are involved with the Springers, Mr. Speaker. They 

learn new skills, improve their physical fitness, and enjoy the 

many benefits that come from hard work and dedication to a 

chosen task. 

 

The competitors deserve congratulations for their commitment 

and hard work. The lessons and life skills they acquire through 

their participation in gymnastics and other activities will serve 

them well for their entire lives. The winning participants in this 

great event move on to the Western regional championships in 

British Columbia. Our government sees the value in activities 

and recently expanded the active families benefit to make 

involvement in sport more affordable for Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

I would encourage all members of the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating our Saskatchewan athletes and continuing to 

encourage healthy living, dedication, and commitment to sport. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Child Welfare Transformation Strategy 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 

the House to talk about the Government of Saskatchewan‟s next 

steps in moving forward on our child welfare transformation 

strategy. Our child welfare transformation strategy is guiding 

our efforts to change the child welfare system on the themes of 

working differently, prevention, and renewal. 

 

Reviewing and updating our legislation is a critical step in 

renewing our system. I am excited that we are moving forward 

with our partners in this work. 

 

Throughout April and May, the Ministry of Social Services will 

hold initial discussions with its partners, the FSIN [Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and Métis 

Nation-Saskatchewan and other key stakeholders. The purpose 

of these early meetings will be to review the child welfare 

review panel‟s recommendations in the context of legislative 

renewal. This will determine the potential scope of the 

legislative recommendations. Any revisions to legislation will 

take into account changes in society as well as in child welfare 

practices that have occurred since the legislation was last 

amended. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislative review addresses one of 12 

recommendations provided by the Saskatchewan child welfare 

review panel to make fundamental change to the child welfare 

system. This will mean real results for government and our 

partners in the future. This update is indeed a success we can be 

proud of. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Conference Sponsorship 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday 

we asked why the government was spending in excess of 

$100,000 sponsoring the WCIT [World Congress on 

Information Technology] 2012 out-of-province conference 

taking place in Quebec. In fact the government has now 

revealed that SaskTel International alone spent $75,000. When I 

asked the minister last week, he claimed that he wasn‟t aware of 

the amount or even the sponsorship, Mr. Speaker. This isn‟t a 

couple of thousand dollars. It‟s 75,000 taxpayer dollars being 

spent on this out-of-province conference. How could the 

minister, who‟s charged with oversight of this major Crown 

corporation, not know this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 

member asked questions, four questions I believe it was, with 

respect to this area. SaskTel International sponsored $75,000 to 

provide the company with the opportunity to market their 

software and consulting services to potential clientele 

throughout the world. This is nothing unusual. They take part in 

these types of events on a number of occasions. 

 

Enterprise sponsored $35,000, SaskPower, $25,000 for areas of 

responsibility under their corporations. Again this is nothing 

unusual. However, I will say this, that the government is 

reviewing this sponsorship policy, and it will look at better 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

coordinating between the Crown corporations through CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] in the 

future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this seems like a very 

hefty price tag for taxpayers, with questionable value for 

Saskatchewan people. Some say it looks like nothing more than 

expensive, extravagant ministerial and executive jet-setting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how many ministers, Crown CEOs [chief 

executive officer], executive managers, and staff are going to 

this conference, and what will the cost be to the people of this 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, again I would say that this is 

nothing unusual. This was done under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. It is being done under the Sask Party 

administration. This is a very large IT [information technology] 

conference — some 3,000 delegates, 80 different countries will 

be represented there. All of the Crown corporations will have 

opportunity to sell either software or other areas that they work 

within. This is something that is a very, very large conference, 

an IT conference, that of course SaskTel and other Crown 

corporations in the IT field would find very valuable in terms of 

selling the products that they develop. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, they‟re interesting 

answers. And when we look at the website, there‟s no 

sponsorship by other major telecoms. There‟s no sponsorship 

by other power companies. There‟s no sponsorship by other 

jurisdictions other than the host jurisdiction. 

 

We see SaskTel International spending $75,000. Late Thursday 

the government finally revealed that in addition to that 

spending, SaskPower is of course spending $25,000 and 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is spending an additional $35,000. 

Last week all three ministers took notice of this question, 

claiming they had no information on the spending, money being 

spent by Crown corporations that they‟re responsible for, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If the ministers responsible didn‟t know about the pricey 

sponsorship, who exactly authorized in excess of $100,000 of 

taxpayers‟ money to be spent on this out-of-province 

conference in Quebec? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, of course the member‟s 

question last week was a specific amount that the Crown 

corporations were involved in. We‟ve given you that amount: 

$75,000 in the case of SaskTel International; Enterprise 

Saskatchewan was $35,000 that had been contributed two years 

ago; and SaskPower‟s was $25,000. You wanted a specific 

number from each one of the corporations. We have provided 

you with that knowledge. Again as I‟ve said, the government is 

going to take a look at this to better coordinate between the 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that sponsorships 

of this type are done in an appropriate fashion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there‟s over $135,000 of 

taxpayers‟ dollars going to sponsor this out-of-province 

conference in Quebec at the same time as rates are going up 

here in Saskatchewan and a local economic development 

conference, SEDA [Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Association], is being cancelled due to a shortage of funding. 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t add up. It doesn‟t make sense. We‟re 

talking about well over $100,000 of which ministers claim they 

had no understanding. It‟s obvious that value-for-dollar analysis 

simply wasn‟t done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how is this serving the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people whom quite simply deserve better? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, indeed the people of 

Saskatchewan are owed an explanation. We have provided that 

explanation. And they are, they should, and they do expect us to 

do better in terms of accountability. 

 

If we look at your track record, the NDP‟s track record over the 

last number of years, Mr. Speaker, we can go through them if 

you like. In South America, in Guyana, you lost $2 million 

there. In NST [NST Network Services of Chicago] in Chicago, 

the US [United States] Midwest Fibre Optics company — 

remember that? — $16 million lost there. If you want to look in 

Newfoundland on a cable company down there, $9.4 million 

lost there. We can go through the list if you like, but it adds up 

to an awful lot more money than $100,000 as sponsorships that 

the three Crown corporations put forward in this event. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Green Rebate Program 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know from the 

budget the Sask Party has cut every green program they could. 

It seems the environment takes a back seat to more politicians. 

 

Now we know from the latest SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] report that another shoe has dropped. The Sask Party 

has eliminated the rebate on auto insurance for eco-friendly 

hybrid and fuel-efficient vehicles. The program was immensely 

popular, helping thousands of people save a little bit of money 

on their premiums for driving an environmentally friendly 

vehicle. To the Minister Responsible for SGI: why is the Sask 

Party government pulling yet another green incentive? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of CIC. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, SGI has recently come 

forward with their annual report. We‟ve also recently come 

forward with a rate increase, Mr. Speaker. SGI is accountable to 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

the driving public. We have to ensure that we have rates that 

adequately cover the costs of accidents, of injuries, Mr. 

Speaker. And before we would come forward to raise rates on 

the driving public, Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure that we have 

the appropriate spending.  

 

And the green rebate program for high efficiency automobiles, 

Mr. Speaker, was something that got the ball rolling. The 

people of Saskatchewan, you see very many high efficiency 

vehicles in Saskatchewan. And those vehicles, Mr. Speaker . . . 

We have a very big province. People are driving long distances. 

I think that for individuals that are looking to see those savings, 

to be responsible, they‟re investing in those, Mr. Speaker, 

themselves. 

 

SGI, Mr. Speaker, will continue to ensure that we have 

affordable rates for the driving public here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government certainly didn‟t talk about this in the last election. 

In fact along with their desire for more politicians, I guess it 

was something that slipped their mind. 

 

In the Sask Party 2011 platform, it says they‟ll work with the 

Crowns to help Saskatchewan go green. But it‟s clear they 

meant something entirely different. In 2011 approximately 

14,000 people received this rebate. The year before saw 10,750 

people receive it. And nowhere in last year‟s release did they 

mention it was the last year of the program — nowhere in the 

release, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why is every decent program on the 

environment torn up under the Sask Party to make room for 

millions more on spending more on more politicians? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the success of this 

program that the member opposite has just pointed out in clear 

terms, those vehicles are still on the road today, Mr. Speaker. 

The emission savings that were captured with the incentive put 

forward by this government over the first four years of the 

program, those vehicles are still on the road today. And the 

success of these vehicles, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t . . . I would 

expect that the people that are driving them today will, when 

they purchase their next car, may make the same decision. 

 

And from SGI‟s point of view, we will continue to ensure that 

we have cost-effective rates for the driving public, and that 

we‟re responsible to ensure that our rates fairly represent, and 

that there‟s an appropriate reserve in place should there be 

accidents, injuries, Mr. Speaker, and SGI will maintain a 

healthy balance in their stabilization fund. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year, the 

Minister of SGI said, “It‟s very encouraging to see the number 

of „green‟ vehicle owners receiving a rebate has grown each 

year.” He added, “It is good for our environment and it is good 

for the economy.” 

 

If a program meets the criteria of being affordable, good for the 

environment, and good for the economy, surely the Sask Party 

only has an ideological axe to grind. This rebate has helped ten 

thousands of people, tens of thousands of people make the 

greener choice to drive an environmentally friendly vehicle. To 

the minister: why is the Sask Party government axing it to make 

way for more politicians? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 

member opposite who makes the assertion that this is an 

ideological change, I would remind the member opposite that it 

was in fact this government, in our platform in the 2007-11, that 

came forward with this green rebate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I stand by my comments last year that I am 

very encouraged that people have recognized the value of this, 

that people in Saskatchewan are driving greener vehicles, Mr. 

Speaker, and that those vehicles are still on the road today and 

that the savings to those drivers from driving a vehicle that is 

marked fuel efficient, Mr. Speaker, is something that will 

benefit our environment for this year and for many years to 

come as those vehicles stay in rotation in Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This policy change 

puts us completely out of step with other provinces. Manitoba 

has a $2,000 rebate for hybrid electric vehicles. BC [British 

Columbia] exempts the PST [provincial sales tax] on their 

purchase. Ontario and Quebec give substantial rebates for 

hybrid purchases. Even in Alberta, even in Alberta the Wildrose 

Party is in favour of consumer rebates for hybrid vehicles. 

We‟re out of step with the direction of the country, Mr. 

Speaker, especially with a province like ours where our people 

have to drive long distances to get from place to place, and 

actually the minister had mentioned that. 

 

Why is the Sask Party government making it harder for the 

middle class to make responsible, environmentally friendly 

choices for their families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my earlier 

answer, Saskatchewan has recently gone before the rate review 

panel, asking for a slight increase to ensure that we have an 

appropriate reserve in our Auto Fund. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can report to the member opposite that 

Saskatchewan has some of if not the lowest rates for driving in 

all of Canada, making it the most affordable place for 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

middle-class people in Saskatchewan to drive vehicles, Mr. 

Speaker. She wants to compare it to other provinces though, 

Mr. Speaker. I think that this is a very apt comparison. 

Saskatchewan is the only province with a balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker. The other provinces have gone forward with large 

deficits. In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have a balanced 

budget. We have responsible rates in our auto and driving rates, 

Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to be responsible to the 

citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Environmental Assessment Reviews 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Conservative government is 

significantly reducing federal environmental oversight of 

natural resource developments and other projects by 

consolidating assessments into three departments, eliminating 

reviews for small projects, and handling more regulatory 

responsibility to the provinces. 

 

Environmental assessment reviews are the main line of defence 

that protect our water, soil, and air from contamination. For 

example the Vale mine and other proposed potash projects will 

have a significant impact on water in this province and deserve 

a rigorous review. 

 

To the minister: how will his ministry handle the federal 

off-loading of this responsibility for assessments? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

let me just begin by saying that, that projects like that that the 

member raised will get a rigorous review, environmental 

assessment review in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in fact, the Ministry of Environment had the 

opportunity to present to the House of Commons committee on 

the environment in November where we put forward our 

support of the principle of one project, one assessment which 

recommends . . . We recommended to the federal government, 

acknowledgement that the provincial environmental assessment 

process is equivalent or better than the federal process for 

projects on provincial land, that we get a blanket exclusion from 

the federal triggers for a federal assessment, and bilateral 

agreements for environmental co-operation during this process 

that might involve other federal agencies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be following up with the federal minister as 

to the exact details. We‟re still waiting for the federal Bill to be 

introduced that will implement these changes, but in principle, 

Mr. Speaker, we support these changes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The federal 

government is also looking at limiting environmental groups 

from intervening in regulatory hearings for major natural 

resources projects in an effort to shortcut reviews. This will be 

included in the new and amended federal legislation the 

minister referred to, which will also limit participation in future 

regulatory hearings to only those people directly affected by 

projects, according to government officials, although details are 

still to come. 

 

To the minister: does this government also plan to limit 

environmental groups‟ meaningful participation in the 

environmental assessment process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, directly to the member‟s 

question: Mr. Speaker, no we don‟t. We‟re waiting to see what 

the federal requirements will be in terms of gaining equivalency 

with the federal government. We have a 30-day public review 

where we accept submissions from anybody. We also have the 

ability, I have the ability, Mr. Speaker, to extend that an 

additional 30 days, which we have done on several occasions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m quite surprised at the line of questioning 

because ministers of the Environment in Canada have been 

active in lobbying for the one project-one assessment for a 

number of years, Mr. Speaker. I read from a document from the 

Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment with respect 

to a proposed one project-one assessment approach, the CCME 

[Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment] — that‟s 

the Canadian Environment ministers task force of officials from 

across the provinces — to look at, and I quote, “. . . options to 

streamline an approach for EA for projects subject to 

provincial/territorial and federal environmental assessments” 

that are consistent with the one project, one EA [environmental 

assessment] process approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only was that signed off on by the Leader of 

the Opposition when he was in environment, but from the small 

group of officials that were tasked to look at this, Mr. Speaker. 

He authorized Saskatchewan Environment officials to be on 

that task group. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These questions 

aren‟t about the one project-one assessment approach; in fact, 

that makes sense. This isn‟t what the questions are about. 

 

The Premier has said, “We want to make sure we have a 

rigorous environmental assessment process.” But the Sask Party 

government‟s record tells an entirely different story, Mr. 

Speaker. The Sask Party government has slashed funding for 

industrial development protection by 49 per cent. With projects 

like the Vale mine and others, the province needs reassurance 

that rigorous environmental reviews are in place. The Premier 

says he‟s in favour of the harmonized approach, but he hasn‟t 

backed it up with proper support. 

 

To the minister: where is the rigorous protection of our 

environment that the Premier has committed to? How can 

Saskatchewan people have confidence in the environmental 

assessment process when the government continues to slash 

funding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

member‟s question and the assertions, that is complete 

nonsense, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we undertook a 

reorganization of some of the branches of the Ministry of 

Environment to deal with this, including building a technical 

resources branch that takes part in the environment assessment 

process. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have added more than twice 

the number of environmental assessment branch employees, 

Mr. Speaker, that look at the environmental assessment. So we 

have doubled, more than doubled the number of people. 

 

And another important step that we took, Mr. Speaker, under 

the members opposite when environmental assessment was 

begun under the former government, when staff was assigned, 

there was no backup staff assigned so that if somebody for 

whatever reason had to take sick leave or had to, Mr. Speaker 

. . . or couldn‟t fulfill those functions, we now on every 

environmental assessment assign backup staff so that the 

process continues forward so that we have timely reviews, Mr. 

Speaker, and proper reviews of all projects. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Electoral Representation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier introduced Bill 36, 

which is going to remove young people under the age of 18 

from the equation that will be used to draw up the new electoral 

boundaries. Bill 36 also adds three more politicians to the 

Legislative Assembly at the cost of millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been receiving petitions, electronically and 

otherwise, and some we‟ve presented here, but a common 

response is this: “No extra MLAs are needed. Health care is 

more important and so is education. No one but the Sask Party 

supports this Bill.” 

 

My question to the Premier: will he admit he‟s made a mistake 

and pull back Bill 36? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve answered this 

question before. In 1979 the number of constituencies was set at 

65 — 63 in the South, three in the North. At that time it was 

based on the voters list. In 1987 the number of seats was moved 

to 66 seats with seats set at 29 urban and 35 rural and two in the 

North, and that time based on the voters list. In 1991 it stayed at 

66 seats but reverted to 64 and two, once again based on the 

voters list. In 1993 the number of seats was reduced to 58 — 56 

plus the two. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen a healthy, robust increase in our 

population and, Mr. Speaker, we feel it is an appropriate, 

reasonable, and fair thing to do to ensure that the citizens of our 

province have a good opportunity and good access to their 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, for weeks we‟ve been debating 

Bill 36, and in fact there was an extensive debate on this Bill 

last week. Our office has received numerous letters and 

telephone calls asking why the Sask Party government is 

excluding young people under the age of 18 from the electoral 

boundary calculations and why the Sask Party government is 

spending millions of dollars on more politicians. A quote from 

one of the petitions says this: “Lessen the number of politicians 

and invest in the people, for crying out loud.” Mr. Speaker, 

even the Children‟s Advocate has weighed in on Bill 36, saying 

it‟s probably a violation of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

This afternoon we will be putting forward a reasoned 

amendment to Bill 36. My question to the Premier: will the 

government support this amendment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks 

about saving money. Mr. Speaker, we believe in that as well. 

Mr. Speaker, since our government came into office in 2007, 

we have reduced the money spent on communications by in 

excess of $5 million a year and the amount of money spent by 

cabinet ministers‟ travel by three and a half millions dollars a 

year. Mr. Speaker, that is eight and a half million dollars per 

year that we are saving since we have formed government, and 

that is an ongoing saving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier made a commitment that there would 

be sufficient savings found in the upcoming budgets that there 

would be no additional costs to taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, we are 

going ahead with that. There will be no costs until after the next 

election after the redistribution takes place. We are doing this in 

a fair, competent, professional manner, Mr. Speaker. We want 

to ensure that we have well-balanced, reasonable sized 

constituencies where people are treated fairly and appropriately. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, common sense Saskatchewan 

people have listened to the argument that the member makes 

here and that the Premier has made other places and say, this 

doesn‟t make any sense. Adding three more members to this 

legislature and having them here for years is going to cost 

millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, page 58 of the 2005 Sask Party policy guide says, 

“The Saskatchewan Party holds as one of its eight guiding 

principles the belief in democratic reform to make government 

more responsive to the people it serves.” Mr. Speaker, that same 

page also says in paragraph DM05-4, and this paragraph 

specifically states, “A Saskatchewan Party government will 

implement free votes except on the Budget and Speech from the 

Throne in the legislature so that MLAs can represent the view 

of their constituents.” 

 

Will the Premier let the other 47 members on that side of the 

House take a free vote today? Will he let them represent the true 

views of their constituents? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if this matter comes to a 

vote today, and I hope it does come to a vote today, I can assure 

you that each and every member on this side of the House is 

going to be voting in favour of this Bill and against the 

amendments that are put forward. Mr. Speaker, we want to 

ensure that we have good, adequate, and fair representation. Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Athabasca has 6,511 constituents; 

the member from Cumberland, 8,726, the member from 

Saskatoon Centre, 7,000; and Saskatoon Southeast, 16,343 

voters. I want to look those people in the eye at the end of this 

process and say, your vote counts as much as somebody else‟s. 

We are not counting young people because they can‟t vote. We 

will apportion election costs on the basis of voters, and that is 

how we are going to do it. And that is a right, fair, and 

competent way to do it, and those members ought support it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Graduate Retention Program 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill 42, The Graduate Retention Program 

Amendment Act be now introduced and read for a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration has moved first reading of Bill 

No. 42, The Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

response to your question, for when shall the Bill be read a 

second time, I‟ll just say the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 43 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 43, 

The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 43, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. When shall this Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time, and on the proposed amendment moved by Mr. 

Vermette.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m glad 

to stand up again and continue this debate, but I know in just a 

few minutes we want to go forward into this discussion. But I 

just want to review the amendment that we proposed. The 

reasoned amendment was to have a second look at Bill 36. We 

think that there was some fundamental flaws in it, that it did not 

go to, it was not presented to the public during the campaign. It 

did catch many people off guard and I think many people think 

that we should have had a chance during the election in 2011 to 

express an opinion. 

 

The idea around the fact that the population has grown has 

caught nobody surprised. We all knew that the population was 

growing here in Saskatchewan. And the time for this . . . And it 

has been growing since I think 2006, is when we started turning 

the corner around — maybe even earlier. And so it‟s by no 

surprise that we knew that we would have more people. And as 

the Minister of Justice has said that there is great variation, as 

you have, between different ridings. But we know we have a 

Boundaries Commission. And it was announced last Friday the 

Boundaries Commission was set, and we know who‟s on it, and 

we know that work that it‟s going to do. So we proposed this 

amendment and it says, and I read: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 

36, An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993 because [first] 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining the constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan, who deserve to be counted to determine 

the representation within this Legislative Assembly; 

and further, 

 

The Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

So this is about elections today, and it‟s about elections into the 

future. And we believe, we fundamentally believe that when 

you have a representative democracy like we do, that everyone 

counts all the time. We do a census, and one of the reasons to 

do the census is to get that number, is to get that number. And 

so that‟s hugely important. And we just fundamentally believe 

that it‟s inappropriate to be adding three more MLAs. There is 

no point to that. There is many other choices that we could be 

making. 

 

And we think that we‟ve seen even questions today about the 

green vehicle rebate or discount that SGI used to get is no 

longer available, and we think that‟s wrong. We think there is a 

way to encourage people to get to seeing the wisdom of having 

a hybrid vehicle. In fact in our family, we have two hybrid 

vehicles. We think it‟s the right thing. One is actually too old to 

qualify any more, so I was actually hoping that it would extend 

to 2000. And here we lose both ways, by having an older hybrid 

and a younger one. So I‟m particularly disappointed. I know 

many people across the province today, and I know the minister 

will be getting many letters on this. I think this is a huge . . . I 

think this is a significant issue. I won‟t put it in the huge basket, 

but I know I‟ll be writing a letter. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a critical piece and I think that 

we need to take some time, and that‟s why we put forward this 

reasoned amendment. And I hope that the folks over there will 

have a free vote, and we can see the true measure of what these 

people‟s been getting. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve 

outlined our case before you, we think that we should support 

this amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — On the proposed motion by the Minister of 

Justice and Attorney General: 

 

That Bill No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto moved by the member for 

Cumberland: 

 

That all the words after the word “That” be deleted and 

the following be substituted therefor: 

 

“this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 

36, An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993 because 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan, who deserve to be counted to 

determine the representation within this Legislative 

Assembly; and further 

 

The Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three, which is an 

unnecessary increase in politicians to represent the 

people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Recorded division. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:24 until 14:52.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the House is the main 

motion on Bill No. 36 and the proposed amendment. Will the 

House take the question as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour of the amendment please 

rise. 

 

[Yeas — 9] 

 

Nilson Forbes Belanger 

Wotherspoon Broten Chartier 

Sproule McCall Vermette 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed to the amendment please 

rise. 

 

[Nays — 45] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Norris 

Draude Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Huyghebaert Toth Bradshaw 

Reiter Duncan Ross 

McMillan Harpauer Harrison 

Wyant Hickie Elhard 

Hart Parent Brkich 

Stewart Ottenbreit Weekes 

Campeau Heppner Wilson 

Michelson Kirsch Merriman 

Doke Cox Makowsky 

Jurgens Steinley Doherty 

Lawrence Tochor Moe 

Marchuk Phillips Docherty 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 9; 

those opposed, 45. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment is defeated. Is the House 

ready for the main question? I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 36 was introduced 

in this legislature without any discussion in the election, with no 

mention in the Throne Speech, and as far as we can tell after 

quite a number of weeks, no consultation with the people of the 

province. Mr. Speaker, that‟s fundamentally the wrong way to 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

amend legislation that relates to the democratic process. Any 

other jurisdiction in Canada that would look at changing the 

democratic process for their province or their territory would 

end up going to the people at various points to make sure that 

everybody has a chance to give their comments.  

 

Now we know from the responses that we‟ve been receiving on 

a number of levels that adding three more MLAs and adding the 

millions of dollars extra that those MLAs will cost over the 

number of years is not the priority of the people of the province. 

And more importantly, not including those people under age 18 

in your calculations as to how you set up constituency 

boundaries is sending the wrong message to young people and 

to families about the worth of their children. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been getting comments from right 

across the province about this. And it‟s very interesting how 

direct people are. I‟m going to make a few quotations from 

some of the comments that we‟ve been receiving online at our 

NDP caucus website. From Prince Albert: “Amazing how the 

Sask Party can cut so many social issues and jobs but turn 

around and give themselves raises and add more positions — 

sickening.” Mr. Speaker, there‟s a comment from Regina: “The 

youth of this province are our future and deserve to be 

counted.” Mr. Speaker, there‟s a very clear plea from Regina: 

“No extra MLAs, please.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a comment from Saskatoon: “As a mother 

of three young children, I find it disgraceful that the 

Saskatchewan Party feels that they don‟t count. Many of my 

concerns are about things that affect my children. They count.” 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a quote or there‟s a message from 

somebody in Regina: “Premier Wall, trying to rig our 

democracy to suit your political ambitions is not acceptable. 

Kids count and 58 politicians is more than enough.” Another 

one from Regina: “Three more politicians and five bucks more 

per medication equal one party I will never be able to vote for 

again.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are people all over the province sending in 

comments. And I know that the members opposite appear to 

laugh about this. I‟m not sure if they were laughing when they 

were talking to their constituents over the last few weeks. But 

it‟s very clear to me, when I have been going out and about in 

Saskatchewan, that I‟ve had many Sask Party members who 

come to me and say that they are ashamed of the Premier and 

what he‟s done on this particular Bill and on some other things. 

And it‟s a question of being ashamed about going forward with 

something like this in the context of so many people who are 

losing out in other areas. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the members opposite better be 

very careful about laughing about this particular issue because 

it‟s not a laughing matter. It goes right to the fundamental 

nature of our legislature, of our democracy. And any time that 

people treat that with disdain or disregard, that‟s a sign that 

they‟re no longer fit to be in this place. They‟re no longer fit to 

be members of this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that what has happened over a number of 

years, but especially in this last six-month period, is that the 

Premier and his 48 other members have decided that they have 

such an overwhelming majority that they can do anything with 

a complete disregard for the opposition but, more importantly, 

with a complete disregard for the people of the province.  

 

Common sense Saskatchewan people say, that‟s enough. We‟re 

not going to allow this any more. We‟re not willing to live in a 

province where a group of women and men who are elected let 

it go to their head and let it go to doing things which are not 

appropriate. Mr. Speaker, Bill 36 is a Bill like that, that‟s not 

appropriate. And moreover it spends money in a place where 

we don‟t need to spend money, and it doesn‟t recognize that 

this money can be used in other places. The responses of the 

Premier to say that, oh we can figure out how to get other 

money — that just doesn‟t wash. People don‟t understand that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some other reasons this Bill has 

some difficulties, and they relate to our Canadian Constitution 

and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. And the Children‟s 

Advocate has been the person who‟s been most vocal about 

this, but others have raised this concern as well to me because 

they know I‟m a lawyer. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re not certain 

what kinds of challenges there may be to this legislation 

because it relates to, once again, fundamental issues of 

democracy. And what we‟re concerned about is that the 

members opposite have not consulted with the people. The 

Premier has not put in place appropriate policy consultation to 

allow this matter to be dealt with. And any time that you come 

forward with legislation like that, it ends up being subject to 

review. 

 

Now we know that the labour legislation that this government 

was so all fired to pass has now received a major setback from a 

very reasoned judge and that it‟s costing the province a lot of 

money in the courts. But more importantly, it‟s costing money 

in the economy because of the uncertainty that it creates. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, this type of legislation as well causes difficulties 

in that area. 

 

So I think the final or fundamental point I want to make is that 

this Bill doesn‟t meet the common sense test, the Saskatchewan 

ordinary perspective test. Because at a time when government‟s 

cutting money, we‟re adding more politicians. So people are 

losing their jobs because they say there‟s not enough money to 

do certain things, and they‟re adding more politicians. They‟re 

cutting back in the archives, adding more politicians. They‟re 

cutting days where our citizens can go to museums and adding 

more politicians. We‟re cutting services in a whole number of 

areas, and we‟re adding more politicians. We‟re adding cost to 

seniors around their health care, around their drug costs, and 

we‟re adding more politicians. Students are having to pay 

substantial increases in tuition. Same time we‟re adding more 

politicians at the cost of millions of dollars. 

 

The common sense question is, where are the government‟s 

priorities? Who is making these choices? The only answer is the 

Premier of the province and his executive group. And we today 

ask the question, would the members opposite follow 

Saskatchewan Party policy and have a free vote which will 

allow for the members to speak about this? And, Mr. Speaker, 

we saw the result. We know their constituents will now be able 

to see on the record the names of every person who stood up 

and voted to defeat the amendment. Mr. Speaker, once again 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

what we‟re saying is that the common sense perspective does 

not justify this Bill going forward. 

 

Now we‟ve been taking every step we can to give the 

government enough time to slow down the process or stop the 

process and send it back to the people for consultation. For one 

day we thought maybe they had seen the light and given this a 

little more time. But clearly that was a one-day reprieve, and 

here we are again, Mr. Speaker. So I think that there‟s still a 

major question around the consultation that hasn‟t happened 

with the people of Saskatchewan. And so, Mr. Speaker, I am 

going to propose a motion as follows. The motion I‟m going to 

make is this: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting all of the words 

after the word “That” and substituting the following: 

 

Bill No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries Amendment 

Act, 2011 be not now read a second time, but that it be 

read a second time this day six months hence. 

 

So moved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 

Leader: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “That” and substituting the following: 

 

Bill No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries Amendment 

Act, 2011 be not now read a second time, but it be read a 

second time this day six months hence. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say 

it‟s a pleasure, but it‟s not a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, because of 

the nature of the Bill that we are discussing today and the steps 

that members opposite are trying to take here with respect to 

our democratic system. But it is important, Mr. Speaker, to 

enter in on debate on this piece of legislation, and I am happy to 

speak in support of the hoist motion that was put forward by the 

Leader of the Opposition when we look at this piece of 

legislation. The legislation, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the 

Official Opposition was speaking about is Bill No. 36. This Act, 

Mr. Speaker, is called The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we speak to different types of 

legislation here in the House, there are of course different types 

of Bills that we speak to. There are those types of Bills, Mr. 

Speaker, that are generally housekeeping in nature, and on a 

routine basis we have that type of legislation come forward 

from ministers opposite, from ministers who through the 

departments have looked at existing pieces of legislation and it 

has been determined that changes are required. And those types 

of changes, Mr. Speaker, can be for a variety of reasons. 

Sometimes there has been a change in practice.  

 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, existing legislation was not a 

permanent solution but was a temporary fix, so to speak. I can 

think of the example last week speaking to some legislation 

around crop insurance that the Minister of Agriculture has 

brought forward to the House. And in that case, it was a 

situation where the piece of legislation that the minister was 

bringing forward was a more permanent legislative solution to 

what had been in place already. 

 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, the legislation is brought forward by 

members opposite is more significant. And I think when we‟re 

looking at Bill No. 36, this is most certainly a piece of 

legislation that is more significant. And I think it is significant, 

Mr. Speaker, because it misses the mark in so many important 

areas, and not only missing the mark, Mr. Speaker, but I think it 

works against the ideals and the principles that we hold near 

and dear to us as participants in the democratic process. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, it weakens the sound reputation that we 

have here in the province. And I think, Mr. Speaker, it weakens 

the signals that we send to all Saskatchewan people here in the 

province. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, when I think of all Saskatchewan 

people — that includes those that live in urban centres, those 

that live in rural areas, those that live in the North, Mr. Speaker, 

those that live in the South, those individuals, Mr. Speaker, who 

may be very young, just born, those that would be a bit older, 

perhaps as a child, a bit older yet as a teenager, into middle age 

and right up to seniors and golden years, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

important that the pieces of legislation that we put forward do in 

fact speak to the interests and the concerns of everyone in the 

province. And I think that is very important to keep in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the length of this particular Bill No. 36, the Bill 

that is addressed in the hoist motion put forward by the Leader 

of the Opposition, is not that long in actual content. It‟s a one 

pager, Bill No. 36, Mr. Speaker, with just a few sections. And 

this was a piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that members 

opposite chose to brought forward. I don‟t know who exactly 

was pushing it. That‟ll be a topic of comments later on this 

afternoon that I will make. But, Mr. Speaker, we know that the 

leadership opposite decided this was the right approach to take 

for whatever reason, and so they brought this forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the actual piece of legislation, I‟ll read it now so 

that those at home have a sense of the length of it and what it is 

like.  

 

The short title:  

 

1 This Act may be cited as The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011.  

 

So the short title, self-explanatory there, Mr. Speaker. The next 

component:  

 

2 The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993 is amended in 

the manner set forth in this Act. 

 

Section 2 amended [Mr. Speaker] 

 

3 Clause 2(k) is amended by adding “that is 18 years 

of age or older” after “total population of 

Saskatchewan”. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this component of the legislation as brought 

forward here is one of the most important parts of this brief 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

piece of legislation. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that when 

making the calculations for constituency populations, members 

opposite are suggesting that those who are under 18 years of 

age should no longer count. And I will have more to say about 

that, Mr. Speaker, in the minutes ahead. 

 

The next component, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Section 3 amended 

4 Subsection 3(2) is amended by adding “total” 

before “population”. 

 

Section 12 amended 

5 Clause 12 (2)(b) is amended by striking out “56” and 

substituting “59”. 

 

So this, Mr. Speaker, is the second main component of the 

legislation, the major change that we see members opposite 

wanting to bring forward and that is changing the number of 

individuals in the southern part of the province, Mr. Speaker, 

from being 56 MLAs to 59. And that, Mr. Speaker, is one of the 

most significant changes along with the 18 years of age issue. 

 

And this, Mr. Speaker, is as the Leader of the Official 

Opposition mentioned, is one of the issues that has people 

scratching their head wondering why on earth members 

opposite, at a time when they are making decisions about cuts, 

in a time when they say they‟re talking about the best interests 

of Saskatchewan people over the long term, would choose that 

there should be more politicians in the province, especially, Mr. 

Speaker, when we look at the number of individuals that MLAs 

in Saskatchewan represent compared to other provincial 

jurisdictions. 

 

Section 13 amended is 

6 Subsection . . . [3](2) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(2) The constituency population quotient is to be 

calculated in accordance with the following formula: 

 

CPQ = TP - NP 

 59 

 

where: 

 

CPQ is the constituency population quotient; 

TP is the total population; and 

NP is the northern population”. 

 

So this formula here, Mr. Speaker, is basically the means by 

which the populations in each constituency would be calculated, 

what the appropriate amount would be for each constituency. 

And individuals may be wondering the nature of the TP minus 

NP, that‟s the total population minus the northern population, 

Mr. Speaker. And that consideration there is in order to allow 

for proper representation in the North with respect to some of 

the traditional rules that have been in place, recognizing the 

huge area of the North and the issues that are there. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The next section, Mr. Speaker, is the: 

Transitional—Commission to prepare reports based on 

amendments 

 

7 Notwithstanding any provision of The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, 1993, if a Constituency Boundaries 

Commission has been established pursuant to that Act 

before the coming into force of this Act, the 

Constituency Boundaries Commission shall prepare its 

interim and final reports based on the amendments 

made by this Act. 

 

And no. 8, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Coming into force 

 

8 This Act comes into force on assent. 

 

And that of course is when the Lieutenant Governor signs off 

on the legislation, it having been passed through the different 

stages that are required here in the House and in the committee. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important to mention The Constituency 

Boundaries Act and the Constituency Boundaries Commission 

because, Mr. Speaker, this is the group, it has been the 

traditional practice over the years . . . it‟s the traditional process, 

I should say, that evaluates changes that are in order and 

necessary for constituency boundaries to better reflect 

population changes that may have occurred over the previous 

years. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a process that occurs regularly 

and is an appropriate process and a good process, and one that 

has worked. 

 

And I will make more extended comments on this issue, Mr. 

Speaker, but this is one of the issues I think where members 

opposite, especially the Justice minister, is trying to do a little 

bit of a spin that would serve their own interests with respect to 

defending this poorly thought-out position, in stating that 

adding more politicians and decreasing the age to 18 is actually 

about ensuring that there are an equal number of people in 

constituencies. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a very clearly a mechanism already 

in place to make those kinds of changes that are needed as 

certain areas, certain communities may grow. Some may shrink. 

Those are the types of adjustments that regularly occur that 

ought to occur, Mr. Speaker. And for the minister to say that we 

need three more politicians in the province in order for that to 

work doesn‟t make sense and in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, is an 

attempt to provide a little bit of interference on the issue as 

opposed to truly speaking about members‟ opposite true 

motives as to why they want this piece of legislation. But I will 

expand more on that in the minutes ahead. 

 

While the actual piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is quite brief 

— a one pager, as I said — it‟s important. And this is a good 

lesson, I think, always for opposition members reviewing 

legislation or government backbenchers reviewing legislation or 

those in the public who are reviewing legislation: it‟s often, Mr. 

Speaker, the short, succinct pieces of legislation, the ones that 

aren‟t very long, which at first glance may appear not to be that 

significant. It‟s always so important to look closely at them 

because they can tell a very different story, a more complicated 

story and in some cases, such as the one with Bill No. 36, a 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

troubling story, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the actions that 

members opposite want to do and want to put forward. 

 

The explanatory notes that are provided after the minister‟s 

second reading speech — or I guess provided when the 

legislation was presented to the Assembly, not simply when the 

speech is provided by the minister explaining why he thinks 

that this is the right way to go — are a bit longer and, for the 

most part, Mr. Speaker, provide an explanation similar to what I 

have provided as I‟ve gone through the different components of 

Bill No. 36 and the different sections that are there. But for 

individuals who want to have a more in-depth understanding of 

the minister‟s and the government‟s rationale for making this 

type of change, they may want to review the explanatory notes 

for a better explanation. 

 

They may also, Mr. Speaker, want to go to the minister‟s 

second reading speech, which would have been delivered in this 

Assembly, as all second reading speeches are done. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that too is an important opportunity and a helpful 

opportunity to see the rationale and the justification that 

members opposite view in defending a piece of legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when looking at second reading speeches, 

there are different types of second reading speeches based on 

the type of legislation. Earlier on in my remarks, I talked about 

different types of legislation, one being more housekeeping in 

nature and, for the most part, less controversial most of the 

time. 

 

Those types of speeches, Mr. Speaker, I know that the folks 

who develop legislation in the ministry — I‟ve never been in 

cabinet, so I don‟t exactly know how it works — but I know 

that legislation and changes can come up through the ministry, 

Mr. Speaker. And most certainly as changes are brought 

forward and members opposite decide that this is in fact the 

path that they want to go, individuals within the ministries, Mr. 

Speaker, have a role in crafting those speeches. And the second 

reading speeches is a very important speech for the Assembly 

and for the official record and for individuals in the House and 

for those watching at home. 

 

On second reading speeches, for the most part, government 

ministers follow a script pretty closely, and they don‟t do too 

much freewheeling and making it up as they go. There‟s 

sometimes the odd sentence or additional example that is 

worked into the speech, but for the most part, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

a fairly tight script. And it is a tight script, Mr. Speaker, because 

it is in many ways an official record, and it is a piece of 

information within this democratic legislative process that 

people can go to in order to see what is the government‟s 

rationale for why they want to do this. 

 

And as I said, in the non-controversial and fairly routine 

housekeeping types of legislation, I would imagine there would 

not be a great deal of change that would need to occur in going 

from the stage where the ministry is preparing second reading 

remarks and going to the minister‟s office and being vetted 

through political staff, Mr. Speaker. I think for housekeeping 

types of legislation, that would be a fairly straightforward and a 

fairly smooth process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only imagine the process that took place 

with Bill No. 36, because I think that it would in fact be a very 

different approach than what I just outlined with respect to 

housekeeping business, with respect to legislation that comes 

forward on a regular basis which is part of regular reviews that 

the minister or the ministry may choose to do. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, the rationale and the explanations that the minister has 

provided for this piece of legislation, as clearly stated for a 

number of consecutive question periods that we‟ve had in the 

Assembly, simply doesn‟t hold water, in my opinion, and I 

think, Mr. Speaker, also is not a true reflection of what 

Saskatchewan people think and a true reflection of what 

constituents of Sask Party members have been telling them over 

the past number of weeks since this piece of legislation has 

come forward. 

 

And I can only imagine, Mr. Speaker, the amount of editing and 

massaging that was required with respect to how members 

opposite decided they were going to sell this piece of legislation 

to the broader public, what sort of defence they would have to 

put forward, Mr. Speaker, in order to have at least some type of 

explanation and at least some type of defence and have at least 

some type of ability to promote this piece of legislation with the 

broader Saskatchewan public. Because, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

think anyone in Saskatchewan — there may be one or two, but 

the vast, vast majority of people, Mr. Speaker — whether they 

are New Democrats, whether they are Sask Party supporters, 

whether they are Liberals, whether they are members of the 

Green Party, whether they are members of the Conservative 

Party, whether they are members of the Western Independence 

Party, whether they are members of the Rhinoceros Party, 

whatever their party, whether they support a party or an 

individual, an issue, Mr. Speaker, people understand, people 

know that adding more politicians is simply not the way to go, 

is simply not a true reflection of what individuals are hearing 

from their constituents, what they‟re hearing from their 

communities and important stakeholder groups in their areas. 

 

And so, as I said, when we think of the work that has been done 

with respect to the minister‟s second reading speech, as we 

think of the work that has been done with respect to the minister 

providing these answers over the last number of weeks in 

question period on why they are bringing this piece of 

legislation forward, I don‟t think this is one of those 

housekeeping pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think it 

was someone within the ministry who thought that it would be a 

good idea to add a number of politicians, that it would be a 

good idea to exclude those under 18, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I actually don‟t think this idea originated in 

the backbenches of the Sask Party and in perhaps even in some 

of the front seats of the Sask Party as well. Because the 

backbencher members of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, some of 

them who have not been in the Assembly a long time, but I 

know they care about their communities and they do work hard 

to listen to their constituents, as is the duty of every elected 

representative in this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, I sure doubt 

that they‟ve had a steady stream of people at their constituency 

office door or calling and ringing off the phones, saying that 

what we should really do is increase the number of politicians 

in the Assembly at a cost of millions and what we really should 

be doing is changing and excluding those who are under 18 and 

then, Mr. Speaker, use a bizarre explanation that this is 

improving representation and it‟s really about ensuring that 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

there are an equal number of people in each constituency. 

 

I simply, Mr. Speaker, don‟t think this idea came from the 

backbencher members of the Sask Party. I don‟t think it came 

from the ministry, from within the ministry as part of regular 

legislative changes. And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think it actually 

even came from probably a good chunk of the sitting cabinet 

ministers or former cabinet ministers, those who have been 

opposed to the evils of big government, as they would put it, for 

many years, Mr. Speaker. To now have them suggesting and 

proposing that we need to add more politicians to the Assembly 

is, well, it‟s not really credible in my opinion, but it‟s also a 

little bit humorous to think of the flip-flop and the change of 

heart that were seen in that case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me talk a little bit about the two sections. 

Actually, no, I‟ll give a little bit more information as to how 

this debate and this discussion has gone, Mr. Speaker. Members 

opposite propose this piece of legislation. And as we have 

listened to people, as we have had feedback come to us, as we 

have seen the faces of backbencher Sask Party members who 

clearly aren‟t too pleased with this bit of legislation — yes, they 

can be whipped and they can vote in support, but you know, the 

face does tell a bigger story and a more detailed story. Because 

of the feedback and the push back from Saskatchewan people 

over this wrong-headed approach that the members are 

choosing to pursue, the official opposition put forward an 

amendment. And the amendment that we proposed, it said: 

 

. . . this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 

36, An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993, because: 

 

The Bill excludes, in determining the constituency 

boundaries, the counting of the young people of 

Saskatchewan who deserve to be counted to determine 

the representation within this Legislative Assembly; 

and further, 

 

The Bill increases the number of members of this 

Legislative Assembly by three which is an unnecessary 

increase of politicians to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that was an amendment that we voted on 

earlier on in this afternoon, and we had a standing vote for this 

amendment. And members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, we 

stood and we supported this amendment because we don‟t 

believe 36 is the right path to go. It‟s not the right path to go for 

our democracy. It‟s not the right path to go for having proper 

representation of young people in this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not the right path to go when a government 

opposite is asking people to pay more for prescription drugs or 

to deal with cuts in a number of areas to be spending this kind 

of money on more politicians in the Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we clearly stood against the legislation that the 

members opposite brought forward in Bill No. 36. And it was 

our hope, Mr. Speaker, that with the standing vote, members 

opposite who know this isn‟t the right thing to do . . . And they 

are on that side, Mr. Speaker. I can guarantee that. They may 

not ever go on record with respect to a media interview or even 

in feedback with their constituents. But I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker, 

in their heart of hearts, as they talk with their closest family 

members and perhaps their closest advisers and confidants, 

which we all have in politics I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker, that a good 

number of the backbenchers and perhaps even some of the 

cabinet ministers said, you know what, friends? This piece of 

legislation, I know you don‟t like it. I know that it is the wrong 

approach and, I‟ll tell you what, I actually sort of believe that 

too, but I‟m being whipped. I‟m being forced into supporting it 

and that‟s just the reality. 

 

You know, we saw, Mr. Speaker, a similar approach when we 

looked at the film tax credit. I know there were members 

opposite who didn‟t support that kind of approach with pulling 

the carpet out from underneath the film and television industry. 

But again, on the vote, members opposite were happy to go 

along with it even if they had concerns about that change. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, another example about the ability of 

members opposite to truly speak what they‟re feeling, to truly 

speak to what people are telling them, we saw it a few minutes 

ago when we were looking at this amendment. I was hoping 

that some of them would have the courage to stand and say, I 

agree. This isn‟t the right thing to do. This is about a mistake 

the government has made. This isn‟t the right approach. This 

idea didn‟t come from within the ministry, within the civil 

service. This idea didn‟t come from members of our executives 

and our local party — the rank and file members. This idea 

didn‟t come from myself as a cabinet minister, perhaps even 

some members opposite thought. 

 

[15:30] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they were more than happy to go along with 

it. And I think that is too bad. I think it‟s sad and I think it‟s . . . 

I‟m sure it‟s disappointing for some of the members opposite 

who perhaps feel a little guilty about not taking a stand on this 

piece of legislation, because they know that it isn‟t the right 

thing to do. And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it causes a little bit of 

problems, a few problems at home with respect to individuals 

that have to justify to their friends and supporters and family 

members why they‟re choosing to add more politicians and 

exclude those who are under 18 from the electoral process. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, those are challenges and concerns that 

members opposite will have to reconcile in their own hearts and 

reconcile to those who may be curious why they chose not to 

take a stand in this instance. 

 

Let‟s look, Mr. Speaker, at a few of the different components 

here. The one section, Mr. Speaker . . . Well I should say, so the 

amendment was rejected by members opposite and it is for this 

reason, Mr. Speaker, we are giving them one more chance. We 

are giving them one more opportunity to do the right thing. 

Through this hoist motion, Mr. Speaker, that has been moved 

by the Leader of the Official Opposition, we‟re suggesting we 

know this piece of legislation is a bad idea. I think a whole lot 

of the Sask Party caucus members know that this piece of 

legislation is a bad idea. I think many people, most people in 

Saskatchewan think and know this piece of legislation to be a 

bad idea. So we‟re giving members opposite a chance here to 

. . . We‟re giving them an exit ramp, so to speak. 

 

While it would appear that they have been determined to pass 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

this piece of legislation, there‟s still another opportunity. We 

can hoist this piece of legislation; we can put it on pause for a 

period of time before it is reviewed, and that, Mr. Speaker, I 

think will allow members opposite a bit of time to go home, be 

in their home constituencies, and drink the water back home for 

a couple of days. Get away from the legislative bubble. Get 

away from those in Executive Council and the heavies within 

caucus or cabinet or within the political structure that is present 

on the opposite side. Step away from that. Remove themselves 

for a period of time in order to have a good second thought 

about this legislation, and determine whether or not it‟s what 

they actually want to do, whether it is in fact the appropriate 

thing. 

 

So I hope, Mr. Speaker, as I speak, some of the members 

opposite may be thinking about the question and the 

opportunity that is available to them, the chance that they have, 

Mr. Speaker, to stand up and speak to what their constituents 

actually believe, stand up and speak to what their heart actually 

tells them to do and, Mr. Speaker, not proceed with Bill No. 36 

at this time. I would like to say forever, Mr. Speaker, because I 

think that would be a better approach, but at this time at least 

counts for now. And that gives the members opposite a little bit 

of breathing time. Go home. Remember what it‟s like in talking 

to constituents. I mean, not that we don‟t do that when the 

House is in, of course. But I think a bit of time away from the 

Chamber here might serve members well in remembering why 

they are here and what they are supposed to do with respect to 

truly representing the views and the concerns of their areas. 

 

So the one component that we see, Mr. Speaker, is of the 

legislation as I mentioned in my introductory comments. 

There‟s two major changes that are occurring with this piece of 

legislation. The one is the fact that for the calculations of 

constituency sizes, those who are 18 will no longer be counted. 

And I have a few concerns, Mr. Speaker, with this decision and 

with this approach, and I‟m not the only one in the province 

who have had a concern and some questions about why 

members opposite are choosing to go down this path. 

 

As is the case very often here in the Assembly, and it is a true 

honour, Mr. Speaker, we have individuals who come to the 

Assembly for a variety of reasons. And as I‟ve said before, 

some of the best visits we have, some of the highlights of any 

legislative session is when there‟s a large group of students who 

come or a small group of students. It doesn‟t matter if it‟s a 

large or small group. But it‟s always a joy to have students 

come to the Assembly. And I think it‟s a very important time 

for the students coming to the Assembly because I know when I 

speak to adults who have maybe come to the legislature for a 

different reason, and I ask, well when was the last time you 

were here in the Assembly? Sometimes they say, well I‟ve 

actually never been. This is my first trip. But the most common 

response is, oh, well I remember coming when I was in a school 

group. I remember coming when I was in grade 5 or 7 or in high 

school in social studies, coming and seeing what was going on. 

 

And individuals remember a few things. They often remember 

some of the theatrics that are involved with question period, and 

that‟s part of the parliamentary tradition that we have here in 

Saskatchewan, that we have throughout the Commonwealth. 

And they also remember, Mr. Speaker, that when they come to 

the Assembly they were welcomed, they were respected, and 

they were valued. I hope at least that is the feeling that they 

have when they come to the Assembly, when they think back to 

their time in the Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the importance that we place on those under 

18 coming to the Assembly is something that members opposite 

and members on this side understand because we always talk 

about how happy we are to have them here, how important it is 

that they are here. And we always encourage them to, or we 

very often encourage them, especially through the 

question-and-answer times that come after whatever 

proceedings may be going on in the Assembly, we always 

encourage them to become involved, to get active, to know 

what‟s going on — at a bare minimum, please vote. More than 

that, if you choose to get involved with an issue or with a party, 

make sure you do that as well. And we do that, Mr. Speaker, 

because we know that those who are under 18 matter. We know 

that those under 18 are important. We know that they have 

important issues, we know that they have important needs and 

concerns, and we know that they have very important ideas. 

 

And as all members know, in our constituency offices as 

individuals come forward, very, very often the issues that we 

deal with at the constituency level have something to do with 

children. Very often, Mr. Speaker, it‟s issues about schooling. I 

can think of many examples where I‟ve had parents come to me 

and say there‟s a problem in the classroom and they want some 

ideas about how it could maybe be solved, who they should talk 

to. Or they have concerns about resources allocated to their 

school. And a lot of this, Mr. Speaker, can be the role of school 

divisions in providing. 

 

But individuals know that a great deal of the funding for 

education, well now pretty much exclusively, comes from the 

provincial government. And they see their MLAs and they see 

their provincial politicians as someone they can go to to present 

their concerns, to present their case, and to hopefully get some 

help or at least some advice and, if all else fails, a listening ear 

to help empathize with the situation that they may be in if 

there‟s no direct action that can be taken. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s that reality of the importance 

that we place on students, it‟s that reality of the importance that 

we place on the role that they have, the ideas that they have, the 

concerns that they have, that we have included youth and 

children in the calculations for constituency sizes. I could think, 

Mr. Speaker, that in some areas the issues of youth are the most 

pressing and most important issues that may be present. 

 

In my constituency, for example, in door knocking or spending 

time and going to events in the Hampton Village area, people‟s 

concerns for their children, and children concerned about their 

school, is perhaps the . . . Not perhaps; it is the most common 

thing brought up by individuals. And that again, Mr. Speaker, 

shows that it is important that the needs, that the interests of 

youth, those under 18, are considered when we are making the 

boundary calculations and in so doing allowing the issues of the 

youth to be as important to anyone else‟s issues. The issues of 

youth to be considered with the same weight, with the same 

level of seriousness as they deserve, as those who are above 18, 

I think that‟s a very important point. 

 

It‟s interesting. Last week while members of the opposition 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

have been talking about this for a little while, some other 

individuals have weighed into the debate. One example, Mr. 

Speaker, is the Children‟s Advocate. And, Mr. Speaker, for 

those that are listening at home there, I‟ll just give a little bit of 

background about the role of independent officers of the 

legislature. Here in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we of course 

have government members. We have opposition members. But 

we have another group of individuals who are servants of the 

legislature, individuals who are independent, not swayed by 

what a government or an opposition member wants. But, Mr. 

Speaker, these are individuals who are selected and given the 

authority to have responsibility for a particular area in order to 

provide that independent, arm‟s-length, objective advice and 

sometimes criticism about what is going on. 

 

And so the independent officers of the legislature — off the top 

of my head, Mr. Speaker — we have the Ombudsman, that‟s 

one; we have the auditor, that‟s another; we have the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner; we have the Privacy Commissioner; and 

we also, Mr. Speaker, have the Children‟s Advocate. I think 

that‟s all of them, Mr. Speaker. Someone that‟s speaking after 

me can correct me if I‟m wrong on those but, Mr. Speaker . . . 

or if I said any of them twice. 

 

But last week we have the Children‟s Advocate who raised 

some really significant concerns about the changes put forward 

in Bill No. 36, specifically the issue of excluding youth from 

the electoral count, and going so far as to call it wrong. There is 

a news story, Mr. Speaker, from The Star Phoenix, and the 

quote here says, and I‟ll read it. It‟s the second page of an 

online article. “It‟s my opinion that this proposed amendment is 

contrary to the interests of children and youth,” said the 

Children‟s Advocate Tuesday about Bill 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, the piece of legislation that we‟ve been 

discussing in the past few days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then there‟s another quote that the advocate provides. It‟s, 

“I‟ve got access to legal advice that I believe compelled me to 

try and suggest to the government of Saskatchewan that we do 

not support this particular amendment.” And there‟s an 

additional quote, Mr. Speaker, that goes on. It says that 

“Considering that over 40 per cent of First Nations citizens in 

Saskatchewan are under the age of 18, you‟re really excluding 

the almost half of the First Nations population from equal 

political representation.” So, Mr. Speaker, some significant 

concerns and went on to say that the change might in fact 

violate the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

And so you would think that when you have an independent 

officer of the legislature, someone who doesn‟t needlessly enter 

debate on important issues but, as they are charged through the 

role and the duty that they take on as being an independent 

officer of the legislature, really only speak up when there‟s been 

a direct request from members on either side . . . And I can 

think of the example of the Ombudsman. And we saw last week 

how the Minister of Social Services referred a matter to the 

Ombudsman about civil servants being allowed to participate in 

the democratic process and be allowed to run for municipal 

election. So that‟s one example of how issues can come up to, 

on to the radar so to speak, of an independent officer. 

 

Another way, Mr. Speaker, is when one of the independent 

officers feels like there is something important, feels like there 

is something that violates the values and the principles that they 

were charged to promote and uphold, and feel a need to speak 

out, Mr. Speaker. And I think it is important to listen to the 

advice and the warning that is provided by the Children‟s 

Advocate on this issue, Mr. Speaker, because it‟s a very 

legitimate and a very real concern. And while, Mr. Speaker, in 

an earlier part of my speech I talked about how I don‟t think 

there are a whole lot of people in Saskatchewan who are 

interested in this piece of legislation, that see this piece of 

legislation as a good idea — that‟s from general public, people 

that pay attention to politics at a base level or perhaps live and 

breathe it — I don‟t think those people think that the addition of 

more politicians and excluding those under 18 is a good idea. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we also see an independent officer of the 

legislature voicing his concern about how this proposed 

legislation is wrong and how this proposed legislation has many 

fairly significant and dangerous pitfalls from a democratic 

perspective in my opinion. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now I would hope, I would have hoped, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister would have recognized that this is a problem, would 

have hoped that the minister would have recognized that this 

was not a smart thing to do, would have heeded the advice of 

the independent officer. But, Mr. Speaker, the minister‟s 

response as reported in this online article from The StarPhoenix 

said, “We don‟t agree with that.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, and I think in the House as I recall from 

remarks that the minister said, I think he said, we agree to 

disagree. I don‟t have that right off the top of my head . . . Or I 

mean that‟s off the top of my head. I don‟t have the Hansard in 

front of me, but I think that‟s what he said on that date. And 

it‟s, while it‟s troubling for this particular issue, Mr. Speaker, 

with respect to the exclusion of those under 18 and the addition 

of three more politicians to the Assembly, it‟s also a troubling 

and a concerning approach to officers of the Legislative 

Assembly that we‟ve seen members opposite exhibit on more 

than one occasion. 

 

The other example I can think . . . Oh, the Chief Electoral 

Officer. That‟s the other individual I didn‟t list when I was 

listing the independent officers of the legislature. But the 

example I want to give involves the Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. 

Speaker, because we had a situation here not too long ago 

where two sides, opposition and government, had agreed on a 

candidate for the Chief Electoral Officer And then once that 

decision was made known to the Sask Party caucus, members 

opposite vetoed it and politically inserted themselves into a 

process that shouldn‟t have been politicized. That‟s one 

example, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there have been other issues with respect to statements that 

the Privacy Commissioner has made where members opposite 

simply say they don‟t care. I‟m paraphrasing, but that‟s the 

outcome of their comments based on the way that they have 

treated warnings and statements that have come from the 

independent officers of the legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in a piece of legislation that has such a great 

relevance and has such a huge effect on people in this province, 

it‟s troubling, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite would take 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

this approach, would ignore good, sound advice from 

independent individuals, independent officers, and would 

simply plow ahead with an agenda simply because there‟s a few 

people on the inner, of the inner circle who think that it‟s a 

good idea politically. Because that‟s what this is about. 

Members of cabinet know this, members in the middle benches 

know this, and most certainly members on the backbenches 

know this. They just don‟t, haven‟t felt convicted enough to 

speak up against it, is all I can assume. 

 

On the issue of the advocate‟s comments concerning the 

exclusion of those under 18, there was an additional quote, 

“Leaving children, youth out of the population . . .” Sorry. This 

is from a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] article, I 

should say, posted April 17th. And a quote from the 

independent officer says: 

 

“Leaving children, youth, out of the population count to 

calculate the boundaries will have a significant effect on 

the political representation of aboriginal people and new 

immigrants due to their much younger demographics,” 

Pringle said. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think of the provincial motto, “from many 

peoples, strength,” something that we talk about because it talks 

about our history of diversity, our history of being a strong 

place because of our diversity, and welcoming and taking into 

consideration everyone in the province. But it would seem to 

me, Mr. Speaker, based on the warning provided by the 

independent officer of the legislature, that in this instance we‟re 

not living up to that provincial motto. We‟re not living up to 

that motto, “from many peoples, strength,” Mr. Speaker, 

because we‟re leaving out many people in the calculation based 

on the legislation that members opposite are bringing forward. 

 

Our member from Moose Jaw North is talking about something. 

I heard something about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 

Utility Development Company] or something. It‟s interesting, 

Mr. Speaker, a very interesting defence. You know, everything 

I‟ve ever heard from members opposite in talking about 

SPUDCO has been pretty negative and pretty concerned about 

it. So for them to now say that this is their SPUDCO and that 

this is an issue that they aren‟t proud of, well I agree. It‟s not 

that great of an issue, and I think it is troubling. And if the 

members opposite believe that adding the number of politicians 

to the Assembly and eliminating those under 18 is their 

SPUDCO, if they think that, if that is their view, if they have 

concerns about it, well then perhaps the member from . . . Well 

I won‟t single out a member. Perhaps all the members in the 

backbench who have similar concerns, or those in the front 

bench, should speak up and pull this piece of legislation or 

support the hoist motion that is before the Assembly at this 

time, Mr. Speaker, and agree to park this piece of legislation for 

a period of time. Because most certainly it doesn‟t . . . We could 

do so much better. It doesn‟t live up to what we should be doing 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the one concern that I‟ve talked about for a while is the issue 

of excluding those who are under 18 years of age. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I don‟t think it‟s the right approach. I don‟t think it is 

consistent with the warm welcome and the high level of 

importance we place on school groups when they come here. 

Because we recognize that young people matter, that young 

people are important, and that young people should in fact 

count. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think excluding those that are under 18 has a 

number of problems from a Charter perspective as identified by 

the independent officer of the legislature, the Children‟s 

Advocate. And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think it‟s what 

Saskatchewan people want. I don‟t think it‟s what the vast 

majority of people in this province think is a wise approach. I 

think, Mr. Speaker, this is coming from an inner circle of an 

inner circle for political, partisan reasons. I do not think that it 

is in the best interests of our democratic system. I think 

members opposite, a good number of them, know this. 

 

And I wish, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite would have 

the courage to speak out against this piece of legislation either 

by supporting the hoist motion or by talking to those on the 

front benches, talking to the Premier, talking to the Deputy 

Premier, and saying that this is a bad idea. That is their duty as 

elected officials, in my opinion. 

 

Now the next component, Mr. Speaker — I‟ve talked about the 

under-18 issue for some time — and the next component is the 

addition of more politicians to the Assembly, increasing it by 

three. And, Mr. Speaker, now if members opposite haven‟t been 

hearing about the need to exclude those under 18 from the 

electoral process, they most certainly, Mr. Speaker, have not 

been hearing about the need for more politicians in the 

Assembly. And members opposite know this. 

 

Members opposite, in the election that occurred last fall, 

knocked on many doors as did members of all political parties. 

Members opposite spoke to many, many people about what 

their priorities are, what their concerns are. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

highly doubt there was ever a single individual who said, what 

we need are more politicians. Please, please, if you are elected, 

I want you to take this message forward to the Legislative 

Assembly. I want you to advocate. I want you to work. I want 

you to clear all government business, all government legislation 

and please, please put forward legislation to increase the 

number of politicians in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think members opposite have ever had that 

conversation with an individual constituent as they have door 

knocked. I don‟t think they‟ve had that conversation as they‟ve 

gone to community events. Mr. Speaker, I know for certain it‟s 

a conversation I have never had with a constituent in talking 

with them about what matters to them, you know, talking with 

them about how their communities could be stronger, how their 

communities could be better. It is simply not credible, Mr. 

Speaker. It is simply not believable that members opposite 

could say in any way that this is something their constituents 

want. I just doubt it, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m talking about 

constituents who are not aligned with a political party, people 

that randomly come to a doorstep or people that come to a door 

when you‟re going to their house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people don‟t want this piece of 

legislation, and members opposite know it. Saskatchewan 

people do not want . . . Member from Moose Jaw North is a 

strong advocate of adding politicians to the Assembly. He‟s 

talking from his seat. He‟s saying that he strongly believes that 

there should be three more politicians added to the Assembly. 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

That‟s a puzzling position, Mr. Speaker. That is a bizarre 

position, Mr. Speaker, especially in light of many of the 

decisions that members opposite have made. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, adding more politicians, increasing the 

size of this legislature is going to cost the people of 

Saskatchewan millions of dollars. It will cost people money. 

Now members opposite, again in their bizarre spinning of this 

misguided piece of legislation, has said, well actually it‟s not 

going to cost more money; it won‟t cost more money at all. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the silliest argument that I‟ve heard. 

MLAs, the vast majority, Mr. Speaker, I think everyone here 

collects a paycheque. That costs money, Mr. Speaker. I run a 

constituency office as does every other MLA. We have to pay 

rent, Mr. Speaker. It costs money to run our constituency 

offices. In our constituency offices, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

ability to hire people to be there and to help constituents as they 

come in when we are not able to be there. Those individuals 

don‟t work for free, Mr. Speaker. Those individuals receive a 

paycheque. That in fact costs money, Mr. Speaker, for all of our 

constituency offices. There are utilities to pay. My office has 

running water. My office has electricity. My office has heating, 

has energy as well, Mr. Speaker. This all costs money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And now a 

member from Carrot River is talking about driving miles. And 

an interesting line of questioning, especially given the fact that 

the SGI minister today was talking about some of the rationale 

that he used in explaining why a certain program was cut. Mr. 

Speaker, it costs money for mileage, and the member from 

Carrot River is correct. And so for individuals either in rural 

areas or urban members who travel to different parts of the 

province, it costs money for travel claims, Mr. Speaker. This 

too is an expense. 

 

So I don‟t understand, Mr. Speaker, how any of the members 

opposite can stand with a straight face and say that this is not 

going to cost more money. It most certainly will because there 

will be salaries to pay for the elected person. There will be 

salaries to pay for the constituency assistant. There will be rent 

to pay, Mr. Speaker, for the constituency office. Mr. Speaker, 

there will be bills to pay in that constituency office. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as the elected representative travels throughout the 

province, either coming to Regina or going to other 

communities for critic duties, for issues of importance, for 

listening to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, that costs 

money. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, for members opposite to say that it will 

not cost more for more MLAs is simply not believable. 

Members opposite know it. But it is, Mr. Speaker, consistent 

with the pattern that we‟ve seen of members opposite trying to 

rationalize, trying to do their very best to provide some 

justification for this wrong-headed move in the same way that 

the Justice minister says that this piece of legislation is about 

ensuring there are an equal number of people in constituencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is done through the boundary review on a 

regular basis. That will occur on a regular basis as it always has. 

Mr. Speaker, those types of adjustments can be made. Those 

types of adjustments are already ensured through existing 

legislation. To use that explanation, to use that explanation as a 

justification for an increase in the number of politicians in the 

Assembly, for reducing those who are under 18 years of age is a 

ridiculous argument in my opinion. It‟s one that members 

opposite, especially those in the backbenches, know doesn‟t 

hold water. And, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that there would be 

a better explanation provided to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Maybe over the weekend, Mr. Speaker, some of the 

backbenchers had the opportunity to speak to the Justice 

minister and say, Mr. Minister, I know I‟m a backbencher and I 

know my opinion is mostly and most often ignored from the 

inner circle, but this idea is silly. Moreover the explanation, the 

rationale that you‟re using to promote and defend it is silly, and 

I would encourage a different approach. And while that, while 

that backbencher is at it, Mr. Speaker, they should tell the 

minister that this piece of legislation should be pulled because it 

most certainly does not serve the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, without doubt this argument that members 

opposite are making that more politicians will not cost the 

people of Saskatchewan anything, we know that is a silly 

argument and simply is not credible. Now if that was it, I mean, 

it‟s not unlike members, it‟s not unlike humans to say things 

that aren‟t credible at times. Sometimes we, that‟s part of the 

human condition that we‟re going to make mistakes and say 

things maybe, Mr. Speaker, that could be said differently. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to plow ahead with a plan that will cost 

Saskatchewan people more money, to plow ahead with a plan 

that clearly is not wanted by the vast, vast majority of 

Saskatchewan people, is, I think, probably not even wanted by a 

good number of the backbenchers and maybe even the odd 

cabinet minister, to plow ahead with a plan of adding more 

politicians then, at the very same time, to bring forward a 

budget a few weeks ago asking Saskatchewan people to pay 

more — that, Mr. Speaker, is one of the things that I find most 

outrageous about members opposite approach to this piece of 

legislation, one of the things.  

 

I‟ve identified how I think excluding under-18s is a bad idea, 

how more politicians will cost money and that‟s not a good 

idea. But then, Mr. Speaker, within the same period of time, to 

say they‟re willing to spend millions more on politicians here in 

the Assembly but then ask Saskatchewan people to pay more or 

to receive less in certain programs and services, Mr. Speaker, 

that is not the right approach. Members opposite know it. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it is a good example of how 

government has missed its mark on this piece of legislation, 

how it maybe started as a clever idea by one or two people in 

the inner circle of the inner circle. But seriously, Mr. Speaker, 

members opposite should get out of the group think. Members 

opposite should have the courage to act by their convictions. 

Members opposite should listen to their constituents, perhaps 

even listen to some of their own party members who say that 

this piece of legislation is a bad idea. I‟m not the only person 

that has said that, Mr. Speaker. There have been columnists and 

editorials that have called this a stupid decision, and I won‟t 

read all those right now, Mr. Speaker. But this is not something 

that Saskatchewan people are running to with open arms. This 

is not giving them a good feeling. They know that this is not the 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

right approach. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on the one hand we have members opposite 

willing to spend millions more on more politicians for those 

salaries, for the rent, for those travel claims, all those things that 

will cost money, Mr. Speaker. Then at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, we see them shortchanging the western development 

museums here in Saskatchewan and causing the WDM 

[Western Development Museum] to close its doors on Monday. 

How does that make sense, Mr. Speaker? It simply doesn‟t. 

 

I have some good friends who are very active on the WDM. 

These people love what they do. They love volunteering, and 

they pour thousands of hours into what they do. They care 

about our history. They care about telling our Saskatchewan 

story and, Mr. Speaker, often it‟s to Saskatchewan people, to 

school groups. It‟s the people that like history. But in many 

situations, Mr. Speaker, the work that they do on Mondays is to 

visitors, is to guests to this province, is to newcomers to this 

province to help tell the Saskatchewan story. 

 

So to have the members opposite shortchange the WDM in such 

a way that they need to shut their doors on Monday mornings 

but they‟re more than happy, they‟ll line up one after another 

and support a government piece of legislation to spend millions 

more on politicians, that just doesn‟t make sense to 

Saskatchewan people. It most certainly doesn‟t make sense to 

the people who are so concerned and outraged over members 

opposite underfunding of the WDM. 

 

Apparently this was reported in the news, Mr. Speaker. I didn‟t 

see the news story myself, but, Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

shortchanging that is incurred by members opposite to the 

WDM, I was told that the staff at the WDM actually agreed to 

take two weeks without pay, Mr. Speaker, in order that there 

wouldn‟t have to be layoffs for other staff members. That‟s the 

level of dedication that people at the WDM have to what they 

do. That‟s how much they care about our history. That‟s how 

much they care about their fellow Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

If only members opposite had a similar type of care when it 

comes to this piece of legislation, Bill 36, they would recognize 

that it is wrong. They would recognize that it is not a smart 

approach. They would recognize that, as columnists have said, 

it‟s a stupid idea, Mr. Speaker. They would recognize that this 

is not what Saskatchewan people want. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we have given members opposite 

many opportunities to speak up. And I won‟t paint every 

member on the opposite benches with the same brush. I think 

there are members over there who know this is a bad idea. In 

the same way, there are members over there who know in their 

heart of hearts that the film tax credit is a good thing, that it 

supported industry. It helped many of their constituents. It 

helped many of their Regina businesses. I know there‟s 

members over there that believe that. 

 

In the same way, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this piece of 

legislation, there are members over there who know this is not 

the right thing to do. There are members over there who know it 

is not fair. It is not right. It is not proper to underfund the 

WDM, to force employees there to give up a paycheque, Mr. 

Speaker, in order to prevent layoffs from other people. At the 

same time, Mr. Speaker, they‟ll roll out millions for more 

politicians in the Assembly. They‟ll gladly write cheques, Mr. 

Speaker, to cover constituency office expenses. They‟ll gladly 

write cheques, Mr. Speaker, for travel reimbursements, but they 

won‟t, Mr. Speaker, fund the WDM properly. That‟s the 

contradiction. That is the horrible situation that we find 

ourselves here with Bill No. 36. 

 

Members opposite know it. Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

know that this is not the right thing. And the more they protest 

. . . Mr. Speaker, you always know when you strike a nerve 

with members opposite and they don‟t like what you‟re saying 

because they start chattering from their seats, Mr. Speaker. 

They start trying to put up a defence. And really the 

explanation, Mr. Speaker, that the member from P.A. Carlton is 

giving right now, Mr. Speaker, is just as wrong-headed as the 

Justice minister‟s justification saying that this is about ensuring 

equal numbers are across the constituencies. 

 

Members opposite know this, Mr. Speaker. Backbenchers know 

this, Mr. Speaker. They need to stand up. They need to speak to 

those in the inner circle. They need to speak to cabinet ministers 

who have a say in this, Mr. Speaker. They need to say that this 

is wrong. And the member from Arm River-Watrous knows it, 

and he ought to talk to those people on the front bench, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other areas where it‟s not consistent with 

this approach of asking people to pay more or get less and at the 

same time spending millions more on more politicians. Mr. 

Speaker, we see with the seniors‟ drug plan. Seniors are being 

asked to pay more per month for each prescription that they 

receive through the drug plan, Mr. Speaker. We know many 

seniors on fixed incomes. We know many seniors, when faced 

with health challenges, they may be on multiple prescriptions. 

 

When we think of a couple, Mr. Speaker, which is often the 

case, two individuals living together on a very fixed income 

doing their best to live within their means, we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that if they‟re on a few prescriptions each that the 

monthly addition here can be quite significant for these people. 

And when they are on a fixed income, this is a substantial 

amount. It would be like an additional utility payment for many 

of them, Mr. Speaker. And we know that often people, unwisely 

but out of desperation and out of doing the best in managing 

their prescriptions, we know that sometimes people make 

decisions with rationing or making choices around prescriptions 

which would be against doctors‟ best wishes or doctors‟ 

intentions. We know these types of decisions are made. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on the one hand, we have members opposite 

saying seniors need to pay more for their prescriptions. With the 

other hand, they‟re more than happy to roll out millions for 

more politicians in the Assembly. To me this doesn‟t make 

sense. I know to many seniors in the province this doesn‟t make 

sense. 

 

The other example, Mr. Speaker, here we have . . . It hasn‟t 

been talked about quite as much as of late, but I know it is 

discussed in estimates in the various ministries. We have the 

members opposite‟s four-by-four plan. And that‟s a euphemism 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

for eliminating 4 per cent of the civil service over 4 years, I 

think is the way that it goes. Members opposite, more than 

happy to reduce and eliminate and get rid of civil servants who 

do a good job of working for Saskatchewan people, providing 

public services that Saskatchewan people rely upon and that 

need so dearly and that value and appreciate, recognizing the 

important work that public servants do. They‟re going ahead 

with this plan to shrink the civil service. 

 

So you would think, Mr. Speaker, that sort of approach, they 

would take some of their own medicine. But we see the exact 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. We see members opposite suggesting we 

needed to expand the size of the legislature. We need to 

increase the number of politicians in the province. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, not something I‟ve heard from many 

constituents. And when we think of some of the civil servants 

affected by members opposite‟s plan to cut the civil service, I 

think if we spoke with some of those civil servants, they too 

would find it a bit puzzling that members opposite are happy to 

eliminate their jobs but they in fact want to increase the number 

of politicians to the Assembly. Doesn‟t make sense to me, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve talked a bit about a number of 

components. I‟ve provided an overview of Bill No. 36, how this 

eliminates those who are under 18 from the calculation for 

boundary populations. I‟ve talked about how that is the wrong 

approach. We in Saskatchewan, based on what people truly feel, 

because people . . . We do know the importance and the value 

of youth. And it‟s evidenced, Mr. Speaker, by the welcome that 

we give to school groups when they come to this Assembly. 

People in Saskatchewan know that those under 18 should count. 

 

The Children‟s Advocate, an independent officer of the 

legislature, has raised major flags about this change. And the 

minister‟s response, the government response is, well we don‟t 

care. That‟s not a quote, Mr. Speaker, but that‟s the intention of 

the response that members opposite have provided. Mr. 

Speaker, members opposite on those backbenches, some in the 

middle, and maybe even a few cabinet ministers know it‟s not 

the right approach. I know they have concerns with it. They 

need to speak up and have their concerns heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second component I‟ve talked about is how, in 

my view, I don‟t think there is anyone other than a few 

members within the Sask Party cabinet who think it‟s a good 

idea to add to the number of politicians here in Saskatchewan. 

And the irony, Mr. Speaker, is now having some Sask Party 

MLAs who for years in oppositions crusaded against the evils 

of big government and are now standing and proudly 

proclaiming their support for more politicians in the province, 

Mr. Speaker. I find that rather strange. And when you see such 

turnarounds with such retreats from long-held beliefs and views 

and clearly articulated visions, Mr. Speaker, I think it tells me 

that there‟s a deeper and a bigger story going on here. I think it 

tells me, Mr. Speaker, that this was a political idea that a few 

people in the inner circle, the inner circle cooked up, that 

pushed forward through getting buy-in from some of the cabinet 

ministers that matter. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that‟s how we 

ended up today with Bill No. 36 before the House. I think 

members opposite who are backbenchers or maybe those who 

served in cabinet once upon a time know this to be the case.  

And I encourage those members . . . We are now discussing a 

hoist motion before the Assembly. They‟ve just, Mr. Speaker, 

voted against an NDP amendment. And I understand their 

reluctance to support an NDP amendment and what that could 

mean politically and all those types of things, how that might be 

hard for them to do that, Mr. Speaker. So be it. Okay. We can 

let that one go. We‟ve clearly stated that we‟re opposed to Bill 

36. We suggested in the amendment that it should be pulled. It 

should not go forward. If members opposite don‟t want to go 

that far, right today, that‟s okay. 

 

We‟re giving them another opportunity now, Mr. Speaker. We 

have a hoist motion before the House. What this will do is hoist 

it off, push it off for 60 days, and I think, Mr. Speaker . . . six 

months, pardon me, not 60 days, six months. Enough time for 

members opposite to go back to their communities, to hear from 

people, to get a bit of perspective outside of the dome here, also 

I think, Mr. Speaker, to be away from the sway of their Whip 

and of whoever within cabinet is the chief architect and 

proponent of this. Some time, Mr. Speaker, for them to do a bit 

of introspection. Some time, Mr. Speaker, for them to listen to 

their gut. Some time for them, Mr. Speaker, to listen to their 

significant others. Some time, Mr. Speaker, for them to listen to 

their constituents. Some time, Mr. Speaker, for them to go to 

the WDM in their local area and ask how they feel about it. 

Some time, Mr. Speaker, for them to go to the seniors who are 

paying more for their prescription drugs and see if they approve 

and are supportive of adding more politicians at a cost of 

millions. Some time for them, Mr. Speaker, to go to the students 

who‟ll be paying more tuition in this province, a chance for 

them to go to them and see if it‟s okay that they‟re pleading 

poverty right now when it comes to providing affordable and 

accessible education for post-secondary students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives them six months to realize that, you know 

what? When the Children‟s Advocate raises concerns, instead 

of getting caught in a trap of spending a lot of money, time, and 

resources on a legal avenue and a court case, let‟s just do the 

right thing right now and take a pause. Let‟s hoist this piece of 

legislation for six months and come to our senses. And I think, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s my hope that a few of those backbenchers 

would have the courage to do that, would have the courage. 

 

They can go back to their lounge right now. They can keep a 

few in the Assembly. They can go back to the lounge and hold a 

meeting right now and discuss this possibility. I encourage them 

to do that. I think there‟s probably a member from our side of 

the House who will be talking to this hoist motion. They have 

the chance to discuss this. They have the chance, Mr. Speaker, 

to even call up some WDM volunteers right now and ask them 

if they‟re okay with spending millions more on politicians. 

Meanwhile they‟re shutting and turning off the lights in the 

WDM on Mondays. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have the time to do that. They could do that 

right now. They could go to their members lounge. I know 

there‟s phones in there. We all have BlackBerrys, something 

that costs money as well. Some people have iPhones. We have 

the technology, Mr. Speaker, we have the ability to listen to our 

constituents. I think there‟s a member from our side who will 

speak to this hoist motion right now, Mr. Speaker. Members 

opposite, they can stand up, go back, listen to some people, 

have a discussion with their caucus, talk to the person they need 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

to talk to within cabinet, and let them know that this is a bad 

idea, an idea that Saskatchewan people do not want. I encourage 

them to do that, Mr. Speaker, and with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

would conclude my remarks. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to wade into the debate today on the motion before us, 

which is calling on the government to basically pull Bill No. 36 

or press pause, put it on hold for the next six months. I‟d like to 

read the motion for you: 

 

That Bill No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011, be not now read a second time, but 

that it be read a second time this day six months hence. 

 

So what this motion is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an opportunity 

to stop and slow down and go back to our constituents, and 

have the Sask Party government go back to its constituents, and 

find out what really matters to the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

So Bill No. 36 — I should provide some context here — what 

Bill No. 36, an amendment to the constituency boundaries 

amendment Act, what this Act does in essence, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is it excludes in determining the constituency 

boundaries the counting of young people of Saskatchewan who 

deserve to be counted to determine the representation within the 

Legislative Assembly. So it‟s removing those under 18 from the 

count when it comes to creating the new constituency 

boundaries that will be happening in the near future, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The other thing that this Bill does is it will be 

adding three more politicians, or three more MLAs, to this 

Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Earlier this afternoon, the government had an opportunity to 

vote on an initial amendment that we had brought forward last 

week asking the government to pull the Bill, basically that this 

Bill not receive second reading. And this afternoon, just looking 

at the clock here, just a couple of hours ago, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we had a vote here in this House, with the nine 

members of the opposition voting in favour of our amendment 

ensuring that this Bill shouldn‟t get second reading. And the 

government voted against our amendment. 

 

So here we stand now. This is another opportunity or another 

option for the government to slow down and say, hey we will 

go out and talk to the citizens of Saskatchewan who we haven‟t 

discussed this with; this was not in our election platform. And 

this was not something that the government raised in the Throne 

Speech. So this is an opportunity to go back to our constituents 

and find out what they really think about this idea around 

adding three more politicians, especially at a time when this 

government is cutting services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The one thing that I often speak of when I get up in this House 

is consultation. And this is an opportunity. The opposition is 

trying to provide the government an opportunity to go back to 

its citizens, to its constituents, get out from the dome of this 

place. I always likened being in the legislature to a bit of a 

bubble. Sometimes we think everybody knows what‟s going . . . 

We in here always have a sense of what‟s going on. But what 

really matters is when we get out and get back to our 

constituencies and talk to real people where issues are really 

pressing in their lives. 

 

I remember speaking to the former lieutenant governor who at 

one point said that . . . The former lieutenant governor talked 

about when he was the Clerk here, and he‟d be in the 

Legislative Assembly and things would seem so intense and so 

just over the top in here, and he would get out for a walk at 

lunch or on break between 5 and 7 and come back. But he‟d, on 

his break he would realize you would think when you were in 

here it was the end of the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and he 

said he would get out there and then you would connect with 

real people and find out that things were very different outside 

of this legislature than they were in here, Mr. Speaker. So this is 

an opportunity for the government caucus to get out from this 

place here and go and speak to constituents and talk to them 

about what really matters. 

 

I know that we‟ve had the opportunity, and I‟ve heard from 

many people about the different parts of Bill No. 36 which is 

proposing adding three more MLAs and excluding those under 

18 from the count. I‟ve had the opportunity to hear what people 

have to say, and I haven‟t spoken to a single individual who has 

said that adding more MLAs is a really good idea and is a top 

priority. Nor have I heard anybody tell me . . . I‟ve heard quite 

the contrary. I‟ve had people tell me that excluding those under 

18 from the constituency boundary count is anti-democratic and 

a really bad idea. So we have to listen to what people are telling 

us about this. We need to represent everyone in the province. 

That‟s what people are telling me specifically about the 

under-18 piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I want to tell you a little bit about my own family and who I 

represent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that I wear my momness 

on my sleeve here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have two daughters. I 

have a 14-year-old, Hennessey, and a 4-year-old, Ophelia. 

Hennessey is very interested . . . Well Hennessey, for the 

record, if this Bill, if Bill No. 36 goes through unamended, she 

will not count, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She will be able to vote in 

the next election. She will be 18 at the time of the next 

provincial election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but she will not have 

mattered. She will not have counted in the redrawing of 

constituency boundaries, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So Hennessey, I want to tell you a little bit about Hennessey. 

She‟s a pretty neat young woman who‟s interested in what‟s 

going on around the world. She just had an opportunity to 

participate in a heritage fair where she was talking about — her 

and her friend Emily — their topic for the heritage fair was 

about women in Canada throughout the last 100 years. So I 

have to say, she‟s a child who clearly makes me very proud, 

talking about issues that are very near and dear to her mom‟s 

own heart. 

 

And then I‟ve got Ophelia, and Ophelia is four. And I would 

say that she has a bit of a flare for the dramatic. She attends the 

francophone school in Saskatoon called canadienne-française at 

the prématernelle program, and I think perhaps that someday 

she might pursue the arts. But we‟ll have to see. You never 

want to try to prejudge or predetermine things about your kids. 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

But those are my two kids, and neither of them will be counted, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the redrawing of the constituency 

boundaries that‟s set to happen right away. And it‟s a shame, 

particularly for both of them, but around Hennessey who will be 

able to vote but her . . . She will not have been counted in the 

redrawing of the boundaries. 

 

The one thing that the Premier said back in, I believe, it was 

December, he said, “Elections are about people who are the age 

of majority, 18 years and older, who can cast the vote.” With 

that comment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would respectfully 

disagree. I believe and I think democracy would tell this tale 

that elections are about citizens, not about voters. It shouldn‟t 

be about who votes. It‟s about who lives in our geographic 

boundaries who we represent. 

 

And I want to talk a little bit . . . I‟m thinking about my 

daughter and her presentation at the heritage fair, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I‟d like to take the Premier with his quote that 

elections are about voters back to not so very long ago — last 

month. Last month, actually I think about the third week in 

March, was the anniversary, the 96th anniversary here in 

Saskatchewan of the Royal Assent of the Bill giving women the 

right to vote on equal terms to men. This is less than 100 years 

ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So if elections are about those who 

cast the vote, is the Premier saying that elections less than 100 

years ago weren‟t about my grandmother and my 

great-grandmother and all other women? Were they just about 

male citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I would argue that elections 

are about citizens and the needs and desires and aspirations of 

citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Or we could go back and talk about First Nations people, who 

were not allowed to vote in Canada until 1960, which is an 

absolute, I think, a bit of a black mark on our record here in 

Saskatchewan and Canada. But again I would argue that, were 

no issues with respect to First Nations people relevant? Were 

elections really simply about citizens, or were elections simply 

about voters and not about those citizens? And I would argue 

that, no, elections are about citizens and citizenship, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan and Canada, we‟ve had issues around 

declining engagement in the political process or declining 

engagement in elections. I think we always point to elections 

because elections are sort of the marker of who is engaged. 

There‟s all kinds of other ways of being engaged in the electoral 

process, but elections are very much . . . But engagement, we 

use elections very much as a marker of how people are feeling 

about their political system. So I would ask the Premier and I‟d 

ask the government members, what message are we sending to 

young people? You don‟t count, so why would you care? Why 

would you bother engaging with the political process? 

 

So there‟s some interesting literature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

I‟ve had an opportunity to read, that often people who feel 

marginalized or put down by policy or who don‟t see 

themselves reflected positively in government policy don‟t feel 

any need to engage. They are the ones who on the doorstep, 

they say, it doesn‟t matter what you say; politics doesn‟t matter 

to me. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The reality is we 

should be sending the message to all citizens here in 

Saskatchewan, including those under 18, that their engagement 

and their involvement really does matter. And if we want them 

to engage, we should be telling them that they matter in the 

count of the constituency boundaries, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

believe this sends an incredibly negative message to young 

people, and many of them who in the next election will be able 

to vote and will have been told, though, that they don‟t count. 

 

There are some interesting statistics. And I actually don‟t have 

this one around me, but if you haven‟t, there‟s something . . . 

I‟m a broad brush strokes individual, Mr. Speaker, and 

sometimes details, precise details, escape me. But I believe if 

you haven‟t cast a vote, they say by the age of about 22, your 

chances of ever casting a vote again radically diminish just 

because you‟ve decided in your own experiences that politics 

doesn‟t matter. And I think that that‟s an absolute shame. 

 

And again, I think telling those under 18 that they shouldn‟t 

count in the redistribution of electoral boundaries is doing our 

young people a disservice. But not just our young people 

because these will be the people who will be moving into — 

they‟ll be casting votes — they will be moving into roles of 

leadership as they go through their education and 

post-secondary education. And I think the opportunity for 

people to know that they matter sends a really positive message, 

and I think this government is sending the exact opposite 

message. 

 

So I‟ve talked a little bit about . . . So actually, you know what? 

I just want to talk about a few of the issues that matter to young 

people who can‟t currently cast a ballot, but issues are 

important to them. Education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the stuff 

that we talk about here in this legislature pertains to what they 

will be learning: curriculum, provincial government-set 

curriculum, provincial government-set school schedules. I know 

there was some concern in the younger set, in the grade 8, grade 

9 students who were very worried about the possibility of 

changes to the school schedule starting after the September long 

weekend and then losing the February break. That was a very 

big concern for young people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Child care, where we send our children for care when we‟re not 

able to be there prior to them starting school, but also while 

they‟re in school, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There‟s after-school 

care. Many parents work long days, and child care is an issue 

and a concern to young people. 

 

Post-secondary education. I know even with my daughter in 

grade 8, university is on our radar. She‟s thinking about where 

she‟d like to go and what she‟d like to study. And so, as you go 

through those high school years, it becomes more and more out 

in your forefront, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so post-secondary 

education and student loans and tuition costs, these are all 

things on the minds of young people who deserve to count, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The environment is a huge one for young people. What is the 

legacy that we‟re . . . And I think this is probably one of the 

biggest ones that I know talking to many of the young people 

that I have a chance to, the environment is front and centre for 

these young people. And they worry about what we are, the 

older generations are, the kind of legacy we‟re leaving for them. 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

So representing young people, those under 18 in the legislature 

really does matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So who do I represent? I represent a whole host of people, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in Saskatoon Riversdale. I think who I am, we 

all bring a little piece of that into the legislature. As I said, I‟m a 

parent of young kids or youngish kids, so that‟s a big part of my 

own network right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I‟m here and I 

represent other parents who have many similar concerns or 

different concerns as well. I‟m here to speak to the needs of 

parents. I‟m here to speak to the needs of seniors, parents, 

people like my parents, who care about their grandchildren and 

the issues that affect them. 

 

Some of the issues and concerns in Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, again, child care. The reality is that often, if 

we want to be employed or if we want to go to school, that 

finding a place that we feel that we can afford, that we feel that 

is good-quality care, where our kids are loved and nurtured, I 

think that that‟s one of the biggest things that we all look for in 

child care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the love and nurturing of a 

facility, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or the people who work there. 

 

Again, education. In my constituency, English as an additional 

language is a very big issue. There‟s many newcomers here in 

Saskatchewan, and I have a good strong population actually of 

refugees who live in Saskatoon Riversdale. And I have schools 

where there‟s more than 23 languages spoken and more than 40 

countries represented. It‟s quite, quite an amazing thing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but the reality is you need to be able to put in 

place those supports to ensure that these hopefully soon-to-be 

citizens have the tools they need to have the best and fulfill 

their potential here as Canadian citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think some of the concerns — balancing work and family, 

being able to find that time to be able to engage in work and 

still be the best possible parent or best possible caregiver of 

your mother or father — the reality is child care‟s a big issue 

here in Saskatchewan, but so is elder care. We have an aging 

demographic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we need public policy. 

We don‟t need three more politicians, we need public policy 

that ensures that we can provide the care for our loved ones that 

they need, again whether they‟re children or they‟re elders, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

I believe these are the priorities of our families. These are the 

priorities of families here, not just in Saskatoon Riversdale, but 

in Saskatchewan. And families come in all shapes and sizes, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know housing, housing continues to be a 

big pressing issue. Home ownership is one thing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and it was always something here in Saskatchewan 

that I think that we took for granted or trusted that this was 

something that we could . . . We‟d always have the opportunity 

to buy a home. You put some money down and you have a 

chance to have, build some equity and pride of ownership and 

attachment to a community, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But housing 

and housing prices, not only have housing prices shot up, but 

with rent shooting skyward it‟s been very difficult for young 

people, or anybody for that matter, to put together enough 

money for a down payment to be able to buy a house. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these are the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people. And this is what I hear in my own 

constituency and from elsewhere as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

think the concerns of average, everyday folks just trying to get 

by and make a living are about housing, about child care, about 

health care. It‟s about education. They want to feel like 

government is listening to them, and adding three more 

politicians is not anything that any of them have said. Nobody 

has asked for three more politicians. It certainly is not the folks 

in Saskatoon Riversdale‟s priority. 

 

I‟ve had a chance to look at what other members of other 

provincial legislatures do or how they make do and how they 

represent their citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you know, 

their jobs are actually very similar if not, I‟d say, identical to 

ours. Their job is to talk to their constituents, find out the needs 

and concerns of their constituents. Like us, they balance their 

work and their care responsibilities. There are undoubtedly, in 

legislatures across Canada, people who have responsibilities for 

young children. And they happen to serve as MLAs or MPPs 

[Member of Provincial Parliament], and they also have 

responsibilities for elder care, whether it‟s a mother or a 

mother-in-law or a grandpa. The reality is these MLAs and 

MPPs are doing the same thing that we are — they‟re balancing 

their family life and time away from home the best that they 

can. 

 

They actually happen to go to capital cities, just like us, and 

represent the issues of their constituents, just like we do. But 

whether it‟s health care or social services or better highways or 

education or better child care, you know what? These MLAs are 

talking about the very same issues because these tend to be the 

priorities of citizens in general, Mr. Speaker. So the reality is 

they somehow manage to do this with a greater number of 

constituents to represent than we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

don‟t know how they do it. Perhaps they are supermen and 

superwomen. But they manage to represent far greater numbers 

of constituents than we do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and balance 

this responsibility. 

 

I‟d like to tell you a little bit about what goes on in some of the 

other provinces with respect to numbers of citizens to MLAs, in 

terms of ratio. 

 

So in BC, if we head west and we head to BC for example, 

there are about 4.4 million people there, and they have 85 seats 

in their Assembly. BC is almost twice the size geographically, 

about 922,000 square kilometres. They have mountains to drive 

over and an ocean to cross to get to their Assembly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And somehow they manage to represent 51,000 

citizens in every seat — 51,000 citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

— compared to about 18,000 that we represent here in 

Saskatchewan. That‟s 2.9 times the number of constituents for 

every MLA in BC than we have here in Saskatchewan — 2.9 

times the amount. My colleague from Saskatoon Nutana was 

saying she doesn‟t know how they do it. And well apparently 

they must be pretty special folks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In Alberta they have 3.6 million people, and right now they 

have 83 seats. So their province isn‟t much bigger than 

Saskatchewan. I think we all know the geography of Alberta 

quite well, our neighbour just to the west. It‟s about 640,000 

square kilometres. So they have far more people than us in that 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

space. They have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 44,000 citizens in 

each constituency — 44,000 citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

which is about 2.5 times that what we have in Saskatchewan. 

 

So just to our neighbour to the east, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

Manitoba they have 1.2 million people. And the interesting 

thing is for a province about the same size, about 552,000 

square kilometres, and more people, and more people, they 

actually have one fewer MLA. They have one less MLA in 

Manitoba, despite the fact that they have slightly more people 

and same population size. So how do they manage to do it in 

Manitoba with one less MLA, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They do 

have a slightly higher population density than we do, but they 

have far more people per seat. And you know what, they 

represent about 21,000 citizens per constituency — 21,000 

citizens per constituency, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 1.2 times the 

number of constituents that we have here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So Ontario, it‟s quite an interesting story in Ontario, Mr. 

Speaker. They have about 12.8 million people in the province, 

and it happens to be the largest province in our country. And 

they have 107 seats, which follow the federal seats of the 

province. So in Ontario they‟re called MPPs, which is the 

Member of the Provincial Parliament, but they do again much 

the same work as we do here in Saskatchewan. I‟d argue very 

much the same work. 

 

So the province there is about 908 000 square kilometres, so 

they have a far more dense province, at least in most areas. 

That‟s at 14 people per square kilometre. So the population per 

seat is much more, however. They have 120,000 citizens per 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, 120,000 citizens per constituency. 

We‟re at around 18,000 per constituency, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

6.7 times the people we represent here in Saskatchewan. So 

120,000, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t know how Ontario MPPs do it, 

but apparently they must be quite amazing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In Quebec they have 7.9 million people. They have 125 seats in 

their Assembly. And just if anybody‟s wondering, they call 

their Assembly the National Assembly, or Assemblée nationale 

in French as they refer to it in Quebec, and their politics tend to 

be quite different in that province. But again the basic tasks of a 

member of their Assembly is very much like what we do here in 

Saskatchewan in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. For their 125 

seats, they have 63,000 citizens in each seat, 63,000 citizens. 

That is about 3.5 times the number of constituents than we 

represent in Saskatchewan. 

 

So in the Maritimes the story is a little bit different, so we . . . 

due to the small geographic size of the province and the tight, 

remote areas that they have. 

 

But one of the reasons I wanted to point out these numbers and 

draw attention both to the members opposite, to the governing 

members, just in case they haven‟t been listening carefully over 

the last few months of this debate, I wanted them to have a 

good picture of what we represent and what other provinces are 

representing. But I challenge the government to really 

demonstrate what is needed about these new politicians. I 

believe that citizens here in Saskatchewan are quite well 

represented. And I know personally and I have no doubt that 

colleagues on both sides of the House work very, very hard to 

represent their constituents. I know that I do. 

But the fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is we have a 

very, well an extremely — I won‟t just say very — it‟s an 

extremely low constituent-to-MLA ratio. This government 

actually is funny with ratios. They don‟t seem to like the 6-to-1 

ratio on return on investment for the film industry but . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, my colleagues are telling me 

I‟m giving them too much credit. But you know what? I believe 

that credit is, you give credit where credit is due. And the 

reality is we, I think we all try very hard to represent our 

constituents. But again, Bill No. 36, Bill No. 36 was not part of 

their election platform. Nowhere do they mention this in their 

election platform, and we‟ve looked. We‟ve looked high and 

low through that election platform, have seen no, no indication 

in their election platform, not even in the fine print. Not even in 

the fine print, Mr. Speaker. Not even with a magnifying glass 

have we been able to find anywhere in that platform or election 

document this government‟s plan to introduce three more 

MLAs. And they didn‟t introduce it during the election 

platform, so that‟s a shame. 

 

But they also actually had another opportunity to talk about it at 

the end of November here — I guess it would have been the 

beginning of December, Mr. Speaker — in the Throne Speech. 

The government had an opportunity in the Throne Speech to 

talk about this. They didn‟t mention a single word about 

introducing a Bill that would involve adding three more 

politicians at the cost of millions of dollars, millions of dollars, 

Mr. Speaker. And the reality, it is millions of dollars. 

 

The irony is, some of the spin that comes from that other side, 

from the government side of the bench, is about the saying that 

adding more politicians isn‟t going to cost money, is actually 

one of the silliest things I quite possibly have ever heard. That 

how is it that, that . . . The Minister of Justice actually, when the 

Premier‟s been asked questions and has refused to, has been 

asked questions . . . When the Premier‟s been asked questions 

about this, he has deferred to the Minister of Justice. And the 

Minister of Justice, actually I like the Minister of Justice. We 

were at an event together on Friday night. But I would quibble. 

I would completely, well more than quibble. I would outright 

disagree that how is it that adding three more MLAs does not 

cost more money, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And my colleague who spoke before me, the member from 

Massey Place, had talked a little bit about this. And the reality 

is yes, none of us in this Assembly, we all draw a paycheque, 

Mr. Speaker. The reality is all MLAs are paid a salary. We all 

have constituency offices where we have to pay rent, where we 

pay for utility bills, where we have the ability to hire staff to 

support our constituents, the people in our areas that we 

represent, when we‟re not able to be there. Those are all costs 

— the costs of driving back and forth. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, it‟s one of the absolutely the silliest 

things that I‟ve heard in my two and a half years here that you 

could argue that adding three more politicians does not cost any 

more money. I have no idea how they expect people to believe 

that. Perhaps if you say something long enough, you begin to 

start to believe that. And I think that that‟s the collective sense 

on those benches, both in the backbenches and the front 

benches. If you just say it long enough, you start to believe it, 

and you cross your fingers and hope that everybody else is. But 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that people don‟t believe that and 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

don‟t accept that. They know that adding more MLAs is (a) not 

needed and (b) will in fact cost more money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the other things that the Minister of Justice has 

commented about is — and trying to deflect attention, actually 

trying to deflect attention from the amendments in this Bill — 

he talks about the fact that his constituency of Saskatoon 

Southeast has grown, and it has. I would give him that. He has 

far more, far more citizens living in his constituency. But you 

know what, Mr. Speaker? There are provisions in the Act 

already that already speak to this. It‟s called boundary 

redistribution, and it happens every 10 years based on the 

census. So these are things that happen as due course. You 

don‟t need an extra piece of legislation or you don‟t need to add 

three more MLAs or discount those under 18 from the electoral 

process to make sure that seats are evenly redistributed, Mr. 

Speaker. You do not need to do that. That‟s completely 

unnecessary. 

 

You know what? I want to go back to the reality that this Bill 

No. 36, the amendments were not part of this election platform. 

And you know who actually said that, Mr. Speaker? The 

member from Prince Albert Carlton. He said it in committee on 

April 2nd in the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee, and I quote, “We never campaigned on more 

MLAs. We never talked about that.” He did not. Nobody has 

said . . . Nobody, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again it‟s interesting. Whenever you strike a chord with folks 

in here, Mr. Speaker, it gets noisy. And I‟m sure that you know 

you‟ve hit a chord, you know you‟ve hit a chord because they 

are feeling so guilty. They know. They‟re hearing, they are 

hearing, Mr. Speaker, from their citizens. Mr. Speaker, they are 

hearing from their citizens: why didn‟t you talk about this in 

your election platform? They are hearing this. So it‟s always so 

interesting to me, when you‟re on your feet making a speech, 

you know when it gets noisy over there that you have hit a 

chord, Mr. Speaker, or a nerve, as my colleague would like to 

say. Perhaps you hit a bit of nerve, and perhaps also I think the 

guilt starts to emanate from that side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟m sorry I keep referring to you as Deputy Speaker, 

but I know you‟ve just changed chairs here a little while ago 

here. So my apologies about that. 

 

[16:45] 

 

You know, I would commend actually, I would commend the 

member from Prince Albert Carlton because I think that that‟s 

one of the most straightforward things I‟ve heard from this 

government since I‟ve been in this House. So you know what? 

Again I‟m a big believer in giving credit where credit is due, 

and that‟s probably one of the most straightforward things that 

I‟ve had an opportunity to hear while sitting in this Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. So I am glad that the member‟s willing 

to admit that fact. 

 

And I would like to call on the other members on the 

government side of benches to admit that as well because I 

know they are getting phone calls and emails and visits to their 

constituency offices and letters — and letters, Mr. Speaker. 

Again, like I said, you always know you‟ve hit a chord. And I 

know that they‟re in their brain calculating how many letters 

did I . . . Oh my goodness, I did receive a whole stack of letters 

on that, Mr. Speaker. So you always know you hit a chord when 

they start speaking so loudly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I know people are asking why they didn‟t put this in 

their campaign literature. And again this is why we have this 

motion in front of us. Again earlier . . . So this motion today is 

asking the government on Bill No. 36 to press pause, take a 

breath, go back and talk to their constituents, do real and 

meaningful consultation. And they will hear, they will hear 

from their constituents that adding three more MLAs is not one 

of the priorities that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I‟ve now 

lost my train of thought. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . being heckled by the Speaker. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that people of Saskatchewan, their 

priority is not three more MLAs. The reality is they‟re, we‟re 

hearing the priority . . . The priorities of the people of 

Saskatchewan are education, health care, child care, good 

quality elder care, making sure that people have what they need 

to lead the best possible life. And adding three more politicians 

does not add to the quality of life for citizens of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the other, again we focus . . . We tend to focus a lot on the 

three more MLAs piece. But the other thing that I‟m hearing a 

great deal about, actually perhaps even more than three more 

MLAs, is the not counting those under 18 in the boundary, in 

the boundary, in the boundary redistribution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would like the members on the opposite benches, on the 

government benches to stand and tell me which doors they 

knocked on, who, which citizens said to them, you know what, I 

really, really would like you to add more politicians. That‟s 

what I need to make my life better — three more politicians, 

Mr. Speaker. I would like, I would like, I would like the 

members opposite to stand in their place and say with a straight 

face that people were asking them for more politicians. Because 

I know that wasn‟t the case. It‟s quite the opposite. 

 

The people of Saskatoon Riversdale, I do know the people of 

Saskatoon Riversdale do not want more politicians. They want 

me to address their concerns here or me to raise the issue. But 

they want the government to address the issues that are 

important to them. They want me to raise the issues here. 

 

I can tell you a little about one of my constituents. She would 

like adequate and affordable housing. She lives in Embassy 

Gardens which has seen rent increases over the last couple of 

years, actually every six months for the last few years. One 

constituent who lives in it, so her rent is more than $700 in Sask 

Housing‟s affordable housing, Mr. Speaker. In Sask Housing‟s 

affordable housing, her rent is more than $700 and her monthly 

income is $1,000, Mr. Speaker. Her rent is $700 and her 

monthly income is $1,000. This is a woman who‟s worked all 

her life but now has a disability and is not able to work, so she 

is living off $1,000 a month and her rent she‟s paying is more 

than $700 in Sask Housing‟s affordable housing which is in 

Embassy Gardens here in Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell you that she would much rather have affordable 

housing than three more politicians, Mr. Speaker. This is a real 

issue and concern for her. Again as I said, she‟s a senior. So 

drug costs, the fact of the matter that you‟re paying five more 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

dollars per prescription adds up for many, many individuals. So 

I know that people want services and they want to be able to 

have a healthy, appropriate, affordable roof over their heads so 

they can fulfill and live their best possible lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again, I talked a little about this constituent who lives in 

Embassy Gardens who in Sask Housing saw rent increases 

every six months, as everybody did in Sask Housing for six 

months in the affordable program, Mr. Speaker. This is where 

rent is, the policy is that it‟s supposed to be 10 per cent below 

market rate. Well I think first of all the reality is this is a 

government program and the minister has the opportunity to 

affect the policies of Sask Housing. And I would argue that 

being 10 per cent below market rate is not affordable. The 

reality is the market has been quite difficult, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think it‟s incumbent on the government to address in their own 

housing program some of the policies that are not working very 

well. 

 

I know, I actually just had a visit from a constituent a short 

while ago, well actually shortly before the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

And you know what? He and his wife are struggling with drug 

costs. I actually chatted with him before the budget — probably 

end of February, early March. And you know what? They were 

struggling with drug costs at that point in time. So two seniors 

who were struggling with drug costs before, before this change, 

Mr. Speaker, and now they‟re really feeling the pinch. If you‟ve 

got seven medications or any permutations and computations of 

medication, Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s 20 bucks a month or 

$100 a month, $20 a month when you‟re on a fixed income 

really has a huge impact, Mr. Speaker. So I know again, just 

reiterating, I know people in Saskatoon Riversdale want 

affordable housing, and they want medications that they can 

afford. 

 

And something else that they‟d like, Mr. Speaker, is more child 

care spaces. This isn‟t in Saskatoon Riversdale, but child care is 

one of my critic portfolios and I know at the francophone child 

care right now, Felix Le Chat, there are currently 63 spaces, but 

the wait-list for those 63 spaces is at 172, Mr. Speaker, 172. 

What‟s happening there, Mr. Speaker, is many people from 

abroad are coming to our province to call it home, which is 

fabulous, and many of them are from French-speaking nations. 

 

So imagine, put yourself in the shoes of someone coming from 

a French-speaking nation. Mr. Speaker, you come to Saskatoon 

and you‟ve been told that the supports will be there that you 

need to integrate and feel a part of Saskatoon and 

Saskatchewan, and your children perhaps don‟t speak any 

English yet. They might speak many other languages including 

French, but they might not speak English. So the one challenge 

we have here in Saskatchewan isn‟t just recruiting people to 

Saskatchewan, but it‟s retaining them here, making sure that 

they feel comfortable and confident and can contribute to our 

province. And one of the things that people need to contribute, 

Mr. Speaker, is affordable quality child care. 

 

And the reality is if you‟ve got francophone children who don‟t 

speak a word of English . . . as I said, they probably speak 

multiple other languages. Yes, they are going to learn English. 

Children are amazing little sponges. But when you come to a 

new country, a new culture, one of the connections with the 

community and into the community is often the school or the 

child care centre. And not having the opportunity for children to 

be able to integrate into their community and for families to be 

able to work or get an education, I think is very . . . well it‟s 

incredibly disappointing and disheartening. And again this is a 

priority of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — not 

having three more politicians. 

 

I‟m thinking about a family from Burundi actually who was on 

the list for the Felix Le Chat child care. And they came to 

Saskatchewan, had been here for a few months. They had been 

on that waiting list where there are 63 spaces and there are 172 

on the waiting list. And they were on this waiting list, Mr. 

Speaker, and do you know what happened? Well they couldn‟t 

wait any longer. They didn‟t have care for their kids. How can 

you work or go to school if you don‟t have care for your kids 

that meets your family‟s need? So you know where they‟ve 

gone, Mr. Speaker? To Quebec. So we‟ve lost a family from 

Burundi to Quebec because we don‟t, apparently this 

government does not have the priorities of the people in mind 

when it comes to paying for services like child care or 

education or health care. But this government has instead as one 

of its priorities adding millions of dollars — and it is millions of 

dollars — for three more politicians. 

 

I actually just two weeks ago, over the Easter break, had an 

opportunity to attend two senior teas and hear from them what‟s 

important to them. Again, what kinds of things did they talk to 

me about? Affordable medications. Access to the health care 

they need. Decent, affordable housing for them and their 

families. And they‟re not . . . You know the interesting thing 

about seniors is that they‟re not just concerned about their own 

little piece of the world. They‟re concerned about their kids and 

their grandkids, what‟s going on for them. And they see their 

grandkids paying increased tuition. They see their kids 

struggling to find child care for their grandkids. So they see 

their grandkids now not being able to buy a house or struggling 

with rent and having huge stress. 

 

So these seniors would like things — obviously affordable 

medication, good housing, the health care that they need — but 

they‟re also very concerned about the younger generations. And 

they were concerned about having those under 18 not included 

in the count, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They were very concerned 

about that. Not one of these seniors, not a single one of these 

seniors said to me, you know what, Danielle? You go back to 

that Legislative Assembly and you, on behalf of Saskatoon, the 

people of Saskatoon Riversdale, you tell that government that 

we want three more MLAs. Not a single one of them said that, 

Mr. Speaker. That was no surprise there to the members on this 

side of the House because we believe this is a wrong-headed 

approach, adding three more MLAs, especially with a 

government who is committed to cut the public service — the 

people who provide the front-line care, Mr. Speaker, the 

front-line services to the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

This government is willing to cut the public service but add 

three more politicians. And I haven‟t been in this Assembly 

very long, but I know there are some members opposite who 

have been in cabinet and are no longer there, and there may be 

others who are actually hugely opposed to bigger government. 

So it‟s interesting to me. Interesting to me, Mr. Speaker. 

Interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, that adding three more 

politicians is in fact bigger government. Adding three more 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

politicians — in case the members opposite didn‟t realize it — 

adding three more politicians is bigger government. 

 

I also had the member, I also had the Minister of Social 

Services, who is responsible for the Public Service Commission 

. . . I read in her Hansard last year she had mentioned that the 

Premier was committed to smaller government. And you know 

what? She said that to me last week in estimates, in committee. 

She said, we have a Premier who is committed to smaller 

government. Well it‟s only smaller government when it‟s the 

people who are providing direct services, apparently, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So at a time where we‟re telling the public service that they 

have to . . . that we‟re cutting the public service by 4 per cent 

over four years in a row, so almost to the tune of 16 per cent, 

we‟re cutting the public service and adding three more 

politicians. That does not fit, does not make any sense at all. 

And the fact that this government is spending money to cut the 

civil service, actually about 1.5 million on their lean 

investment, Mr. Speaker, in the first two years, 1.5 million to 

cut the civil service, Mr. Speaker, that is really lean, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One point five, actually that‟s a 6 to 1 return on investment, just 

in case you were wondering. And that‟s what the minister had 

said. Ironically, that‟s the 6 to 1 return on investment of the film 

employment tax credit, which this government thought was not 

a good idea. They didn‟t think the 6 to 1 return on investment 

was satisfactory for the film employment tax credit. But you 

know what? They think that 6 to 1 to implement their lean 

initiative is satisfactory, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again I just want to emphasize, in those estimates . . . I‟d 

read back in preparing for estimates. The Public Service 

Commission is a new critic duty for me so I was trying to do all 

the preparation necessary. And just reading back through 

Hansard, that there were many times where the minister had 

mentioned the Premier being committed to smaller government, 

and actually that was said again last week. This Premier is 

committed to smaller government. Well that actually flies 

completely in the face of adding three more MLAs, Mr. 

Speaker. That is exactly the opposite of smaller government. 

 

So we have much, much, much, much to say. And I‟ve heard a 

few members opposite say, oh Danielle, you‟ve only got eight 

minutes to speak. You know what, Mr. Speaker? I have a lot to 

say about this Bill. This is a really . . . This is a pressing issue 

and a pressing concern. This government needs to press pause 

on this piece of legislation, which we‟re providing them the 

opportunity to do through this, through this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The time now being after the hour of 5 

o‟clock, this Assembly stands adjourned to 7 p.m. this evening 

. . . recessed to 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1177 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1177 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1177 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1177 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1178 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1178 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1178 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Grade 5 and 6 Students Care for the Earth 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1178 

 Support for Families and their Pets 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1178 

 Municipal Leaders Prepare for New Potash Mine 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1179 

 Saskatoon Educator Named Outstanding Principal 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1179 

 Country Music Awards held in Prince Albert 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1179 

 Yorkton Hosts Gym Sask Provincial Championships 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1180 

 Child Welfare Transformation Strategy 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1180 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Conference Sponsorship 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1180 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1180 

 Green Rebate Program 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1181 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1181 

 Environmental Assessment Reviews 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 

 Electoral Representation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1184 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1184 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 42 — The Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1185 

 Bill No. 43 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1185 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1185 

 Recorded division (amendment)................................................................................................................................................ 1186 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1186 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1188 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1198 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


