




















































Hansard: April 23, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 33B  MONDAY, APRIL 23, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1205 

 April 23, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. I 

recognize the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time, and on the proposed amendment moved by Mr. 

Nilson.] 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to hear the 

government has had some time to think about things over 

supper and have come back and have decided that they are 

going support the opposition’s motion, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Anyway all jesting aside here, the motion, what are we talking 

about here tonight before we broke away for supper? Today 

we’re talking about Bill No. 36, An Act to amend The 

Constituency Boundaries Act, Mr. Speaker. And what we’re 

debating is the motion that this opposition has brought forward 

encouraging the government to basically, for all intents and 

purposes, press pause, take a step back, get out of the 

legislature, and go out for the next six months to our 

constituents and hear what our constituents have to say because 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker, came out of absolutely nowhere. It was 

not in this government’s election platform in November, which 

is . . . It is what it is. But they had an opportunity in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, to talk about it as well, and they skipped 

that opportunity as well. The first time we heard it was early 

December, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So again what are we asking again here? We’re asking the 

government to take a step back and do some consultation again. 

In this House, I’m a huge proponent of consultation, but I 

believe it needs to be meaningful and connected to people’s 

realities. And I’d like to talk about a good example of 

consultation. Actually just a couple of years ago this 

government, after privatizing SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] and feeling some pressure from the 

public, actually chose to take part in a task force, or actually 

initiated taking part in a film and TV task force. And you know 

what, Mr. Speaker? I’ve heard so much positive feedback from 

people who took part in that exercise, Mr. Speaker. They felt 

like they’d been listened to, they . . . A whole group of people 

came together — big producers, small producers, people from 

across the piece, Mr. Speaker — as well as different areas of 

government were represented around this film and TV task 

force, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know what? When this report was presented in October 

of 2010, this government hasn’t implemented a single 

recommendation. So they took a good piece of consultation — 

actually probably one of the best ones that this government has 

done because they haven’t been well-known for their good and 

meaningful consultation, but this was an opportunity actually 

where they did do some really great work — and what did they 

do? It became a completely hollow exercise, Mr. Speaker, a 

completely hollow exercise. And this government has failed to 

implement a single recommendation from the film and 

television task force.  

 

And instead what they’ve chosen to do is cancel the film 

employment tax credit, which I know that I’m hearing from 

hundreds and hundreds of people, and more than 8,000 people 

have signed a petition in a very short amount of time in support 

of the film employment tax credit. So they have taken a good 

piece of consultation and ignored everything about it. 

 

An example of not such a great piece of consultation that this 

government has done is from last session actually, was The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, for the government had talked 

about consulting or claimed that they had consulted, but clearly 

as groups came forward, they in fact hadn’t done any 

consultation. 

 

So I would encourage the government, and the opposition is 

encouraging the government, in these six months to pass our 

motion, Mr. Speaker, pass our motion, to take a moment, to 

take six months and talk to constituents because clearly this 

idea to add three more MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] and to exclude those under 18 from the count when 

redrawing constituency boundaries has come out of absolutely 

nowhere. This was not a piece of consultation. It clearly . . . 

Well who knows where it came from? Perhaps one of the 

ministers — perhaps we’ll call it the inner circle — came up 

with an idea that they thought was a brilliant idea at the time. 

But in fact that priority flies completely in the face with 

priorities of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had mentioned earlier in my speech before we had taken a 

break for supper here, I disagreed with the Premier with respect 

to him saying that elections are about voters. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe and we believe on this side of the House that elections 

are about citizens. Democracy is about citizens, not voters. This 

democracy is about citizens, not voters, and those under 18 are 

part of our democracy and deserve to be counted. 

 

The other thing that I actually disagree with with respect to the 

Premier, with respect to the Premier’s comments, I would argue 

that he is talking out of both sides of his mouth. On one hand, 

in the fall, he had a newly elected member who had planned on 

or had thought about continuing on with his previous 

employment. And actually the Premier gave his blessing to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. So on one hand we have the Premier saying 

that yes, it is just fine to work part-time, and then just a short 

while later saying, oh my goodness, we need more MLAs. 

 

So I’m not sure which it is, Mr. Speaker, but this Premier has 

talked about his MLAs being able to work part-time, which I 

can assure you, Mr. Speaker, this is not a part-time job, Mr. 

Speaker. This is often a seven-day-a-week job. This is not a 

part-time job. But my point here is that the Premier on one hand 

has talked about allowing his MLAs to work part-time, giving 

his blessing, and which would be a huge disservice to our 

constituents, Mr. Speaker. And on the other hand, he’s talked 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

about the need for more MLAs. So I would ask him, what is he 

talking about, Mr. Speaker? Well that’s a very good question. 

 

So I know that I have other colleagues who are interested in 

getting into this debate. There’s much to say on this topic, Mr. 

Speaker. And so again I just want to emphasize that I, we very 

much disagree with the Premier on this side of the House that 

elections are not just about voters. They are about citizens, and 

citizens include those who are under 18. And the second piece 

is, well which is it, Mr. Premier? Is it that MLAs work 

part-time, or we need more MLAs to do the work? So with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to pass it off. I’m sure my colleagues have 

much more to say. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a 

certain sense of . . . I don’t know how it is that we’ve come to 

this point in the debate, Mr. Speaker, because I guess the way 

that I’ve been brought up in democracy and the way that I 

understand what the members are about opposite is that these 

are men and women that have claimed a great deal of pride in 

saying what they were going to do and then doing what they’re 

going to say. 

 

And certainly from 2000 to 2011, there was hardly a week went 

by where we didn’t have something from the members opposite 

on the promises kept, promises made and promises kept front, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s always interesting to see the evolution of 

a government, the evolution of what it regards as important, 

what it thinks is a priority, and what, you know, how that 

relates to their time in power and whether or not that’s a certain 

process of what goes up must come down or, you know . . . 

[inaudible] . . . or ossification, or what goes on over there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But certainly this is a government that in 2007 to 2011, after 

thundering into power with a battle cry of hope trumps fear, 

well now, Mr. Speaker, we find out what people . . . People had 

to sort of sift through the details in terms of where they’re at 

with what that government was hoping for and what people 

should be afraid was actually going to happen. And I guess 

again, Mr. Speaker, in the last campaign we saw the moving 

Saskatchewan forward. We saw the Premier and, you know, 

perhaps we’ll get an applause out of this, Mr. Speaker, we saw 

them talk about how the only day in Saskatchewan better than 

today was tomorrow. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. McCall: — Yes, there we go. There we go. It’s almost 

Pavlovian over there, Mr. Speaker, in terms of you ring the bell 

and the dogs start salivating. But certainly the Premier had them 

well conditioned to applaud that line. 

 

I guess the thing that we wish would have happened in all of 

that, Mr. Speaker, is if they’d actually talked about what the 

bottom line was. And I guess in terms of Bill 36, we see this as 

a show of character on the part of the members opposite. We 

see this as demonstrative of where those members are at. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, it’s always sort of hard to figure out, you 

know, who’s in the inner, inner circle, who’s in the inner circle 

and who’s just along for the ride and there to provide the 

volume for the applause lines. But it’s pretty clear that on this 

one, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t the people of Saskatchewan that 

were invited along for the ride on Bill 36 because of course in 

the campaign we heard nothing about their plan to introduce 

three more MLAs. 

 

We heard about being ready for growth, and that was 

interesting and a fair point to debate, Mr. Speaker. But we 

didn’t hear that the fact was you should be ready for growth in 

the number of MLAs, and we didn’t hear about that from the 

members opposite. And we didn’t hear about the fact that yes, 

young people, you’re important. Young people, you’re the 

future. Young people, won’t you come on home? Young 

people, won’t you start your futures right here, and on and on 

and on. 

 

But when it comes to counting them in to the basic units of our 

electoral democracy in this province — the constituency — we 

didn’t hear a darn thing from the members opposite when it 

came to saying that everybody under the 18, despite the practice 

for the past two decades in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

despite the practice for our neighbours in Manitoba and our 

neighbours in Alberta, despite the practice in the majority of 

provincial jurisdictions in the country of Canada, despite the 

fact that this is good enough for the feds, Mr. Speaker, despite 

all those facts, we didn’t hear a darn thing from the members 

opposite when it came to saying that everyone under the age of 

18 is going to be eliminated from the count in terms of how we 

build our basic constituencies in this province. 

 

So you know, there’s two strikes Mr. Speaker. One strike, three 

MLAs, they didn’t say a darn thing about it. Two strikes, we’ve 

got everybody under the age of 18 is going be eliminated from 

the process for building the basic building blocks of our 

electoral democracy, the constituency. And third strike, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that, again despite a lot of rhetoric 

otherwise, the fact that these members didn’t say a goldarn 

thing about it in the election campaign. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I guess I grew up with the idea of sins 

of omission and sins of commission. And I guess I chalk this 

one up under, you know . . . I’m not sure, you know, where the 

sin of omission begins and where the sin of commission ends. 

But I do know this, Mr. Speaker. For people who spend so 

much time talking about, you know, a promise made is a debt 

unpaid — to again, you know, borrow from Robert Service — 

or the fact that the great pride that was taken in way they’d 

count off the promises made and promises so-called kept. The 

fact that we’re here today debating Bill No. 36, and the fact that 

members opposite couldn’t be bothered to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan about it when they went to the polls in the 

November and October of 2011, mere months ago, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The fact that we’re here today debating a measure that’s been 

brought forward in times of so-called prosperity or austerity, 

and the members opposite can’t seem to make up their minds as 

to what that is, but they do know this: that while they’ve got the 

money to put three more MLAs into play and they’ve got the 

brain power and the wherewithal and the room on their agenda 

to eliminate everyone under the age of 18 in terms of the 

purpose of building constituencies, alongside that, though, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve also got energy to make grandma and grandpa 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

pay more for their prescriptions, and kids as well. They’ve got 

the attention and the brain span to go after the film employment 

tax credit. They’ve got the wherewithal to get into the Tourism 

Saskatchewan as a Crown debate, and we’ll have a great 

discussion about that I’m sure in this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They had time and energy to do all these different things, but 

what they didn’t have the time and the energy and the decency 

or the forthrightness was to come forward in the election and 

say, this is our plan. And you know, on all those other measures 

that I talked about, Mr. Speaker, in terms of increasing the 

amount that seniors pay for prescription drugs or the changes 

that impact the kids in this equation or the fact that, you know, 

the folks with Highway No. 22, well go on and wait. It’s in a 

rolling five-year plan, and it just hasn’t rolled around to you 

yet. Or the fact that they’re going to turn Tourism 

Saskatchewan into a Crown. You know, they didn’t talk about 

any of those things in the campaign in terms of action or 

inaction, but that’s bad enough. That’s bad enough, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

But what is worse is when they come forward with something 

like Bill 36 to get at the very rules by which we conduct our 

electoral democracy in this province, by which people choose 

their representatives, by which people say how they’re going to 

be governed in this province. If you’re going to be messing 

around with that, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve got proposals on 

changes that relate to our electoral system or to how we conduct 

democracy in this province, it’s usually a pretty good rule or 

pretty basic fundamental expectation on the part of the citizenry 

that you’re going to ask the people whose lives are going to be 

changed by this, you’re going to ask them whether or not they 

like it. You’re going to ask them whether or not they approve of 

these changes to how the electoral democracy is going to be 

conducted in this province. And I guess that the fact that these 

members didn’t leaves us wondering on the opposition benches, 

well how the heck does that work? 

 

[19:15] 

 

How is it that they didn’t go to the people and say, look we 

think it’s a great idea to bring forward three more MLAs? We 

think it’s a great idea to eliminate everyone under the age of 18, 

and what that means for young neighbourhoods like, say, north 

central Regina or I think Keeseekoose up in Canora-Pelly or 

White Bear out in the Speaker’s neck of the woods, Mr. 

Speaker, places where they have a young population. But the 

fact that instead of talking to people about these changes before 

the election and asking them whether or not they should have a 

mandate to make these changes, whether or not these changes 

would be legitimate, whether or not the people want to give the 

authority to make these changes — you know, all pretty 

fundamental concepts in our representative democracy, Mr. 

Speaker — instead of doing that, they said nothing. They said 

nothing and they had a lot of sound and lights in terms of the 

campaign and a lot of flashy, flashy smoke and lights, I guess, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when it comes to the fire around which people are going to 

warm themselves, it has to do with basic gumption, Mr. 

Speaker. And the fact that these members didn’t have the 

decency to talk to people about a very fundamental change that 

was in the offing for the way that elections are conducted in this 

province, that they didn’t have the decency to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, makes me wonder, well why is that? And one, it’s not 

hard to figure out. It’s not hard to figure out — three more 

MLAs. And going around the province, you know, any number 

of their normal spear carriers in the media, Mr. Speaker, or out 

there in the pundit class, they’re not carrying the water for them 

on this. And they think in some cases that this is in fact, to 

quote, the “stupidest idea” that this government has come up 

with. 

 

And there are different people that have come forward. And I 

think even John Gormley was weighing in today saying, that 

three MLAs business, I don’t know if I’m there — Gormley, 

even John Gormley, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s sort of indicative of where these members are at, at this 

and we think, you know, they’re a bit out to sea on this. They’re 

out to sea on the prairies here, Mr. Speaker. But it’s indicative 

of a government that I think has grown self-interested, that’s 

more interested in the Sask Party interest as opposed to the 

Saskatchewan people’s interest. I think it’s about, you know, 

who does this benefit? Is it this government looking for how 

this benefits the great, great number of people in the province 

and, you know, making the case out there in communities that 

are young and old and around? They didn’t do that, Mr. 

Speaker. They didn’t say a goldarn thing about this. 

 

And I know very well, having spent some time in this House, 

Mr. Speaker, how members opposite would have reacted if this 

had been brought forward by other men and women. They 

would call it for what it is. They would say that if you don’t 

have, if you haven’t taken it to the people and you haven’t got a 

mandate for it, then that’s wrong. And if you do something like 

that, not just in terms of what your platform said or didn’t say, 

if you do something like that when it comes to the basic rules of 

our elections, then that is unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. And I can 

only imagine the kind of pyrotechnics and gymnastics that we’d 

see on the part of the members opposite. 

 

And I guess this is part of what makes people so cynical about 

this, about politics, Mr. Speaker, is because there’s a certain 

amount of this that they’re counting on in terms of people’s 

basic disdain for the system, that it’s just a bunch of politicians 

being a bunch of politicians. And that’s so sad, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s not only sad in terms of what those members had 

laid claim to in 2007 and 2011 in the campaigns, but it’s sad 

because the people that we should be serving to speak and that 

are further disenfranchised by this action, Mr. Speaker, it drives 

them further away from the system. And I guess maybe, maybe 

that’s a kind of cynicism that members opposite are counting 

on. And if that’s the case, it’s a sad, sad thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We should be figuring out how to open those gates wide to 

bring people in to our democratic system. We should be 

figuring out how to engage people in their society. We should 

be figuring out how not to just go and help serve a spaghetti 

dinner but how to make sure that we’re laying the way open for 

those people to participate in their democratic system. We 

should be thinking about how it is, when men and women come 

to their legislature, we welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly, and how we’re not here because, I’m not here as the 

member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre because I own this 

seat or this is my seat. It is given to me by the people of Regina 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

Elphinstone-Centre, as it is with every chair in this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, including yours. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if the terms on which you occupy 

these benches, if you haven’t been forthright with the people, if 

you haven’t been straight up about the terms on which you’re 

seeking to operate those, to take responsibility for this very 

great privilege in this society of ours, if you’re not straight with 

the people about how that works, Mr. Speaker, I think people 

hopefully will remember. 

 

On the other side again, Mr. Speaker, I think that members 

opposite are counting on a certain amount of cynicism, and I 

think they’re counting on short memories on the part of the 

people, Mr. Speaker. But my hope is this. You know, 

sometimes there’s different analogies for what happens when 

you’re in government, Mr. Speaker, but you know, certainly 

one of the analogies I’ve heard a number of times is that if 

you’re in government, you’ve got a backpack and, you know, 

each day in different ways you get a stone placed in that 

backpack. And some days they’re pebbles, Mr. Speaker, and 

some days they’re bricks. And at some point the weight of 

those stones and the weight of the decisions made that 

shouldn’t have been made and the compromises that shouldn’t 

have been made and all of that, sooner or later that weight will 

become irresistible and it will send you back down the 

mountain, off to think about how things go in opposition or 

perhaps, you know, what the political future of the province 

holds for your particular contribution or your party’s particular 

contribution. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of decisions that I’ve seen 

made in this House, I’ve seen certainly the party that I am a 

member of and a proud member of, I’ve seen us make some 

decisions, Mr. Speaker, that some of them were pebbles and 

some of them were bricks. And I’ve certainly seen members 

opposite make some decisions — some of them being pebbles 

and some of them being bricks. But I think, Mr. Speaker, this 

one is a brick of a decision. 

 

It’s a brick of a decision because rarely do you see something 

that is so nakedly, so patently in their own self-interest on the 

part of a governing party. And rarely do you see something 

brought forward with such unseemly haste after an election 

when they’ve just talked to the people. And instead, you know, 

of talking to people about it, instead of being straight up about 

what was in their platform, instead we see them keep their 

peace through the election, and then whoever the in group is 

over there bringing this forward, and then everybody else over 

there gets to catch up. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I know that there is a power structure 

over there. I know that there’s an in group and an out group and 

we can see that in different ways, Mr. Speaker. But one thing 

that we’re pretty certain of, one thing that we’re pretty certain 

of, Mr. Speaker, we’ve given them a chance to press pause on 

this course of action. We’ve given them a chance to give this a 

bit of a think. We’ve given them a chance to say, you know, 

time out; maybe we got this one wrong. And of course they’ve 

not availed themselves of that, Mr. Speaker, in terms of their 

treatment of the recent amendment. It is pretty clear that all 

members were on hand for that decision. 

 

So again whatever sort of hopes we had for the backbench in 

this, Mr. Speaker, whatever sort of expectations we had of the 

values that we think propel different members over there into 

power, when push comes to shove, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty 

clear what side those members are on. Are they there because 

they’re whipped and because it’s a matter of Sask Party 

self-interest, or are they there for the people, Mr. Speaker? Are 

they there because they’ve got a mandate to do these things to 

the electoral system in this province from the people they seek 

to govern, Mr. Speaker? Are they there because of that? Well 

no they’re not, Mr. Speaker. We’ve given them one chance on 

the reasoned amendment to show who’s got some gumption 

when it comes to feeling some concern about what they’ve got 

a mandate to do in this government and what they don’t, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, we’ve put forward the hoist in the 

hopes that members opposite will avail themselves of this 

opportunity to go out and talk to the people of Saskatchewan 

and say, look, we’ve got this great idea. We’ve got this great 

idea for three more MLAs, and we want to eliminate everybody 

under the age of 18 in terms of how our constituencies are 

constructed. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? If at the end of six months 

they’re able to come back and make a convincing case that they 

had consulted and that the people thought this was a 

tremendous idea, then that is something that, I think, that would 

give us a lot of pause for thought, Mr. Speaker. That would say 

to us that here’s a government that’s serious about getting a 

mandate for the things that they do. Here’s a government that’s 

serious about keeping their promises and talking about what 

they’re going to do and getting consent from the people they 

seek to govern. And if that was the case, Mr. Speaker, then that 

would be fair enough. There are things the members opposite 

do in terms of their legislative agenda or in terms of their 

budgetary agenda, but bottom line is that, you know, when they 

went to the people, both sides put forward their platforms. 

Other entities put forward platforms. And they’ve got a 

mandate to govern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is the bottom line in our representative democracy, 

and that is fair enough. And it’s up to us to work and to make 

sure that we do a better job of listening and a better job of 

responding to the hopes and dreams and aspirations of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I keep coming back to it, Mr. Speaker. This was nowhere in 

terms of their platform. This is nowhere in terms of that bundle 

of actions that they have a mandate from the people of 

Saskatchewan to carry forward. And something that is so 

fundamental to our electoral system and to our democracy as 

we practise it, Mr. Speaker, is that consent from the governed to 

be governed. And if you don’t have that consent and if you 

don’t have that mandate, Mr. Speaker, then your actions can be 

judged to be illegitimate. They can be judged to be suspect. 

They can be judged to be wrong. They can be judged as counter 

against the people that sent you to the legislature in the first 

place. And this Bill fits that criteria in so many different ways, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We, myself and the member from Rosemont and a number of 

members opposite, had the opportunity to stop by the North 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

Central Family Centre. And it’s an organization that I know has 

long-standing ties and support from both sides of this House. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, North Central Family Centre is in the 

middle of North Central, which is the youngest neighbourhood 

in the city of Regina by a long shot, Mr. Speaker. And all those 

kids in the last census, they were counted in this past census. 

And in terms of the last boundary redistribution, they were 

counted and they went into what’s made up Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, Mr. Speaker. And they helped to build that 

basic building block of our electoral democracy in this 

province, the constituency. 

 

And Regina Elphinstone-Centre in that particular boundary 

redistribution, Mr. Committee Chair, or Mr. Speaker — there 

we go; all right, we’ll just stick with that — in that last 

boundary redistribution, Mr. Speaker, Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre clocked in at, I think, the fourth or fifth 

most populous constituency in all of Saskatchewan. And again, 

it’s such a fascinating place in so many ways, Mr. Speaker. And 

it’s my home, and it’s got its great things and its bad things, and 

it’s a place that I love and love dearly. 

 

But one of the things that I find endlessly hopeful about the 

place, and one of the things that I find also to be a challenge is 

the great number of young people in that constituency, and the 

fact that they are in fact the future of, not just North Central or 

Elphinstone-Centre, but the future of Saskatchewan, and how if 

we’re not making the right decisions in this Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker, how decisions made and affect and ripple out over not 

just days and months, but years and decades, and how decisions 

that we make around housing and decisions that we make 

around education and decisions that we make around the 

economy and decisions that we make around community safety, 

how all of these things will hopefully positively impact the 

people that we seek to represent. And that’s so true in spades, 

Mr. Speaker, for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

So the thing I don’t understand is that, given the way that 

children and youth play such a huge part of life in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, given the fact that they’ve been part of the 

warp and woof of the way we’ve built constituencies for the 

past decade, given the fact that they are so important to not just 

the proclaimed agenda of the members opposite in terms of 

different legislative items or different budgetary items, but 

given the way that, you know, tonight we see members opposite 

interacting with their kids. And it’s clear that those kids are 

important, and it’s clear when the young people come to this 

legislature and they’re welcomed to their Legislative Assembly 

and there’s a lot of words put forward about how important they 

are. 

 

[19:30] 

 

If those words are to be judged as true, Mr. Speaker, if kids are 

in fact going to matter to this government or if they’re going to 

matter to this agenda, then how is it that in one of the most 

fundamental structures in the things that we have to do within 

this Legislative Assembly, the electoral system, how is it that 

after including them in the process and making sure that our 

constituencies have them built right into the picture, and by 

extension, their concerns, Mr. Speaker, how is it that after two 

decades of doing that, members opposite now will seek to turn 

back the clock? 

And we’ve heard from the Children’s Advocate, Mr. Speaker. 

And we’ve heard again this is a bit of a pattern that’s pretty 

clear with this government in terms of the way that independent 

officers have had to step in and step up at times, Mr. Speaker. 

When it comes to a government that is — I don’t know if it’s 

arrogance or if it’s thoughtlessness or self-interest or what 

precisely propels the members opposite in terms of their actions 

— but from time to time, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the 

independent officers step up. So it was with definite interest 

that we looked on the intervention from the Children’s 

Advocate. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Pringle is a past member of this 

Legislative Assembly, did tremendous work at the Saskatoon 

Food Bank, was called upon by government to perform any 

number of functions, be it through the CBO [community-based 

organization] summit or as the Co-Chair of the then 

Merriman-Pringle task force on housing or the work that was 

done that, even to this day, we are hearing referenced around 

the child welfare system and the review that was undertaken 

there. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, so I think Mr. Pringle has 

demonstrated himself as someone who just through the 

contribution he’s made to the public affairs of Saskatchewan, 

he’s somebody that, when he speaks, people would do well to 

listen. And that that authoritative quality to what Mr. Pringle 

has to say about affairs in Saskatchewan, that that was upgraded 

to the Office of the Children’s Advocate. Again, Mr. Speaker, it 

only enhances the authority that that individual brings when 

making comment on the affairs of this province. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen instances in the past when 

different independent officers of the day weigh in on different 

affairs of the government. And for any government, that’s a big 

deal to be condemned or to have your actions questioned by one 

of the independent officers. That’s a big deal. And certainly 

that’s why those individuals were put in those places to begin 

with. And be it the Ombudsman or the Chief Electoral Officer 

or the Privacy Commissioner, these are individuals that were 

put there to provide a safeguard, to provide an ally for the 

public interest over and above narrow political self-interest that 

all governments fall prey to from time to time. 

 

So when the Children’s Advocate weighs in and says that this 

government is wrong, that it has opened itself up to possible 

legal action under the Charter, when he talks about his concern 

for this action and what it says to First Nations people in this 

province, almost half of whom are under the age of 18 and who 

should be a valued part of this province, a valued treasure for 

this province, a valued opportunity for this province, when the 

Children’s Advocate weighs in and says that it’s wrong on 

these different points, you’d think that that government would 

stand up and say, okay, that’s your job. You’re there to do that 

job and we value what you have to say. And they have said 

some of that, Mr. Speaker. But then they follow it up with, well 

I guess we’ll just have to agree to disagree. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, this is in a couple of different movies 

we’ve seen with this government, one with labour legislation 

where the labour legislation is brought forward as fair and 

balanced, and then it’s condemned by the International Labour 

Organization. And members opposite just say, oh well it’s just 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

big labour bellyaching or whatever, you know, passed for 

debate from the members opposite. But then they get taken to 

court. And then Justice Dennis Ball comes back and says that, 

you know, it’s not just a matter of debate; it’s a matter of law 

— that what you have done is unconstitutional. And there’s a 

tremendous amount of time and effort that’s gone into the thing 

to date, and of course they’ve appealed it. And we’ll see were 

this winds up yet, Mr. Speaker. But again this is a symptom of a 

government that is out of touch or that thinks it knows best. 

And, you know, to heck with the people that have been tasked 

as the advocates for the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve got a 

mandate from the general election. We know best. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see how it works out with the 

labour legislation, but it hasn’t been a pretty venture to date. 

And there’s been a lot of time and effort and frustration plowed 

into something that’s been I think a destructive exercise for this 

province instead of something that builds and brings people 

together. And I think we’re seeing another movie like that 

unfold with Bill 36, Mr. Speaker, as regards what’s happening 

with bringing people together and bringing people into the 

system. 

 

And on this one, Mr. Speaker, again on different actions of the 

government, you look to those independent officers of this 

Assembly to provide that advice, to provide that sober second 

thought, to borrow an attribute that’s normally attributed to the 

Senate, Mr. Speaker. But certainly in the checks and balances 

that we have in this Assembly and the checks and balances that 

we have in this province of ours, the independent officers are 

hugely critical to that effort. 

 

And it brings to mind another effort, Mr. Speaker, in the way 

that games got played with the previous Chief Electoral Officer 

in this province and the way that those members opposite made 

changes to the elections identification regime in this province 

and the way that they got shut down at the eleventh hour by the 

Acting Chief Electoral Officer who took the, you know, highly 

unusual step of standing up and saying what they’re doing on 

this is wrong. This is what the federal government does. This is 

what worked relatively well in the system previously. And 

attestations for on-reserve First Nations should be upheld and 

should be allowed to be used in the election. 

 

And thank goodness that members opposite decided to stand 

down on that. But again it’s the time and effort and energy and 

the way that it had led up to that point, Mr. Speaker, was kind 

of sad to see in this province of ours where we need ways to 

bring people together instead of ways to wedge or drive people 

apart. And again, you know, the people have their own defence 

in the ballot box. But in that case I was very glad to see the 

Acting Chief Electoral Officer step in to make sure that we 

didn’t have election law in this province or an election practice 

in this province that was so retrograde as to ask any number of 

questions about its motivation and the way that it singled out a 

particular group in this province. 

 

Well again, Mr. Speaker, we have a circumstance in the case of 

Bill No. 36 where something like 40-plus per cent of First 

Nations in this province are under the age of 18. And different 

times, Mr. Speaker, the argument is made that, in some cases, 

the future in Saskatchewan is young and Aboriginal. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, I was reminded of that as recently as this supper 

hour going to the North Central Family Centre and seeing all of 

those young kids and all of those young First Nations kids that 

have such a great future in front of them, or should have such a 

great future in front of them, and who, on so many other fronts, 

are rhetorically hugged and welcomed by this government in 

terms of saying that, yes, your issues are important to us. But 

when it comes to two decades of electoral practice in this 

province, when it comes to what is the law of the land in the 

great majority of other provincial jurisdictions and which is 

good enough for the federal government, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to the fact of including people under the age of 18 in the 

construction of the basic building blocks of our democracy and 

when it comes to putting deed to the word that we hear from the 

members opposite as to the importance of children and youth to 

this province, we find out just where that sentiment ends and 

where the Sask Party self-interest really begins. Because 

they’ve been written out in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I don’t know what it is about this government that 

makes them so scared of kids, or makes them hold such an 

animus towards kids and youth in terms of what has been the 

case for the past two decades and their inclusion in the basic 

building blocks of this democracy that we practice here in 

Saskatchewan. Is it because a young neighbourhood like north 

central generally doesn’t vote for the Sask Party? Is that why 

they’re being singled out in this fashion, Mr. Speaker? I think it 

is. Is it because a lot of the younger constituencies in this 

province, you know, who have highly populous numbers when 

it comes to the redistribution that was done after the 2001 

census, is it because those constituencies don’t traditionally 

vote for the Sask Party? 

 

Well I guess this is what we’re finding out, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

finding out the gap that exists between what is said by members 

opposite and what is done in this Legislative Chamber when it 

comes to safeguarding and securing the future of those young 

people, and considering them in the most basic of ways when it 

comes to the way that we practice our elections here in 

Saskatchewan. And it’s a sad thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess the other thing that we’ve talked a lot about in this 

Chamber is the whole question of three more MLAs, and my 

colleagues have done a good job of talking about how out of 

whack, how much of a gap this would place between us and the 

rest of the provincial jurisdictions in terms of the per capita 

representation. 

 

And I guess the one thing I want to add to that, Mr. Speaker, the 

one thing I want to add to that is we had a lot of doors that I 

knocked on in the election, Mr. Speaker. I knocked on a lot of 

doors and I had the pleasure of going out and doing some door 

knocking last Sunday, Mr. Speaker. And in all the doors I 

knocked on in the campaign, all the doors I knocked on in 

Cathedral village, all the doors I knocked in my home 

neighbourhood of north central, all the doors I knocked on in 

downtown, all the doors I knocked on in Heritage, all the doors 

I knocked on in Regent Park, and all the doors I knocked on in 

the old warehouse district, you know what, Mr. Speaker? Not a 

single person raised the issue of more MLAs and how we need 

more MLAs in this province with me on the doorstep. 

 

And I guess this is as it should be, Mr. Speaker, because you 

know, who the heck expects something like that when a 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

government says it’s ready for growth or it’s ready for this, that, 

or the other thing? But you expect them to make investments in 

infrastructure, in health care, in education. You expect that to 

be the gist of ready for growth, Mr. Speaker. But that of course 

is not what those members opposite meant when it came to 

ready for growth. What as it turns out they meant was three 

more MLAs, and this year, Mr. Speaker, was legislation that 

was just in time for Christmas, because of course nothing set 

off the Christmas hearth just so much as news of three more 

MLAs coming and coming soon. Thank you to the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, if you’d gone home 

with news of that as like, honey, kids, Merry Christmas — 

we’re bringing home three more MLAs. I think they’d send you 

back to the store, Mr. Speaker. I think they’d say, what the heck 

are you thinking? And what did we do so badly over the year to 

deserve that as our Christmas gift? But that’s, of course, what 

we saw this government bringing forward just, you know, in the 

Christmas season — word of three more MLAs soon to be 

coming upon the land. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if they’d gotten a mandate, if they’d 

gotten some marching orders from the people of Saskatchewan 

about how this was a concern or a priority for the people of 

Saskatchewan and this is what the people needed addressed in 

the agenda of their government, that would be one thing. But of 

course they didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They weren’t on doorsteps in the Trianon seniors’ high-rise, 

Mr. Speaker. They weren’t on doorsteps there saying, yes, 

you’ve got concerns about the way that your housing is tight 

and the way that your rent keeps on going up and you have a 

hard time making ends meet and you have a hard time paying 

the bills; and yes, these are your golden years; and yes, all these 

things that you thought would be getting easier seem to keep 

getting more difficult. Yes to all those things. But don’t worry. 

The Sask Party has three more MLAs coming on down the line. 

You know, I certainly didn’t see anything like that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

For all the doorsteps I stood on and talked to people about 

housing, and the way that they were having a hard time keeping 

up to the rent and the way that this had propelled them into 

using the food bank for the first time, in the case of one woman 

I talked to over just off Pasqua, and the way that she was 

worried about keeping body and soul together despite the fact 

you’re working a full-time, just above minimum wage job. And 

the way that she was worried about providing for her daughter, 

who is in elementary school at Sacred Heart, and for her son 

who’s going to start, had just started that fall at O’Neill. And 

the way that she was worried as a mother that here she was, 

what should be, you know, a happy time of her life, where if 

you told her 10 years before that that it was going to be this 

tough, she would have said, no, you’ve got to be kidding me. 

But the way that she was finding it so hard to make ends meet 

and so worrisome about ensuring that her kids had that some of 

the good things in life and a shot at making a good life for 

themselves, and the way that this weighed on her heart and on 

her mind so heavily. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, I certainly didn’t have anything 

to say about there was three more MLAs coming. And I know 

for a certainty that my Sask Party opponent didn’t have 

anything to say about, well, for all these kind of concerns 

you’re facing around cost of living or housing, you know, here 

are the different measures that we’re bringing in. And oh, by 

the way, a ready-for-growth government is going to bring in 

three more MLAs. 

 

They didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker, because people would have 

thrown them off their doorsteps. They would have thrown them 

away from their kitchen table if they had the decency to bring 

that up. So why didn’t they bring it up, Mr. Speaker? Well it’s 

pretty plain why they didn’t bring that up. But now that it’s 

after the election and they think it’s to their strategic advantage 

that they think this works for them, that they think this is in 

their narrow self-interest, well, of course we see the real agenda 

emerge. 

 

I think about the folks that I talk to, working people out on 

Avonhurst Drive in poll no. 3, and, you know, one of them had 

a kid with a disability and the way that that was a challenge in 

their life and the sort of struggles that they were having paying 

the bills. 

 

I think about the pioneers that built our province that I talk to in 

Davis Mews or Trianon or Renaissance or in Palliser Place and 

the way that they were finding it tough to make ends meet in 

their golden age and at what should have been a good time for 

these people, Mr. Speaker, but the way that they found it 

increasingly hard to make ends meet. 

 

I think about different health care providers I talk to, that one 

had a concern around how Alzheimer’s patients are dealt with 

in this province and the kind of dementia issues that are being 

faced in places like Santa Maria care home. 

 

I think about kids that were worried about all this that they’d 

heard about Scott Collegiate and whether or not that was going 

to show up as a renewed, revitalized institution for the 

neighbourhood, Mr. Speaker, in terms of that critical role that a 

high school should play in a neighbourhood, but the way that, 

you know, they’d heard a lot of good news and then it just kept 

going on and on and on in terms of no action being shown. 

 

I think about people that live across the street from Herchmer 

School and the way that they were concerned about how fast 

that school was torn down and what would happen with 

Wascana and Herchmer and, you know, what was going to be 

combined and was there going to be a possibility for housing in 

all this. And I think about all those different sort of hopes and 

dreams that people had, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think again, you know, not one of them said, you know, 

and by the way, what I’d really hope to see that government 

give in at the tail end of the sitting when you go back after the 

election is that three MLA plank from their platform. You 

know, nobody was talking about that because of course the 

Sask Party wasn’t talking about that. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a point that we’re trying to impress 

upon members opposite. And you know, we’re coming up a 

vote on the hoist. And maybe they’ll see it in their hearts and 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

see it in their minds to realize that this is a bad idea and that this 

is a brick that they’re going to put in their backpack. And 

maybe they’ve got a chance to just step away from the brick, 

just lay it down and step away from it and go back to the 

drawing board. 

 

Or at least have the decency to talk to people about something 

like this before they do it, Mr. Speaker, at least have the 

common courtesy to go talk to people and say that, you know, 

we think this is part of the deal in a growing province and this 

is worthy of consideration, and this business about everyone 

under the 18, under the age of 18, we want to discount them 

from the electoral system in terms of the construction of the 

constituencies, and go have that conversation with the people 

that they seek to govern, Mr. Speaker. Go have that 

conversation with the people that they seek to represent in this 

Legislative Assembly. And if the people say, yes, that’s a great 

idea — you’ve got my support; go ahead; do it — then fair 

enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that’s not what happened in this past fall. That’s not what 

happened in the election when you’re supposed to go to people 

and make that bargain, that covenant with the voters in terms of 

what your platform is, what your ideas are, and how people 

support that or they don’t. They didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. 

They did not do that. 

 

And I guess what we think there will be is a day of reckoning 

on that, Mr. Speaker. We think again, you know, if they insist 

upon throwing the old brick in the backpack, we think that they 

may look back at this day, they may look at this Bill and think, 

yes, that was all about us. That was all about the Sask Party. 

That wasn’t about the Saskatchewan people, which is supposed 

to be what it’s about, and we got it wrong. And I guess the 

thing is, Mr. Speaker, it’s not too late to do that. 

 

And again, you know, it’s clear that they’ve got unanimous 

support over there in terms of going ahead on this. But this is 

one last thing where they can take that time, go — to borrow a 

phrase from the Minister of Justice, the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast — go out and look the voter in the eye and 

say that this is a good idea. This is a what we’re running on. 

This the policy we want to make into practice. This is an idea 

we want to make real. And they can go out to the people and 

look them in the eye, Mr. Speaker, and have that conversation. 

And if people come back and say, great — that’s a wonderful 

idea; you know, glad you thought of it, Sask Party; how 

helpful; how thoughtful — if they can come back with 

something that demonstrates that, then fair enough because 

that’s how it works in a democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s how it should work in particular when you’re doing 

something to the basic rules of the game, when you’re trying to 

change the way that people get elected in this province, when 

you’re trying to change the electoral democracy in this 

province. But again if you’re not doing that, Mr. Speaker, then 

you got to wonder about the motives. You got to wonder about 

the reasons why. And if that’s how it’s playing for members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, then well, I certainly hope the people of 

Saskatchewan expect better from their legislators. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I think what these members are 

counting on is cynicism and disenchantment on the part of the 

electorate to slide them through on this one. But I expect better 

and I hope for better from the people of Saskatchewan. I hope 

people remember this and remember it well that, when it came 

time for that first round of action on the part of members 

opposite, when it came to being stewards of something that was 

so fundamental to our electoral democracy in this province, that 

they didn’t have the decency, they weren’t forthright with their 

plans for changing the number of MLAs — increasing it by 

three in this province — and they weren’t forthright about the 

elimination of people under the age of 18 from the way we 

build our basic building blocks in this democracy. 

 

And you can go through the, you can go through the map. You 

can go through the issues. You can go through any number of 

things, Mr. Speaker, where this is such a no-brainer. It’s a, you 

know, why would you do something about that and you’re not 

doing something about — as my colleague from Rosemont was 

talking about — do something for Highway 22, you know, that 

the Sask Park certainly had a lot to say about, not just before 

the 2011 campaign, Mr. Speaker, but before the 2007 

campaign, Mr. Speaker, you know. 

 

Again this is a government that’s got the wherewithal to bring 

forward three more MLAs, to eliminate everybody under the 

age of 18 from the count, and not bother to talk to people about 

it in the campaign. But when it comes to any number of other 

issues, the members opposite didn’t have the intestinal fortitude 

or the decency to talk to the people of Saskatchewan about their 

plans. 

 

So again, one of the things that we have out in front of us, Mr. 

Speaker, is to try and hold the government, this government to 

account, to try to demand accountability from the members 

opposite, to try and make them live up to their claim that they 

would be the most open, accountable, and transparent 

government in the history of the province. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s pretty interesting that on such a fundamental test 

as this, so soon out of the gates after the last election, that this 

government is failing so badly. We are trying to give them a 

chance to do the right thing here, Mr. Speaker, and they keep 

arrogantly passing that by. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, the way 

that . . . the final sort of accountability on this will be exacted 

by the people themselves. 

 

But I do have hope for the people, Mr. Speaker. I do believe in 

the people, and I do believe in the people’s wisdom. And I do 

believe in the people’s ability to understand when they’ve been 

sold a bill of goods, when they haven’t been dealt with fairly by 

a political party, and when they haven’t been dealt with 

forthrightly by a political party. And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the way that this government has conducted itself on this piece 

of legislation, I think the people are going to mark this and 

mark it well. 

 

They’re going to mark it as, you know, when they’re interested 

in tuition issues, when they’re interested in kids getting the 

trades so they can get the good jobs to make the good bucks for 

their family, start a family in some cases. When they’re 

interested in the cost of housing, Mr. Speaker, when they’re 

interested in the cost of living, when they’re interested in 

making sure that grandma and grandpa can afford to pay their 

meds, when they’re interested in whether or not they have make 

up their bills by going to the food bank at the end of the month, 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

Mr. Speaker. When they’re interested in making sure that 

schools are taken care of, that health care is taken care of, that 

the basic sort of infrastructure is there to take care of. When 

they’re interested in paying a fair tax dollar, Mr. Speaker, when 

they’re interested in making sure that the economy is working, 

and not just for the few but for the many. 

 

When people are interested in those things, it’s interesting that 

this government’s response is to bring something forward in 

this regard, to bring something forward that they didn’t talk 

about on the hustings, that they didn’t talk to the people of 

Saskatchewan about to get a mandate, that they didn’t have in 

their platform, that they didn’t have in their Throne Speech, that 

they didn’t say, you know, we seek to govern you, people of 

Saskatchewan, and here is one of the changes that we’d like to 

make to the fundamental way that we run elections in this 

province. Here’s a change that we think is worthy of your 

consideration. 

 

They didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have a mandate 

for this action. This action is illegitimate. This action is 

something that, if it was somebody else doing it, they would be 

decrying it to no end. This is something that they’re relying on 

cynicism and short memories to carry them through on. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I think when people come time to evaluate their 

next platform, when people come to say, you know, that nice 

young leader of yours from Swift Current, he had all the talk 

about the promises made and the promises kept, well one of the 

things he didn’t tell us in this last election was about all the 

promises that you weren’t making but all the things that you 

were going to do. 

 

And when it comes time to reckon those out, Mr. Speaker, 

again there are different policy choices that have been made by 

members opposite that again, that they, you know, mere months 

after a general election, feel compelled to step forward with 

trying to kill the film industry in this province via the action on 

the film employment tax credit. That they feel compelled to roll 

Tourism Saskatchewan — a very successful, long-standing 

partnership with industry and front-line operators in this 

province — that they feel compelled to take that over because 

they’re coveting the ad budget, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

interesting to see that the only thing that apparently trumps their 

disdain for Crown corporations is their desire to take over the 

ad budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When people are evaluating those kind of actions, when they 

evaluate the fact that mere months after the election, when they 

shined up seniors to no end but come budget time they want to 

increase the price of their prescription drugs, they didn’t say 

anything about any of those things in the election, Mr. Speaker. 

And again that’s bad enough. And people will pay, you know, 

whatever price they will for that. But when it comes to the 

fundamental rules of our democracy, when it comes to how we 

practise elections in this province, a fundamental rule of the 

thing is that, if you’re going to make a change to that, you 

should seek the permission of those governed, the people of this 

province. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, did they come forward in the election 

and say, you know, stop the presses? We’ve got a great idea 

here. Let’s have three more MLAs and let’s eliminate everyone 

under the age of 18 in terms of the way that we build 

constituencies in this province. They did not. They did not, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’ve given them a chance to press pause on this 

thing with the reasoned amendments, and the reasons for that 

are very clear. 

 

They have not done that, Mr. Speaker. We’ve given them a 

chance to avail themselves of demonstrating whether or not 

there are any independent thinkers over there or whether or not 

the in-group will rule on this. And that’s everybody who didn’t 

campaign on this, and they might have some misgivings about 

it, but they’re along for the ride anyway. Well there’s a chance 

here, Mr. Speaker, to get off. There’s a chance for members 

opposite to stand up for what they went door to door talking to 

people about. And they didn’t go door to door talking about 

three more MLAs and to eliminate everyone under the age of 

18 when it comes to the basic building blocks of our 

democracy. They didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. And we know 

what their opinion is of their chance to stand down on that. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the last sort of chance they’ve got here is to 

avail themselves of the pause that is afforded to the Legislative 

Assembly under the rules in terms of putting a pause on this 

legislation for six months. And if those members can go out to 

the public and, you know, maybe some of them can tour pundits 

around their ridings, Mr. Speaker, or whatever sort of plans 

they have for it. But if they can go out and gather together and 

scrape together and scratch together some kind of a mandate, 

something that resembles a mandate, something that 

demonstrates that they actually talked to people outside of the 

walls of their caucus room, Mr. Speaker, if they can do that and 

come back with something that’s convincing, then fair enough. 

That’s the way it goes in the system. That’s the way it goes in 

our representative democracy. If you’re seeking to represent 

people in this democracy, Mr. Speaker, you should tell them 

what’s going to get done in their name. They didn’t do that, Mr. 

Speaker, and for so very many reasons. 

 

And I know that this played out in doorstep after doorstep in 

places like Pelican Narrows and places like the west side, 

places like the east side of Saskatoon, places right around this 

province. They didn’t get that mandate, Mr. Speaker, and this 

gives them a chance to go out and at least address some of the 

wrong that they’ve created in this. But my hope is this, Mr. 

Speaker, that should they refuse to avail themselves of this 

opportunity to demonstrate that yes, they’re human and to err is 

human and that they’re not perfect, but that they do take it 

seriously when it comes to asking people about what their 

mandate should be and what they should be doing, this hoist 

will give them that opportunity, and I hope to goodness that 

they take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again for every school group that comes to this legislature and 

they’re welcomed to their Legislative Assembly, for every time 

we hear this rhetoric about the importance of young people to 

our system and how their future isn’t just the important thing 

but right now matters as well, any time we talk about looking 

beyond the horizons of these years to make decisions in this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker, we should remember today. And we 

should remember that if we couldn’t be bothered to carry on 

with a practice that included those under the age of 18 for two 

decades previous in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, if they 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

couldn’t be bothered to do that and — worse — couldn’t be 

bothered to talk to the people to get a mandate to do that, if they 

couldn’t be bothered to talk about how they wanted to bring 

forward three MLAs but, you know, take all these bad actions 

or take wrong action or sit back with inaction on different 

issues, Mr. Speaker, if they couldn’t do those things, then again 

I think the day of reckoning will come. And my hope is that the 

people remember how shabbily their democratic system was 

treated by those who purport to represent them and to govern 

them. 

 

I know that there are many other members in this debate that 

want to talk about the concept of the hoist in particular. I 

believe that they’re ready to go at this time, Mr. Speaker, and 

with that I will say this: Bill 36 is wrong. It should be pulled. 

That this government brought forward three more MLAs, that it 

seeks to eliminate everyone under the age of 18 from our 

electoral process and that, worst of all, Mr. Speaker, that they 

did not seek the mandate from the people to do these things in 

their name — it’s wrong for all those reasons. And this 

government should have the decency to pull this legislation and 

to go talk to the people whose name they seek to govern in in 

the first place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to get up this evening and talk a bit about the 

amendment that we put forward this afternoon, the hoist, 

because I think it’s an important time for the government to 

take a few months, six months particularly, to reflect on this 

Bill, do a poll, do something, get some feedback. We have not 

heard from them who have they been consulting with that 

thought this was a great idea. It would be very interesting. 

We’ve not seen any polling, and this government tends to like 

its polls and tends to spend money on it. Clearly they must have 

done some work in that area. Who is thinking this is a good 

idea? 

 

So we put together this amendment this afternoon, and it’s 

called a hoist. The idea is to press pause for six months, come 

back in six months, and we’ll give the second reading vote, and 

I’m sure they’d win it then. But tonight we’re thinking, hey we 

should take some time and reflect on this Bill before us because 

it’s a significant Bill. These are one of those kind of Bills that 

we debate in the House probably, you know, as an MLA, 

maybe once in a lifetime. I’m not sure if others were here in ’92 

and ’93. I think there two others that were here — the Speaker 

and another member who were elected — during that debate in 

the early ’90s when Premier Romanow, at the time, had put 

forward some significant changes. Only two other people have 

been able to go through this kind of change. And I think it’s 

significant. 

 

Many of us in this House will not be asked to reflect on this 

again, just because these are so fundamental. You know, we 

talked about earlier today about, you know, we knew the 

population’s coming, so the idea that every 10 years we have a 

Boundaries Commission to correct any of the imbalances. And 

the Minister of Justice has spent time at length, at length, 

pointing out how different some of the ridings are. I think he 

should recognize that — we all recognize that — and move on 

to the next topic which is there is more to life than just this 

issue. 

 

There is a way of correcting it. We know, we know that there is 

some imbalances, but we know that there is a process for 

correcting it. We know there’s a process for correcting it. But 

we think the idea of adding three more MLAs without 

consultation is just wrong. It’s just wrong, and it’s foolish, and 

it’s not the way to be spending taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

There’s so many other priorities that we could be using. You 

know, we talked earlier about whether it’s highways, and 

Highway 22 came up as a suggestion, that one, that idea. Health 

care, the drug plans, the tuition fees — I’m sure many of us 

have ideas of how we could spend those dollars. Now the 

government says it’s worked hard to save dollars. Well that’s a 

good thing. But does it mean that they then get to say other 

things don’t cost money? They do. That’s foolish to say 

increases in MLAs don’t cost money. How can they possibly 

say that with a straight face? I don’t understand it. Of course 

they cost money, of course they cost money. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They cost millions. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — They cost millions. They cost millions. So how 

can they possibly say that? 

 

So I think tonight is the night that we should press pause and 

really think about what are we doing here? And is this what 

they campaigned on? You know, as my colleague said, you 

know, say what you’re going to do. Have the courage of 

conviction. When you get on a doorstep and you knock on the 

door, say what you’re going to do. 

 

This government takes a lot of pride on delivering on promises. 

Now it’s ironic that they seem to be also delivering on promises 

they didn’t tell anybody about. Here’s a promise that nobody 

knew about. And I’m sure they’re probably going to check this 

one off as a promise kept but nobody knew that that promise 

was made and so . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nobody? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Nobody knew this promise was made. And 

with promises made like this, you know, I think we can do 

without. So, Mr. Speaker, we have some real, real problems 

with this. We need to really think through some of these things. 

We need to think about the unintended consequences of adding 

three more MLAs and choices, choices this government has 

made. And clearly when you make a choice like this, you’re 

saying yes to MLAs, and you’re saying no to something else. 

And that’s a simple, basic process of government when you 

make choices and you set priorities and you plan it out. So you 

can’t say yes to everything; you have some difficult choices to 

make. 

 

So clearly there was some choices made here, and we’re saying, 

hey let’s take some time. Let’s take six months, put it on pause. 

Clearly the government spoke this afternoon when they voted 

down the reasoned amendment. I think they were unreasonable 

in voting down that amendment. I thought it was a reasonable 

thing to do, but clearly they see it as it must go through. 

 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

Well let’s take six months and reflect on this over the summer 

months, talk to the people. When we go back, we can talk to the 

people and see what they think. In my own riding, I’ve been out 

talking to people about it, and they have concerns. They have 

concerns, particularly around the not counting youth. They have 

concerns of, what does this mean? Does this mean that they’re 

going to lose the representation that they feel that they deserve, 

that they have valued? I think this is a real, real concern, and 

particularly when we have it pointed out continually that 

Saskatoon Centre is a small riding. But, Mr. Speaker, if you 

come to my riding, you’ll find out that it’s not a small riding, 

that in fact there is a lot of people there, and they’re from all 

over the world and many of them are very young and cannot 

vote. They cannot vote yet simply because they’re not 18. So 

why are they being disqualified? Why are they being 

disqualified? 

 

And you know actually, interestingly, Mr. Speaker, I’d be 

curious . . . I don’t know this, but I think it would be interesting 

to know how many people are 16 or 17 living by themselves in 

my riding, who work in my riding. I would suspect that it’s tens 

if not hundreds of young people who are 16 or 17, renting an 

apartment or sharing with someone else, who are working at a 

convenience store or a store, a retail outlet. Some of them may 

even have children. This wouldn’t be unusual. And I know in 

my riding we have many of those folks, and they’re just going 

to be disqualified even though in many ways they’re living an 

adult life. They’re working or they may be going to school, but 

they’re on their own. They’re responsible for themselves. 

 

So I think this is a big issue. So you know, Mr. Speaker, in 

many ways, you know, a government that operates well is a 

government that has no surprises. You know, when you elect a 

government, you think the one thing I’m going to count on is 

there should not be any surprises. And you should be able to 

say when you elect a government, a party, you’re going to 

know what they’re all about. You’re going to know what 

they’re all about. But not so much with this government. 

 

Clearly this is a surprise to a lot of people, and even people 

who, even people who have supported them in the past. I’m 

thinking of radio personalities like John Gormley, the papers, 

you know. And I know the media has been not always on their 

side, but boy we’ve sure heard from the editorialists, the 

columnists, that this is wrong-headed. This is clearly 

wrong-headed and probably the most foolish thing, the most 

foolish thing that this government has ever done. And for why? 

And for why? We just have not heard it articulated at all, and I 

think that this government is going to rue the day that it decided 

to have the bright idea that what we really needed was three 

more MLAs. 

 

You know, we’ve talked about this, that in other provinces the 

population is growing and they’ve decided to check it out with 

their, with their constituents. We know federally that there will 

be more seats. There will be more seats in Alberta and British 

Columbia and Ontario. We aren’t getting any more seats 

federally in Saskatchewan because the government — federal 

government — obviously thought even with the population 

increase it’s just not worth adding any more seats because we 

are below the federal average. And likewise when we come to 

MLAs: we are below the average when you look across 

Canada. So why are we rushing out to have three more seats? 

I have talked at length about the British Columbia experience 

where they thought they would add more MLAs, but clearly the 

public spoke loud and clear: no more MLAs. We want services. 

We want services. And you know, British Columbia is a pretty 

good province. And I think they have in many ways things that 

we think, we look at and we say, look at the Olympics, an 

exciting place. But sometimes they show a little common sense 

and they listen to the people. This is one where we have to say, 

who’s listening to who? And that’s a simple question. We have 

not heard where did this come from, you know, and what is the 

drive? Actually this kind of thing should have been happening a 

couple of years ago. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I know other members of our caucus here 

want to speak on this. And I think that they’re anxious, they’re 

anxious to get up. They want to say a lot. They want to say an 

awful lot because they have much to say. They want to review 

how important it is that this hoist is like a press pause, and it’s 

very important. And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s the key premise: 

let’s push pause tonight and vote for the hoist amendment. 

Thank you very much. 

 

[20:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

and I guess reflect on . . . My colleagues have expressed 

concern, not only from the members of the opposition, official 

opposition, but I guess clearly from constituents, people signing 

letters. We’re talking to the media. You’re seeing different 

areas where people are concerned and very concerned in light 

of a government who’s made some decisions. And based on 

information, their party has decided, and as the governing of 

our province, the people did give that mandate to the Sask Party 

. And they said, here you go — govern. And I think the record 

of the current government, the people are going to be truly 

looking at it and they’re going to be wondering. 

 

When we have a province that’s supposed to be doing so 

wonderful and when good things are happening in the province, 

it’s good to say to the government too, you know, you make 

policies that are good. You do some programs that are good and 

help people. That’s a good thing. There’s nothing wrong with 

saying that. But you know what? When you have legislation 

that this government’s introducing in light of the cuts, in light 

of what they have done to our seniors, the cost to seniors, but I 

think the big issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, comes down to this. 

It’s the way it’s being done. 

 

And the way it’s being done is to eliminate, in the boundaries, 

to eliminate anyone under 18. And you know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’m very concerned when you look at the numbers of 

young people that would be ruled out. And I know my 

colleagues have expressed and we’ve tried to say, explain to the 

government, rethink this. Stop before you go ahead with this 

and push it. They’ve asked very clearly. Very clearly they have 

said, rethink this. 

 

What they’ve asked is for the government to, whether it’s a 

pause. We’ve done different things. We’ve thrown in, you 

know, an amendment to the motion. We’ve tried to get the 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

government to take a pause. We know now we’re moving 

forward with a hoist motion amendment. So trying to get the 

government to stop and take a pause and to really be sure that 

they go back and they consult with the people of the province 

who are saying, no more politicians. We have enough. 

 

We’ve talked about the numbers. We’ve expressed it very well. 

We’ve shared it with the public. The media has picked it up. It 

seems like so many different organizations, so many groups, so 

many individuals, whether it’s signing the online petition, the 

petition that’s on paper as well, letters, phone calls, comments, 

just conversations with people saying, why do we need more 

MLAs? And people are frustrated. They’re very frustrated and 

wondering why. What’s behind all this if everything was going 

good? 

 

A very short period of time ago we had an election and the 

people spoke. We have to respect that. And they gave the 

government the number of seats that they have. But they asked 

them very clearly. They didn’t express we want more 

politicians, we want more MLAs. You know, that will cost 

millions and it’s a frustration to hear members opposite say it 

isn’t going to cost anything. Well take any three MLAs in a 

period of four years and see what it costs to have them sitting in 

this House with all the services they provide in here, the CAs 

[constituency assistant] and everything else. 

 

But we’ve asked for them to stop, pause, And I think we’ve 

expressed that very well. The public has expressed that. Some 

have been very clear. They feel that we have enough MLAs, 

that 58 is enough to take care of our province. And it is a 

beautiful province, and I think some MLAs do an excellent job. 

I don’t know how all the MLAs operate. The ones I know do an 

excellent job representing their communities and they try to do 

it. And having said that, some are bigger. Some have more 

population. 

 

But to remove the children 18 and under, just give you an 

example, even within my own family. My oldest grandson is 

18. My youngest grandchild is six months. There’s 14 of them. 

Half are First Nations; half are Métis. They live some in First 

Nations communities. Some live in the North; some live down 

south. But having said that, should they be included in the 

boundary? Yes, because some of them are going to be, in 2016 

will be, will be allowed to vote. They will have that right to 

vote. But in the boundaries, in the formula that you’re 

proposing, they will not be used in the formula, but yet they 

will get a chance to vote. So here’s an opportunity for the 

government to rethink this, pause, to pause and really think this 

out. Is this what the public wants? Is this what the people of our 

province want? 

 

Who’s pushing this? Who asked for this? And I mean you go in 

to the different programs, and I don’t want to talk about the 

cuts, but seniors were asked to put out a little money. Yes, and I 

know they say, well it’s only $5. To some people that may . . . 

say $5 per prescription may be a small amount, but to seniors 

on fixed income who are barely making ends meet, it is huge to 

them. So they would prefer to actually probably say, if you 

gave them a choice, say, would you remove the $5 increase if 

we had less MLAs? They probably would say yes. Don’t get 

the MLAs, three more MLAs, and use that money in a better 

way. 

And that’s just one way I’m talking about. And we’re hearing 

that stuff. We’re making it very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We’re asking this government . . . And the Premier made it very 

clear, he has a government that’s going to be humble, who’ll be 

accountable, who will listen to the people. Well that was fine 

and dandy before. A short period of time after when the people 

did give you a strong mandate and they said, here you go. 

You’re not consulting. You’re not talking with the people, and 

you didn’t talk to them when you were campaigning. 

 

I’m curious to see what the answers would’ve been at the 

doorstep had the members of the Sask Party of the government 

gone and say, oh by the way, we’re going to introduce 

legislation for three more politicians. And we’re going to get rid 

of this and we’re going to get rid of that and we’re going to do 

this. And what do you think of that? I’d like to see the changes 

that would be in this House. 

 

But no, we don’t want to talk about that. All we’re doing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is giving them a chance to pause, to think and 

really think this through with making sure that they consult the 

people that will be impacted, anyone under 18, do they want to 

be included in the boundaries or not? And I know there’s a 

Boundary Commission, we’ll put that forward, but we’re going 

to develop the rules how the Boundary Commission will work. 

And if you tighten up the rules and you put them in a little box, 

well you limit what they can do. So here’s one area where 

we’re going to limit what they can do, anyone under 18 will not 

be used. 

 

So it’s very concerning to a lot people, and I think we’ve shown 

by the amount of debate that we have discussed in this House, 

in this Chamber, trying to make sure the government hears. 

And you talk about a free vote, and I’m hoping members 

opposite will get their free vote, that there’s certain motions that 

they’re going to have a free . . . I hope, and we’ve seen in 

question period today very clearly it was put forward to have 

their free vote. And let’s see how many of them, maybe not all 

the members in government and the backbenchers agree that 

this is a time. This is a time, a time to pause; to pause, to think 

this thing through. What’s the purpose of it? Who’s asked for 

it? Why so quickly? And some people have their own 

conclusions why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why this is happening. 

 

You know what? Clearly, clearly, you know, clearly, clearly 

we’re saying to the government, take a pause. Think this thing 

through. It’s so important, the cost. Listen to the people. And I 

think over the last few weeks and the opportunities that my 

colleagues have expressed their concern, we have gone through 

a process to explain to the government. We have brought in 

some amendments to make sure the government realizes here’s 

why: it just isn’t because this is, oh, we think it’s a bad idea. 

We’re giving a chance to the government to take a pause and to 

think this thing through, truly think it through, weigh out the 

pros and cons. And at the end of the day, if that’s what they 

decide to do because they do have the majority, they will push 

it through. 

 

That’s fine. We understand that. But I think the way this 

legislation was introduced, shortly after the election, they must 

have known that they were going to do this, and they wanted to 

do this. Why didn’t they share that? And that’s what the public 

is saying. So I think, at the end of the day, people will have to 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

answer to that. MLAs, in your own constituency, you will have 

to answer to that. It’s like anything you’ve done, whether it’s 

the film tax credit cuts; the programs that are being affected, 

cut; whether it’s highways, you have to answer to it. You’ve 

had five years as a government. You will have to answer to 

some of that. 

 

And I think clearly the people will say, we gave you a strong 

mandate. Yes we did. We asked you to bring in legislation that 

works for our province, works for the people, and legislation 

that helps people in our province. This is legislation where it’s 

spending millions, and the people don’t want it. I don’t know 

how much clearer the public, the media, the official opposition, 

people have to express themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to get 

the government to listen. 

 

And we talk about humble. Are they listening? And sometimes, 

you know, it’s very concerning when you see a government . . . 

And you know, they talk about being humbled. Well the jokes 

that they make, it’s fine. It’s acceptable, you know, forty-nine, 

nine over here. That’s all right. That’s all right. We’ve been 

asked, and we have an honour to do as nine MLAs over here. 

 

The people have asked us, you’re Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. We ask you to do a lot. We expect you to make 

sure you hold the government to account, and you have to. It’s 

not easy filling the role, but the people have spoken. And when 

the people speak, we have no choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

to respond. And they did. And there’s 49 members over there, 

and they say they’re humble. But I don’t think so, at the end of 

the day. 

 

So there’s a chance today to vote on a hoist motion, and I hope 

that the members opposite will support that and say, maybe we 

should stop and have a pause. We’re hearing concerns. And it’s 

a chance for the members opposite to truly stop and think this 

thing through. It’s a time out. I use that with my grandkids. 

We’ll give you guys a time out to stop and think about this, 

really think it through. And you know, it’s okay to have a time 

out and think things through. Take a break. Pause. We’ve said 

that. There’s no apology. You haven’t done anything yet, but 

you can stop and really think this thing through before you 

move ahead. 

 

So you know, I know my colleagues want to join in on the 

debate and want to share their ideas, their concern . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . You want me to carry on? Okay. 

Very good. I would like to just carry on. 

 

You know, when you see what’s going on . . . Now that we 

have the Speaker in here, I want go over everything I shared 

with the Deputy Speaker. I want to share it with the Speaker so 

he hears it. 

 

But you know, when you look at the people . . . It’s nice to see 

the Speaker in here. Good to see Mr. Speaker, and you know, 

very clearly now . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, oh. 

Anyway I think we’re tried to express our concern, and we’ve 

raised it. And we’ve had a lot of time to talk it out and a time to 

ask the government to pause and think this thing through in 

light of all the concerns, whether it’s the media, whether it’s 

organizations, whether it’s the public, whether it’s constituents 

or their family members, young people under 18 years of age, a 

lot of Aboriginal people. And like my colleague said, 40 per 

cent of First Nations and the Métis, their population, 40 per cent 

is under the age of 18. They will not be included in the 

boundary, and that, that is shameful. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, when you think about it, the child 

advocacy, they get to weigh in on it and give their opinion. And 

we’ve heard that very clearly, what they’ve expressed. And I 

think that we should be paying attention. The government 

should be paying attention, Mr. Speaker. Clearly that is a 

position that’s been respected and should be respected. And 

when they give their opinion, the government . . . These are 

independent bodies and they make a decision, a 

recommendation. They try to work with the government, make 

the government understand that there’s certain things. 

 

And I think clearly we have heard that from the different 

agencies. We’ve heard that from the child advocacy. We’ve 

heard that from many other groups, the media. And I think a lot 

of the official opposition has expressed concerns from 

constituents, from people that are truly concerned about the 

way this was introduced, the way it’s being handled, and the 

way the government is not listening to the people. You will be 

held accountable and if you think over time that the people will 

forget, the people will not forget the trust they have given you. 

They handed you trust and they asked you to do something for 

them. And they will, they will judge you on it. And at the end 

of the day we will see how that works out. 

 

[20:30] 

 

At this time I’m prepared to finish on my comments that I 

wanted to at this time, and I know my colleagues would like to 

join in and want to get in on the debate. So at this time I will 

take my chair. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter in on debate here this evening with a matter 

that should have been resolved a long time ago. This Bill 

should have been withdrawn. It should have been pulled. That’s 

the reasonable thing to do. It’s what Saskatchewan people 

expect of this government with respect to a Bill that’s been put 

forward that certainly isn’t in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

But we put forward a motion again here today, a hoist motion 

calling on this government to do the right thing and to pull this 

legislation, to not spend the millions of dollars needlessly that 

this Bill sets out to do, and to serve Saskatchewan people’s best 

interests. 

 

I know we’ve spoken about it regularly. We just heard about it 

from the member from Cumberland. But nobody, nobody voted 

for this, Mr. Speaker. When we went before the voters in the 

fall as parties, and as that party went before voters in the fall, 

this certainly wasn’t in their election platform, Mr. Speaker. It 

wasn’t part of what they proposed to Saskatchewan people. 

 

What this government did put forward or this party put forward, 

Mr. Speaker, was a lot of fine talking points, feel-good sort of 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

statements, Mr. Speaker, but not a mention that they were going 

to spend millions of dollars to increase the number of 

politicians in Saskatchewan to only serve their own political 

best interests, Mr. Speaker, to discount the voice of youth all 

across this province by not counting them into the 

constituencies all across this province, taking away that 

important focus that we need to have in this province, being 

putting youth first and understanding policy and placing 

resources that serves their needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, so disappointed on so many fronts by this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. We are going to have a chance to vote 

on this here again here tonight. We’ve put forward a very 

reasonable motion here today and that’s that we pull this 

legislation for six months, Mr. Speaker. That’ll allow this 

government time to consult, to listen to Saskatchewan people. 

They haven’t done that to date. They never once were straight 

with Saskatchewan people with their true intentions in this last 

election. They weren’t straightforward in their Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker, and this will provide an opportunity finally for 

this government to do the rightful thing and to do that 

consultation. 

 

In so doing, they’ll certainly recognize and hear from all across 

Saskatchewan that this isn’t what Saskatchewan people desire. 

Saskatchewan people are not calling for more politicians. They 

don’t see it as a proper expenditure of dollars. They don’t see 

how that connects to their best interests, Mr. Speaker, and quite 

frankly, we don’t either. 

 

And when we look at the constituency sizes all across the 

country, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we in fact have the 

smallest constituencies that we serve: British Columbia, two 

and a half or three times larger than our constituencies; Alberta, 

which is having an election here tonight, Mr. Speaker, two and 

a half times larger than we have here in Saskatchewan; in 

Ontario, six times larger, Mr. Speaker. And just, quite frankly, 

it’s not warranted to increase the number of politicians. 

 

To put this in the broader context, they’re doing this at the same 

point in time, Mr. Speaker, as they’re increasing costs for 

seniors in this province, for everyday families across this 

province. They’re doing that through things like prescription 

drugs, Mr. Speaker. And I know members opposite often try to 

minimize this, say, well it’s just $5 here or $5 there, Mr. 

Speaker, but what members opposite fail to identify with or 

recognize is this is hundreds of dollars out of the pockets of 

seniors and families all across this province, Mr. Speaker, and 

dollars that certainly don’t serve Saskatchewan people. 

 

We see the expenditure of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, at a 

time where people are losing their jobs in this province through 

job cuts in the civil service, Mr. Speaker, front-line service 

delivery jobs. We see it as a time where tuition is being hiked, a 

time where we’re supposed to be doing well as a province, Mr. 

Speaker, and somehow this government has its priorities in a 

manner that aren’t consistent with Saskatchewan people, and in 

fact are choosing to spend millions on the number of 

politicians, but certainly nothing to, nothing to support 

accessible education to students here in Saskatchewan. 

 

What’s really disappointing as well is that this government’s 

failing, certainly, to listen to Saskatchewan people on this front, 

but also our Children’s Advocate, who’s been clear that this 

may even breach the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, Mr. 

Speaker, something that’s disappointing. We’ve seen this 

government go down the route of putting forward 

unconstitutional legislation in the past. That has consequences 

for Saskatchewan people and we urge this government to 

withdraw this sort of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at the priorities of Saskatchewan people, we see 

the health care needs across Saskatchewan. We see highways. 

Here in Saskatchewan we see Highway 22, for example, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s in great disrepair, something that certainly 

requires action, has been promised many times by this 

government, but no action on it, Mr. Speaker. We see 

specifically Highway 48, Mr. Speaker, down through the 

southeast, a highway that needs action, Mr. Speaker, and we see 

no action on that front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on so many fronts we see a government that’s choosing to 

spend millions on more politicians instead of choosing to serve 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people. We call on this 

government to withdraw this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. We 

already have the smallest ridings in all of Canada. 

Saskatchewan people are a common sense people, and they 

expect us simply to be able to step up to the plate, to work a 

little harder, and to serve their best interest, something that we 

certainly, on this side of the House, are more than prepared to 

do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that columnist Murray Mandryk said, I quote, “It’s the 

stupidest decision and stupidest justification I’ve heard from the 

Brad Wall government so far.” Mr. Speaker, he goes on in a 

radio interview: “There is no justification for it, 

population-wise or otherwise.” Mr. Speaker, we agree. This 

isn’t something that Saskatchewan people have called for. I 

haven’t heard it from Saskatchewan people other than members 

opposite who are thinking that we need to needlessly spend 

millions on more politicians at a time when they’re making cuts 

in education and in heath care and bringing about significant 

increases to the cost of living for everyday families, young 

families all across Saskatchewan, and certainly seniors, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I’m so disappointed that this government hasn’t simply 

done the right thing by withdrawing this piece of legislation and 

focusing their attention and their priorities on Saskatchewan 

people and on the kinds of expenses that we . . . on the kinds of 

priorities that we speak of. 

 

When we talk about discounting the voice of youth, which is a 

consequence of this legislation, of marginalizing that voice, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s exactly the wrong direction that we should be 

going. What we need to be doing is enabling and engaging that 

voice of youth in our democratic process. We need to be 

reaching out and finding ways to both involve youth in the 

policy decisions of today, in the budgetary decisions of today 

but also in the democratic decisions that govern them, not just 

at election time but between elections as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this terrible message that youth don’t count in this 

province by way of this legislation is counter to what we need 

to do on that front. It’s a terrible message to the very youth for 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

whom we need to reach out to, for whom we need to seek 

engagement, for youth that we need to involve in this process, 

Mr. Speaker, and quite simply youth that we need to serve the 

interests of, Mr. Speaker, youth that we need to make certain 

that we’re making decisions today, whether they’re decisions 

that impact the provision and accessibility of child care all 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s as it impacts to 

tuition and the significant skyrocketing of tuition that we’ve 

seen under this government at a time of purported prosperity, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at youth and the importance and that recognition 

of the generation ahead and many generations forward and 

then, of course, the need for that environmental protection and 

sustainability, Mr. Speaker, and it’s that generation, Mr. 

Speaker — youth — that are sometimes looking at the long 

game, Mr. Speaker. They’re looking at the immediate in their 

lives as well, but they’re also looking, well, what’s our province 

going to look like and what are our communities going to be 

like, Mr. Speaker, 10 and 20 and 30 and 40 and 50 years down 

the road, Mr. Speaker? And these are the kinds of individuals 

and minds that we need to be involving in this process. And for 

the government to be moving forward in a process that doesn’t 

listen to Saskatchewan people and then very forcibly 

marginalizes that voice, Mr. Speaker, is entirely wrong. What 

we need to be doing is spending our efforts and our energy on 

policy decisions that serve youth in the next generation and 

ensuring that bright future, but we also need to be spending our 

energies in figuring out ways and analyzing how we best 

engage youth across this province in the democratic process. 

 

This is a massive step backwards on that front, Mr. Speaker. It 

serves only one purpose and that’s the best political interests of 

a party, Mr. Speaker. That’s disappointing. This is a 

government that . . . a party that earned a large mandate from 

voters, Mr. Speaker, and I respect that. What I respect is that 

voters made a choice. This party put some messaging out there. 

They put a few platform items out there, Mr. Speaker. And then 

Saskatchewan people gave them a mandate, and they have a 

large majority. 

 

What’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker, is they haven’t taken that 

majority; they haven’t taken that victory and then come into the 

legislature and rolled their sleeves up and done the hard work 

for Saskatchewan people delivering that mandate. They failed 

to do that, Mr. Speaker. What they have done, Mr. Speaker, is 

in fact they’ve deviated significantly from what they said they 

would do. Nobody voted for more politicians in the fall, Mr. 

Speaker — nobody. I’ve never heard from somebody calling 

for more politicians. And when I say nobody voted for that in 

the fall, Mr. Speaker, this party opposite, if you can imagine, 

never even mentioned it, Mr. Speaker, in the fall election. 

 

Now, it’s a matter of being straightforward with people, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a question of the integrity of the decisions that we 

make, Mr. Speaker. And it’s incredibly disappointing and 

disheartening, Mr. Speaker, to see a government earn a 

significant majority, a significant mandate, and instead of move 

forward in a humble fashion, rolling up their sleeves, doing the 

hard work for Saskatchewan people, the hard work that 

Saskatchewan people deserve, Mr. Speaker, they see a 

government move forward in a fashion that is only about them, 

Mr. Speaker, nothing about Saskatchewan people. It’s all about 

them, Mr. Speaker, and their own political interests, and 

actually spending millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, to backstop 

and to try to manufacture and architect future electoral 

successes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course we speak to the concerns that have been raised 

around gerrymandering, Mr. Speaker, and the purpose of the 

changes that are put forward. And that’s so disappointing, Mr. 

Speaker. At one point in time, Saskatchewan . . . and in various 

point in times, we’ve been held up as a place of a pretty 

healthy, functioning democracy, Mr. Speaker. It’s sad days in 

Saskatchewan. We have a government that’s less interested in 

serving seniors, less interested in building economies, less 

interested in building out and addressing the needs of 

Saskatchewan people, and more interested in playing games 

with our electoral system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see all the shenanigans, Mr. Speaker, in the intervention, 

political intervention into the independent Chief Electoral 

Officer, Mr. Speaker, something that this government should be 

brought to task for, Mr. Speaker. And as well we see the 

changes, Mr. Speaker, around things like voter ID 

[identification] that were never recommended by any 

independent panel, Mr. Speaker, or by the Chief Electoral 

Officer or not supported by academic research or not called 

upon by Saskatchewan people, but simply put forward to allow 

the Sask Party to play with our electoral system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, Saskatchewan people and Canadians have 

worked hard to build a healthy, well-functioning democracy, 

Mr. Speaker. In fact I think that our province has punched well 

above its weight when we’ve looked to international affairs in 

sending Saskatchewan people who have chosen to serve in 

countries all over this world to build out democratic systems, 

Mr. Speaker. Certainly we know that to be the case for those 

veterans from the Second World War and that have served from 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what’s so disheartening is at a point in time, Mr. Speaker, 

here we are in the modern times we live, Mr. Speaker, to be 

forgetting it seems all of that, Mr. Speaker, all of that service, 

all of that sacrifice in the name of democracy. Mr. Speaker, to 

now see a government that’s unilaterally moving and making 

decisions and spending millions of dollars only to manufacture 

circumstances that serve their political best interests, Mr. 

Speaker, not to be allocating dollars and making decisions, Mr. 

Speaker, that serve Saskatchewan people’s best interests. 

 

And I know when we go across this province, when I’m up in 

Arm River-Watrous, Mr. Speaker, I know what I hear there. 

They don’t want us to be spending millions of dollars on more 

politicians in Arm River-Watrous. They’d like us to keep that 

school open, Mr. Speaker. They’d like us to keep Nokomis 

open because we have a phenomenal opportunity by way of the 

Jansen mine, Mr. Speaker, that’s in a good position to build and 

grow and expand, Mr. Speaker. And those workers are going to 

be looking for a place to live, Mr. Speaker. And I think that if 

the member from Arm River-Watrous stands up and votes 

tonight and doesn’t vote to put this on ice, put this plan on ice, 

Mr. Speaker, the expenditure of millions for politicians, it says 

a lot about that member’s choices, Mr. Speaker, about his 

priorities, Mr. Speaker. And that’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 

 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

Just the same, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s disappointing that when 

we look at highways across this province, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think of Highway 361, that highway needs our attention. And 

where’s the Highways minister on this front? Where is this in 

his five-year plans that take 10 years to discuss, Mr. Speaker? 

We don’t know where it is, Mr. Speaker, and it’s disappointing 

to see a government spending dollars. Highway 361 is but one 

example of the many highways all across this province that are 

both important for commerce, but also put at risk right now so 

many young families and people all across this province that 

are working and living in communities and utilizing that 

highway’s infrastructure. 

 

[20:45] 

 

The list goes on. I see my good friend from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. Speaker. I know what his 

constituents desire, Mr. Speaker. I know they desire to see 

Highway 22 repaired, Mr. Speaker. What they’re tired of is 

more promises from this government, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 

want to see the Premier out on that broken pavement any more 

making campaign announcements, Mr. Speaker. He’s done that 

enough. He’s done that more than once, and he’s failed to 

deliver, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so the constituents in Last Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. 

Speaker, what they want to see is their member stand up tonight 

and simply do something reasonable, something common 

sense, Mr. Speaker, which says, let’s put this plan on ice, Mr. 

Speaker. Let’s put this plan on ice so that we can focus our 

attention to the issues that matter to Saskatchewan people and 

that we can make those decisions that make a direct impact into 

Saskatchewan people’s lives. 

 

Enough of these games, Mr. Speaker, where you see this Sask 

Party come before voters in the fall and give all these cheery 

messages and talk about, you know, slogans and slick 

brochures, but now do something that’s entirely different. What 

they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, of course they’ve hiked up the cost 

of living, they’ve hiked up prescriptions for seniors all across 

this province. That’ll cost hundreds of dollars a year, having 

those, Mr. Speaker, the pioneers of the province digging deeper 

and deeper into their pockets, Mr. Speaker, many of them not in 

a position to do so, many of them on a fixed income, and 

certainly compromising the dignity that those members of our 

society deserve to have, the seniors in our province. We see the 

same with young people and young families all across this 

province, Mr. Speaker, where our government is making 

choices that certainly aren’t in their best interests. 

 

We didn’t see any of that in the fall. We didn’t hear they were 

going to hike up tuition, Mr. Speaker. And now the member 

from Nutana’s agreeing here that she never heard and I’m 

looking to members in this Assembly have, you know, whether 

or not we’ve ever heard someone call for the number of 

politicians. Not one. I look to my colleagues here and not one.  

 

We knocked on thousands and thousands of doors, we sit in 

community meetings all across this province, and I look to my 

colleagues and I see them identifying right now they’ve never 

heard that once, Mr. Speaker, other than a few of the members 

opposite who are trying to serve their own political best 

interest. 

The Sask Party MLAs, Mr. Speaker, spend millions of dollars 

on more politicians at the same time as they’re asking 

Saskatchewan people to pay more and expect less, Mr. Speaker. 

You know, I know I suspect that members on the . . . you know, 

I’ve heard discussions around tuition, I suspect members have 

heard discussion around child care or of housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I found it interesting, I was up in Nipawin on Friday 

for a regional planning session. And the region up there, Mr. 

Speaker, is of course planning for the mine expansion there and 

serving the needs of those communities and surrounding areas. 

And community leaders came together, Mr. Speaker, and it was 

sort of displaying that community spirit that we have as a 

province and how we come together to address challenges, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I heard lots of good discussion. I heard lots of optimism about 

what we need to work towards. I also heard some challenges 

that need to be addressed by way of infrastructure, by way of 

housing, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we can keep this 

economy strong, Mr. Speaker, make sure that we see the 

investment continue, but make sure that people’s lives are 

continuing to improve alongside that. 

 

So for all these reasons, we call on this government to support 

the common sense, reasoned position we put forward today to 

hoist this piece of legislation; put it on ice. Let the member 

from Arm River-Watrous go tend to Nokomis School and keep 

it open. Let the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood go 

out there and keep, fix up that Highway 22. Let the member 

from Moosomin work on Highway 48, Mr. Speaker. Let all of 

the members opposite work towards making sure that we’re 

addressing some of the housing pressures across our 

communities and putting the ear to the ground that is so 

obvious. Mr. Speaker, that isn’t going on with a government 

that we’re hearing is seeming to be out of touch and out of step 

with Saskatchewan people on many fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we certainly don’t support the legislation put before us. 

We’re going to be looking for members opposite to vote to 

support this very reasonable position we put forward today to 

hoist this piece of legislation, withdraw this piece of legislation. 

Allow us to do the work that we should, as legislators serving 

Saskatchewan people’s best interests, not the political best 

interests of the governing party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That being said, I certainly support the hoist that we put 

forward today. We’re going to keep fighting for Saskatchewan 

people all across this province. We’re receiving the petitions. 

We’re getting the phone calls all across this province whether 

it’s Moose Jaw, whether is Nipawin, whether it’s Strasbourg, 

Mr. Speaker, whether it’s Rosetown. All across this province, 

we’re getting that urging. We’re proud to do that work. We’re 

proud to push for this Bill to be scrapped. We’re proud to stand 

up for the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

At this point in time I know I have many colleagues that would 

like to speak to this piece of legislation, to the motion we put 

forward here today, and I will pass the torch to my honourable 

colleague from Nutana. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

with some anticipation, I think, that I speak to this, a motion to 

hoist the Bill 36 because I’m hoping that this last effort that we 

are making to convince the government to at least take pause 

and think about the implications in this Bill, think about the 

ramifications that may arise in court, and certainly doing the 

right thing as far as democracy goes, we’re hoping that this 

might actually work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And just want to make a few more comments about this Bill 

and why it’s not a good idea and why in fact it’s being referred 

to as a rather stupid idea. And basically the first thing I want to 

address is the whole notion of the democratic process here. 

 

In terms of the timeline for this Bill, as you know we had an 

election campaign last fall. Each of the parties put forward their 

platform. It was a reasoned platform each party put forward. 

And we went out on the doorsteps, and we talked to people. 

And not one mention of this idea came out at the time of the 

election. Certainly the Premier knew that the census was 

completed and that we would be looking at the boundaries and 

the Boundary Commission would be struck. That was clear. 

The state of the law was clear. 

 

So he knew at the beginning of the election campaign this was 

coming. He certainly . . . Everybody knew. There’s no notice 

required for this. This is the law. The census is conducted. After 

the census, we strike a commission. The commission takes a 

good look at the changes in population and changes in 

demographics, and that commission then has the responsibility 

to make sure that the allocation of voters is fair. The law is 

plain and clear, simple, uncomplicated. We have our two 

northern boundaries, and then we have the other constituencies, 

58 constituencies, and it just was working. 

 

So there was no discussion. There was no indication from the 

voting public. Certainly none of the people that I talked to, of 

the many that I talked to, said that they thought that we should 

look at the number of MLAs and that we should rearrange the 

way our population counts are established in the electoral 

boundaries Act. 

 

So we didn’t hear about it on the doorsteps. The election came. 

The election went. We had a Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. So 

you would think that in the Throne Speech, now that the 

Premier has had time to think about it, that maybe this would 

show up in the Throne Speech. And we listened to the Throne 

Speech, no mention of this whatsoever. Certainly no indication 

from the public or anybody in the media that there was a need 

for more politicians or that the way the boundaries should be 

established and the way that the counts were established should 

be changed. We still had a perfectly good Bill, the boundary 

commission Act, and that was looking after the way population 

changes would be dealt with. 

 

And then all of a sudden, right near the end of the fall session, 

in comes Bill 36, the last Bill introduced in the fall session. 

There was a full 35 other Bills that seemed to take precedence 

to this. And bang, we have Bill 36. Where did this come from? 

Nobody knows. Obviously the opportunity to talk about it arose 

much, much sooner and should have been discussed with the 

people because, as we see from the comments we’re getting, no 

one was consulted. It was an idea that came out of . . . We’re 

still trying to figure where it came from. And it certainly 

doesn’t make any sense, common sense. And it seems to really 

only serve the interests of this government, so that’s something 

that’s of concern I think to everybody, particularly the children 

of this province. 

 

The way the Bill is currently structured is that anyone who is 

under 18 won’t be considered for the population count, and yet 

a large number of those people will be voting in the next 

election. They will be voters, Mr. Speaker. My son is 16. He 

will be voting in the next election and yet when this 

commission is struck, they’re not allowed to count him as one 

of the people that should be counted for the establishment of the 

boundary. And I find that offensive and he finds it offensive. 

This is something that is clearly discriminatory to him based on 

his age. He will be a voter in that election, and he’s not going to 

be counted in the boundaries. 

 

And I think one of the main concerns that everyone should be 

worried about here is that we do have a Charter in this country, 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. As we know, it just turned 

30 years old. And we have a Children’s Advocate who’s 

pointing out that section 3 of the Charter is violated here. And 

I’ll just . . . For the benefit of the record and the people that are 

listening, I’m just going to share with you the text of that 

clause. So clause 3 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms says: 

 

Every citizen of Canada has the right to vote in an 

election of members of the House of Commons or of a 

legislative assembly and to be qualified for membership 

therein. 

 

Well the whole exercise of that vote is based on representation. 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the Children’s Advocate 

had this to say about section 3 of the Charter in this Bill 36 and 

he said: 

 

Leaving children, youth, out of the population count to 

calculate the boundaries will have a significant effect on 

the political representation of Aboriginal people and new 

immigrants due to their much younger demographics. 

 

This just isn’t about the children, Mr. Speaker. It’s about those 

families and the families who have more children are going to 

be effectively represented less in this Chamber. And that simply 

is not acceptable. And it’s sad to think that again we have a 

government who is passing laws that may not meet the 

requirements of the Charter. 

 

Also, of course, section 15 of the Charter comes in to play. And 

that is a very important, probably the most important section of 

the Charter, and that’s the equality rights, Mr. Speaker. And 

section 15 says that “every individual.” It doesn’t say every 

adult or every voter, but it says: 

 

Every individual is equal before and under the law and 

has the right to equal protection and equal benefit of the 

law . . . 

 

And again, we’re talking about everyone, not people who are 

over 18 and not people who are over 18 and aren’t even citizens 

of our country. They’re counted in the count, but not our 

children. The equal benefit of the law, and again I’ll continue to 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

quote from the section. In fact I’ll start over again. Section 

15.(1) of the Charter reads: 

 

Every individual is equal before and under the law and has 

the right to equal protection and equal benefit of the law 

without discrimination and in particular, without 

discrimination based on race. 

 

Right here we have the Children’s Advocate telling us this 

could be discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin. 

And again the Children’s Advocate is concerned that this may 

not be . . . this might be a violation of the section — colour, 

religion, sex, age. And right there again, Mr. Speaker, we have 

another potential violation on the equality rights of our children 

and the families of this province. And it just is a really 

dangerous, dangerous thing to think that this government has no 

regard for those provisions of the Charter and is going to blast 

on through and pass this Bill into law. That’s the aspects of the 

Bill related to youth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly the concerns that have been raised about population 

rising, we’ve given many, many reasons where our average 

count in our constituencies is well below that of other provinces 

that are over one million in population. So there’s lots of room 

to catch up to those other provinces before we add more 

politicians and more constituencies, and of course, Mr. Speaker, 

the costs associated with that. There’s been many times that we 

have spoken to concerns about the additional costs. We are 

seeing millions of dollars and the government has the temerity 

to say that, well we’ll find savings elsewhere. They should be 

finding those savings regardless, Mr. Speaker. It’s got nothing 

to do with the addition of more MLAs and more politicians. If 

they can find those savings elsewhere, they should do so 

immediately regardless of whether there are more politicians 

added to the mix. 

 

What we see is that these extra costs are being presented to the 

population of Saskatchewan at a time when seniors are paying 

more for prescription drugs, when we’re hearing about horrible 

highway conditions, when there’s considerable cuts to the 

public service which is no longer able to ensure adequate 

monitoring and compliance of the regulations that exist. So then 

we see a dumbing down of the regulations. It’s just a nasty little 

downward spiral that seems to be going on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so, I think just to close off, I don’t want to take a whole lot 

of time tonight, and certainly my thoughts have been expressed 

here before. But I do have a few quotes that we’re getting from 

the people — the ones that weren’t consulted, the ones that 

weren’t talking about this on the doorstep, the ones that didn’t 

hear about this in the platform for this government, and they 

certainly didn’t hear about it in the Throne Speech. 

 

For example, a quote from an individual on the no extra MLAs 

Twitter feed. It says:  

 

I call on the Legislative Assembly to not increase the 

number of politicians in Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly and to continue including those individuals 

under the age of 18 in the determination of constituency 

boundaries. 

 

So I’m hoping that the members opposite are thinking about the 

people that are expressing their opinions here, and certainly it 

seems to be that that’s the majority of people that are 

expressing views on this Bill. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Another quote: “We need proportional representation, not more 

MLAs.” Another quote: “In comparison to Ontario, Alberta, 

and British Columbia, we already have far fewer constituents 

per politician. We don’t need more politicians. We need more 

professional public service employees providing services.” 

Another quote from yet another ordinary citizen who’s 

concerned about this Bill: “Amazing how the Sask Party can 

cut so many social issues and jobs but turn around and give 

themselves raises and add more positions. Sickening,” is that 

quote. Another quote: “The youth of this province are our 

future, and deserve to be counted.” Another quote: 

 

Legislators represent all the people in a constituency, not 

just those who can vote. Overly partisan and divisive 

politics is the result of focusing too much on those who 

vote and not enough on who needs representation. 

Boundaries need to be determined by the number of 

constituents, and as close to equal in number as possible 

needs to be understood as equal in number of those 

represented, not only those who can vote. I don’t 

understand how anyone could possibly think otherwise. 

 

Another quote: “Remember that you serve all people of 

Saskatchewan, especially the youth who will have to live far 

longer than others with your decisions. Do the right thing and 

reconsider now this short-sighted idea that you’re proposing.” 

Another quote: “This is a disgraceful bid to gerrymander for 

more conservative seats. Shame.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s the hundreds of these that have been 

delivered on the Twitter feed, and there’s certainly hundreds of 

people signing petitions. We have tried a reasoned amendment 

to convince this government that this Bill is definitely not a 

good idea, not in the interests of democracy, not in the interests 

of youth, and certainly not in the interests of the Charter, and 

that hasn’t worked. And so at this point, we are doing a final 

effort to convince this government to at least stop and think 

about it, to talk to people, to talk to youth, to talk to their 

constituents, to talk to the people that are concerned about 

democracy and hold it dear to their heart, to talk to people who 

care about the Charter, who care about equality rights and about 

the right to representation in chambers such as this. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think there are others of my colleagues 

who are prepared to speak to this at this moment, and I want to 

afford them the time that they deserve to make their comments 

as well. So I’m going to take my leave at this point, and we’ll 

let my colleague carry on from here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

once again very pleased to re-enter the debate. And obviously 

this is going to be on the hoisting motion, Mr. Speaker. And at 

the end of the day, I think one of the biggest and most 

resounding messages, I think, the people of Saskatchewan want 

to say to the Saskatchewan Party, the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

is that this is an incredible waste of money, an incredible waste 

of resources, and an incredible waste of time getting more 

politicians in the Assembly when it could easily use that money 

in many other different ways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s one of the most important things that the people of 

Saskatchewan want to say, that this Bill No. 36 is an absolute 

waste of money. It’s an absolute waste of time, Mr. Speaker. 

And every single person in Saskatchewan has advised this 

government of that in many ways, shapes, and forms, and yet 

this government still, this government still wants to continue to 

pushing their agenda to add more, three more MLAs so they 

can gerrymander the process to try and benefit as a political 

party, Mr. Speaker. And people in Saskatchewan are yelling a 

collective, we’ve had enough of that old-style, conservative 

politics, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just simply deal with the issues, 

deal with the issues that the people are going to want dealt with, 

such as highways, health care, housing, and the work goes on, 

Mr. Speaker, and the list goes on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that on Bill No. 36, on 

this hoisting motion, what we are trying to do as an opposition 

is we’re trying to have and give the Saskatchewan Party, the 

Sask Party, the opportunity to go back to the public. And what 

this motion does, that’s before the Assembly today, it delays the 

Bill for six months so the Saskatchewan Party, the Sask Party, 

can do the right thing, the common sense thing, and go back to 

the people and ask them for permission to move forward with 

this Bill No. 36, to add more politicians. This hoisting motion, 

this motion would give a six-month reprieve to the Sask Party 

to go back and ask for that mandate, Mr. Speaker. And they 

don’t have the confidence to go back, Mr. Speaker, because we 

will see by evidence of their vote exactly what they think, the 

Saskatchewan people, in terms of a mandate when it comes to 

adding more politicians. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know, we know that a lot of the 

backbench, you know, as they . . . Some will have the 

opportunity sooner than later, but when they’re getting to their 

age where they’re — and there’s quite a few of them at that 

stage right now, but some of them aren’t all at that stage — but 

after a number of years, maybe five years, maybe ten years, and 

they’ll be sitting in their rocking chair at their homes, Mr. 

Speaker. And whether they’re a grandpa or grandma or 

grand-uncle — they’ll be grand something anyway, Mr. 

Speaker — and they’ll be sitting in their home and their rocking 

chair and one of the grandkids will come up, and they’ll say to 

him or to her, grandma or grandpa, could you once again tell us, 

what is the first thing that you done when you were a 

politician? Because we were told that you’re a politician, 

grandma or grandpa. What’s one of the first things that you 

did? And notice the young children, bright-eyed, you know, and 

they really fancy, you know, their family, young kids, you 

know. They’ll say, grandma or grandpa, did you bring in a 

seniors’ health Bill of Rights when you were a politician? And 

of course the Sask Party former MLAs will say, well no, no, we 

didn’t do that. We had to raise the prescription rate because it 

was not affordable. And then the young child would say, well, 

grandpa or grandma, wasn’t that a time of prosperity? Yes, for 

some, but it was not for all, you know. 

 

And the next thing they’ll say, well, grandma or grandpa, did 

you help the poor people? Did you help the poor people? Which 

is something that young kids admire — right? — if their 

grandpa or grandma was helping the poor people. And they’ll 

say, well actually, we took them off the income tax roll. So the 

young child will say, what does that mean? Oh about $20 a year 

savings for them.  

 

And then the young child will be confused and say, well let’s 

change the channel, grandma or grandpa. Did you help slay a 

debt? We had a huge debt then. And grandma would say, well 

we were told, we were told to say we have a balanced budget. 

So we don’t know, we don’t know what that means when it 

comes to the debt. We’re not sure. We understood we were 

going to do that, but ask another question there young man or 

young lady. That’s what the grandpa or grandma would say. 

 

And then they’d say, grandma or grandpa or grandnephew or 

grandma or grandpa, did you guys help champion the protection 

of the environment? And what will the Sask Party elder say at 

that? Oh no, no, no, no. We had to make sure we protected the 

economy. In fact we made things so efficient that the federal 

government told us what to do. We just simply followed them. 

 

So there they are, rocking away in their rocking chair, rocking 

away in their rocking chair. What other question did you have 

for me young child? And they said, did you plan, did you plan 

for the long-term prosperity of our province, grandma or 

grandpa? And they’ll sit back and they’ll say, well no, we 

didn’t because we gave everything away for nothing. Because 

at that time, we weren’t thinking. At the time there, young 

child, we simply wanted to make sure we got re-elected in 

2011. So we never took no principal stand to have a long-term 

sustainable future for you and other children, but that’s just how 

we do business, my girl or my boy. You have to understand 

that. 

 

And then they’d say, well what did you do, grandma or 

grandpa? Tell us what you really . . . What’s the first thing that 

you’ve done? As you’re rocking, as you’re rocking in your 

rocking chair by the fire and your young grandchild asks you 

what did you do — especially to the backbench — what did 

you do besides sing the old tunes of, we have a balanced 

budget, which you’re told to say, or it’s about the economy, 

what you’re told to say. Everybody in Western Canada and 

Saskatchewan gets that you should balance your budget and 

you should have a booming economy. Those are things we say 

every day, Mr. Speaker. You need to get some innovative 

thinking going on within the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, and all 

we have is a bunch of political drones. 

 

And again my point, Mr. Speaker, is you’ve got to have a 

backbench with a backbone, Mr. Speaker, and they haven’t 

done anything that we have addressed. Some of the issues here 

about a seniors’ bill of rights, about long-term vision for our 

prosperity, about sharing all the resources, of protecting our 

interests, not one thing have they done, Mr. Speaker, to be able 

to claim credit to that. 

 

So as they’re rocking back and forth in their aged years and a 

young child asks again, well what did you do, grandma or 

grandpa or grand-uncle or grand-aunt, what did you do? And 

they’re going to have to say, well I think the first thing I 

remember, the first big Bill we fought was Bill 36. And you 

know Bill 36, you know what that bought us, young lad or 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2012 

young lady? It bought us more politicians. It bought us more 

politicians, that’s what I done. And then the young kid is going 

to be totally confused by then because obviously they had great 

aspirations. They had great beliefs that grandma or grandpa or 

grand-uncle or grand-auntie actually done something of 

significance in their political lives, and they’re going to start to 

realize that the feeling of disappointment is starting to creep in. 

 

And then what all those backbenchers will have to do is they’ll 

have to lean over and they’ll say, but the only problem we had, 

we brought more politicians into Bill 36. Through Bill 36, you 

brought more politicians. But you know what, little pumpkin? 

You know what, little pumpkin — and they’ll tap that young 

child on the head — we couldn’t count you in that process. We 

didn’t want to count little people. And of course the young 

child is going to say, well why not? I’m here. And we didn’t 

want to count you, little pumpkin, because that would really 

mess up our political agenda. And the child is saying, what, 

what’s this political agenda? What’s more politicians to the 

mix? Well why didn’t I count? All these things you’re going to 

ask. 

 

So as you sit in that rocking chair and reflect on Bill 36, that’s 

about what your legacy is going to be, Mr. Speaker, as a result 

of this session and as a result of this Bill. That’s a colossal 

waste of time. It’s a colossal waste of money. It’s a colossal 

waste of opportunity to really build on the things that we New 

Democrats feel are really important to build, such as a seniors’ 

bill of rights. 

 

Now my last point, Mr. Speaker, I want to make, and this is 

what I want to really watch. The Sask Party says, where do you 

get millions of dollars from? Well, Mr. Speaker, what we done 

was we met, we used the member from Regina Northeast, you 

know. And this is what they do, the Sask Party. They go out, 

identify their connections and their friends and their old 

colleagues, and they use the Crowns as their halfway house. 

 

So what they do, Mr. Speaker, is come on down here from 

wherever you’re at right now. We know Saskatchewan’s having 

a tough old time and you scooted off to greener pastures. But 

come on down, come on down here, and we’ll give you a cushy 

job for two or three years, oh maybe at 200,000 a pop. And then 

after a few years you’re there, we’ll slide you into an MLA 

position, and then we’ll slide you into a minister’s position. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you times that by three, and you know that 

over a process of a year you can see that the Crowns are 

becoming halfway houses for some of their old buddies, Mr. 

Speaker, so they can bring them back with the political process. 

And you add that matrix to three more MLAs, this is where we 

get millions of dollars from. 

 

So as a young lad sitting there, looking up as the confused 

child, looking up at their grandparent or their grand-uncle or 

grand-aunt saying, well geez, I had all these aspirations for you; 

I really believed in you. And the grandpa or grandpa goes to 

say, well I’m sorry I didn’t count you there, pumpkin, but that’s 

just how it is, you know? And you’ll understand as you get 

older. 

 

And I can see that young child get up and say, well, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m going to go vote NDP [New Democratic Party], 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what that young child’s going to say, Mr. 

Speaker, because this Bill is a colossal waste of money. It’s a 

colossal waste of time. It’s a colossal waste of opportunity as 

we mentioned, Mr. Speaker, and not one person in 

Saskatchewan supports this in any way, shape, or form, and 

shame on them. 

 

And the final question that young child would ask, the final 

question that young child would ask that grandparent is they’d 

say, well grandma or grandpa or grand-uncle or grand-aunt, 

during all this, who actually supported this Bill to gerrymander 

the elections? Was it a minister of politics? And the sad reality, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be: it was the Minister of Justice. It 

was the Minister of Justice that promoted this Bill. That’s the 

sad reality, Mr. Speaker, and that’s an absolute crying shame in 

this day and age, Mr. Speaker, to have that Bill supported and 

promoted and put forward through the Ministry of Justice, Mr. 

Speaker. That is not right. That is not fair and not proper in any 

way, shape, or form. 

 

So my final point I would make to the Sask Party, I would 

support this motion because we have said our piece on Bill 36. 

We have said our piece on Bill 36. This government has its 

opportunity on this motion to go and do what they should have 

done in the first place, and that is to get a mandate from the 

people of Saskatchewan to add more politicians, something 

they never, ever campaigned on last fall, Mr. Speaker. And will 

they have the guts to do that, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. 

And that’s the challenge we have from the NDP, Mr. Speaker, 

to vote on this hoisting motion, and I want to see where they 

stand. Thank you. 

 

[21:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

proposed motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General that Bill No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time and the 

proposed amendment thereto, moved by the Leader of the 

Opposition: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “that” and substituting the following: 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011, be not now read a second time 

but that it be read a second time this day six months 

hence. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — On the amendment. All in favour of the 

amendment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All opposed say nay. 



April 23, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members. Recorded division. 

 

[The division bells rang from 21:16 until 21:46.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 

the amendment on Bill 36. All those in favour, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 9] 

 

Nilson Forbes Belanger 

Wotherspoon Broten Chartier 

Sproule McCall Vermette 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed to the amendment, please 

rise. 

 

[Nays — 44] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Norris 

Draude Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Huyghebaert Toth Bradshaw 

Reiter Duncan Ross 

McMillan Harpauer Harrison 

Wyant Hickie Elhard 

Hart Parent Brkich 

Ottenbreit Weekes Campeau 

Heppner Wilson Michelson 

Kirsch Merriman Doke 

Cox Makowsky Jurgens 

Steinley Doherty Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Marchuk 

Phillips Docherty  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 9; 

those opposed, 44. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the amendment defeated. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

proposed motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General that Bill No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Call in the members. 

Recorded division. 

 

[The division bells rang from 21:49 until 21:53.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour of the main motion, please 

rise. 

 

[Yeas — 44] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Norris 

Draude Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Huyghebaert Toth Bradshaw 

Reiter Duncan Ross 

McMillan Harpauer Harrison 

Wyant Hickie Elhard 

Hart Parent Brkich 

Ottenbreit Weekes Campeau 

Heppner Wilson Michelson 

Kirsch Merriman Doke 

Cox Makowsky Jurgens 

Steinley Doherty Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Marchuk 

Phillips Docherty  

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 9] 

 

Nilson Forbes Belanger 

Wotherspoon Broten Chartier 

Sproule McCall Vermette 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the second reading 

motion, 44; those opposed, 9. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. Second reading 

on this . . . Okay. To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill will be assigned 

to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being near 

the time of adjournment, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Tuesday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:57.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1205 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1214 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1215 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1217 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1221 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1222 

 Recorded division (amendment)................................................................................................................................................ 1225 

 Recorded division (motion) ........................................................................................................................................................ 1225 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 1225 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


