




















































Hansard: April 18, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 31A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1119 

 April 18, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I take great pride in introducing some honoured 

guests in your gallery, seated in the front row of your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a delegation here from the Republic of Indonesia, and 

as you may know, Indonesia has become not just an important 

friend but also a very substantial customer for products that we 

export from Saskatchewan. Indonesia is the second largest 

customer for the potash that we produce locally, and they are 

also a big importer of wheat. So they’ve got the two primary 

products that we produce covered, and we appreciate their 

business. 

 

With us today, and I would ask the individuals to stand as I 

recognize them, the consul general of the Republic of 

Indonesia, Julang Pujianto. And I’m sorry; I warned him before 

this that I might have that bit of a problem. The consul for 

social, cultural affairs is Sudarsono Soedirlan. And we have 

accompanying these two gentlemen, Ms. Djatu Riyanda 

Primadini, and she’s the vice-consul for Economy. 

 

I would like all members of this Legislative Assembly to make 

our guests warmly welcome today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — On behalf of the official opposition, I too would 

like to welcome the guests from Indonesia. One of the facts 

about Indonesia that always is important I think for us to 

remember is that Indonesia is the country in the world with the 

most Muslims of any other country in the world. And they are 

great international traders, great business people, and have done 

that for millennia, I think would be the best way to describe it. 

 

And so we’re very pleased to have Indonesia here in 

Saskatchewan as traders, but we’re also very pleased to have in 

our community immigrants from Indonesia who are strong 

leaders in our Muslim communities in Saskatchewan. And I 

also would say that there’s a lot of Lutherans in Indonesia as 

well. It has one of the largest Lutheran churches in the world. 

And so I know that there’s much interaction on that level as 

well. So I very much welcome you to Saskatchewan. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it’s my pleasure today to welcome 20 public 

servants who are in the Speaker’s gallery today. They’re here to 

take part in the parliamentary program for the public service. 

The participants are from the following ministries: Agriculture; 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing; Environment; Health; 

Municipal Affairs; Public Service Commission; and Social 

Services. 

 

They’re going to have a tour of the Legislative Assembly, and 

they’ll have briefings from the Legislative Library, the Office 

of the Clerk, and Executive Council. They’ll meet with 

members from both sides of the House, and they’ll have a 

meeting with the Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m asking all members 

in the legislature to help me welcome these very valuable 

public servants to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to join with the minister in welcoming the public 

servants to their Legislative Assembly. On behalf of the official 

opposition, it’s my pleasure to later on meet with the 

individuals here on the tour, and I had that opportunity last 

time. It was a most interesting experience and exchange, Mr. 

Speaker, and I look forward to it on behalf of the official 

opposition later this afternoon. So again, I join with the minister 

and ask all members to welcome these public servants to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I would like to introduce in the west gallery today 14 grade 

11 and 12 students from Glaslyn Central School. Just give us a 

wave up there. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 

Brian Goota, and chaperones, Mervin Pritchett and Carol-Lee 

Allan. And they are here this afternoon to watch the 

proceedings, and I’ll be meeting with them later. They’ve 

travelled five hours to be here. They are from the furthest 

northeast corner of my constituency, and I would like 

everybody to welcome them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of this Assembly, I’m honoured 

to present three visitors to you, to the Assembly, in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. Two weeks ago I attended the graduation 

ceremony, a very unique graduation ceremony, on behalf of the 

Minister of Advanced Education, called the targeted initiative 

for older workers program. In our gallery are Christine 

McConnell and her husband, Bruce — Christine is the 

coordinator of the program — and recent graduate, Vivian 

Lutzko. 

 

There were 13 graduates of this program, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

just an example of the kind of programming that exists in our 

province for education. It’s never too late to get an education. 

We’re very proud of that. Vivian has since been hired, and 

we’re extremely excited about that. So I’d like all members of 

this Assembly to help me welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a constituent of Saskatoon Greystone, Mr. Robin 

Bellamy.  

 

And many will know Mr. Bellamy for his variety of work that 

contributes mightily to not just Saskatoon but right across the 

province. He’s involved with a number of educational 

initiatives. He’s involved with a number of philanthropic 

initiatives. He’s also not simply focusing on local communities, 

which he works tirelessly to help enhance, but he also is one of 

our key informal but very, very vital ambassadors with the 

Philippines. And so to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

invite all members of this Assembly to welcome Mr. Bellamy 

to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 

great pleasure today that I can introduce 33 grade 7, 8, and 9 

students from the terrific community of Colonsay. They’re 

accompanied today with their teachers Brian Cowan, Joanne 

Helemkey, and Lisa Eger, as well as the chaperone of Michelle 

Halvorson. So I would like all members to help me welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I see in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, a friend of mine. Mr. David Bowman has 

joined us here this afternoon. Now David’s family is well 

known in the province of Saskatchewan, and many will know 

of a school in Saskatoon named after his grandfather, that being 

Aden Bowman school, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, David is actually a constituent of the member for 

Regina Coronation Park, although he worked on my campaign 

extensively last fall. And I think he just got the surnames mixed 

up and kept coming to the wrong campaign. So I appreciate all 

of his help. But please help me in welcoming David to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, Saskatchewan, alone and 

unprotected from intruders. And we know that armed robberies 

such as one that took place in Regina in January and several 

that took place in Saskatoon over the months of February, 

March, and as recently as just two nights ago, Jimmy’s law is 

much needed. 

 

We know British Columbia and other provinces have brought 

several safety precautions through law, including a requirement 

that workers cannot be alone during late night, early morning 

hours. And if they are required to work, there must be 

protective barriers such as locked doors and protective glass. 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And the people who have signed this petition come from Moose 

Jaw and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to both the management and 

accounting of our provincial finances. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Carnduff and Yellow Grass. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of citizens who call on the Sask 

Party government to support and pass the Saskatchewan 

seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights, which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Twelve and a 

half million Canadians dedicate their time each year to continue 

a rich history of volunteering and community involvement. I’m 

proud to stand before the Assembly today and recognize these 

volunteers who are so central to their communities and our 

great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, volunteerism results in a positive change in many 

different ways. Canadians spend their time supporting 

community health care, sports and recreation, heritage and arts, 

environmental protection and advocacy, disaster relief, 

international development, and firefighting, just to name a few. 

 

This week marks the 68th annual National Volunteer Week, 

and the celebration represents the nation’s largest recognition of 

volunteers and civic participation. In Saskatchewan, the 

Ministry of Social Services works with 195 community-based 

organizations comprised of volunteer boards that play key roles 

in the delivery of important services. 

 

As well the province has 250 housing authorities made up of 

volunteer boards and 270 volunteer-based community housing 

organizations that include church housing groups and local 

seniors’ lodges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have a reputation for 

dedicated volunteerism. They have led the nation in 

volunteerism rates on many occasions and are driven by their 

desire to contribute to their communities, share their 

experiences and skills, support friends, and help those in need. 

 

Please join me in applauding the work of volunteers nationwide 

and particularly our Saskatchewan friends who do so much to 

enhance our communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Holocaust Remembrance Day 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today in 

recognition of Yom Hashoah, also known as Holocaust 

Remembrance Day, to commemorate the lives of the 6 million 

Jewish people who died horrifically in the Holocaust between 

1933 and 1945. 

 

On this day, Mr. Speaker, many people in Canada, including 

those with Jewish ancestry or connections, hold ceremonies and 

events to remember Holocaust victims whose lives were so 

tragically taken away during this incredibly dark period of 

modern history. The two Jewish congregations in my riding are 

holding their ceremonies on Sunday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these ceremonies not only allow us pause and 

honour these 6 million individuals and their families left 

behind, but they remind us of the horrors of state-sanctioned 

hatred and genocide, of anti-Semitism, of inaction in the face of 

mass atrocity, of the demonization and defaming of our fellow 

human beings, and of the culture of impunity. 

 

It’s up to us, Mr. Speaker, as members of a free, open, and 

diverse society to ensure that these lessons learned from the 

Holocaust, and other genocides, are passed on to future 

generations. We can do this, Mr. Speaker, by listening to the 

stories of survivors, by passing on these stories to current and 

future generations, and by attending ceremonies and by lighting 

candles for Holocaust victims. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join with me today in 

remembering those 6 million people who came before us. We 

must pledge that we will never be silent or indifferent in the 

face of evil. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Field House and Mosaic Place 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

extol on the virtues of the Moose Jaw Field House and Mosaic 

Place. These amazing facilities have created a new and exciting 

vibe in Moose Jaw, from ultimate Frisbee at the Field House to 

TSN [The Sports Network] broadcasting the Capital One 

Canada Cup curling classic this November. We’ve had our 

inaugural concert with Canadian country music star, Paul 

Brandt, and as of today there are two more in the queue 

including rock legend John Mellencamp. 

 

For those of you not yet to visit these remarkable facilities, 

seriously, what are you waiting for? The attendance of the 

average Warrior game is now 3,800, which is double what it 

was at the Crushed Can. The Field House has just added batting 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

cages and a driving range, and in June of this year our own 

Saskatchewan Roughriders will be having a training day there. I 

considered joining them but didn’t want to embarrass the team 

with my athletic prowess. 

 

While the committee members are too many to name, I’d like to 

mention Shelley Jones and Bill Deyo, Co-Chairs of the Moose 

Jaw Multiplex Builders Inc., on receiving the 2011 Citizens of 

the Year. To quote Margaret Mead, “Never doubt that a small 

group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world. 

Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.” 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Saskatoon Literacy Volunteer Receives Award 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, on March 1st, Read Saskatoon 

held their Read ’n’ Feed Celebrity Auction fundraiser where 

they presented the Sylvia Vicq Tutor Award to Julie Gregorash. 

 

The Sylvia Vicq Tutor Award recognizes a tutor who goes 

above and beyond the tutoring expectations. Learners at Read 

Saskatoon often tell staff how appreciative they are of their 

tutors and of the impact they’ve had on their lives. This award 

allows Read Saskatoon to recognize all of the wonderful work 

their volunteer tutors do and lets them know that they’re 

contributing to building a strong community. 

 

Julie Gregorash was nominated by Lawrence Smokeyday who’s 

been the recipient of Julie’s tutoring. He wrote in his 

nomination: 

 

Next month is a year that we’ve been working together. 

She is a great tutor. We joke around a lot. It relieves a lot 

of tension and stress. She gives me solid, confident 

feedback. She says lots, “It’s up to you, Lorne.” I get to 

make the decisions. She means a lot to me — she has 

started to figure out my weaknesses. She’s my second gift, 

my second chance. 

 

Julie Gregorash is a great example of Read Saskatoon’s focus, 

not just on words but literacy — reading, writing, speaking, 

listening, and numeracy. By providing these foundational skills 

with qualified staff and trained volunteers, Read Saskatoon is 

helping people like Lawrence Smokeyday reach their full 

potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Read 

Saskatoon for all the important work their staff and volunteers 

do every day and in particular, Julie, on receiving Read 

Saskatoon’s Vicq Tutor Award. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Environmental Engineering and Design Collaboration 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to highlight a recent collaboration between the 

University of Regina, the city of Yorkton, Communities of 

Tomorrow, and Agmar International Marketing. 

 

These partners have collaborated on the design of a new 

client-based, experiential learning class in environmental 

engineering and design, pairing the needs of the city of Yorkton 

with the skill set of the U of R engineering students. Through 

this class three groups of University of Regina engineering 

students will compete to provide solutions to the environmental 

waste disposal challenges facing the city of Yorkton. 

 

The student projects assess the waste streams, identify the 

destination of their products to be recycled, assess the financial 

viability and stability of the markets for the recycled materials, 

and assess the earth-friendliness of the recycling process and 

products in Saskatchewan. 

 

Yorkton is a great choice for this project, Mr. Speaker, and has 

a long history when it comes to collaboration in developing 

waste and recycling solutions. We are currently known for 

having possibly the most successful and comprehensive 

recycling program in the province, due to the work done over 

the past 20 years through partnerships with the city of Yorkton, 

the Saskatchewan Abilities Council, the Yorkton Kinsmen, the 

Prairie Harvest at risk youth employment program, and 

Ottenbreit Sanitation Services Ltd. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I’d 

like to congratulate these partners for applying research to find 

real life solutions and for focusing on public policy issues of 

importance to the province. Congratulations to the University of 

Regina, the city of Yorkton, Communities of Tomorrow, and 

Agmar International Marketing. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Sexual Assault Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Sexual 

Assault Awareness Month and I am honoured on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan to rise today and join in the 

conversation. 

 

The 2012 campaign provides an effective way for communities 

and individuals to become involved in learning how to respect 

one another in order to prevent sexual violence. This campaign 

will bring awareness to the impact of cultural messages and the 

importance of equality while teaching about respect and 

consent, healthy sexuality, family planning, and sexual relations 

that are free from violence and coercion. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan provides resources that help 

to address the root causes of sexual violence, including 

information, referral, and education initiatives. As well services 

for victims of these crimes are available. Sexual assault services 

include a 24-hour crisis telephone line, direct support including 

accompanying the victim to medical or legal appointments, 

counselling for victims, and compensation and video 

conferencing to allow vulnerable victims to testify outside their 

courtroom. This range of sexual assault services is provided 

throughout the province by various community service 

organizations in conjunction with the government. 

 

I would like to invite my colleagues in the Assembly to please 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

join me in thanking all the ladies and gentlemen who work hard 

to educate on respect and consent, and console the victims of 

this terrible crime. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 

 

Saskatchewan Budget 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to remind the opposition that now with both Manitoba 

and Prince Edward Island governments recently tabling deficit 

budgets, that Saskatchewan remains the only province in 

Canada with a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Manitoba’s NDP [New Democratic Party] 

government is raising taxes and is planning to sell off 

provincial assets. They’ll also be expanding the PST [provincial 

sales tax] to more goods and services, the third such expansion 

since the year 2000. Even with these increases to taxes, 

Manitoba’s NDP government is still projecting a deficit of $460 

million, virtually unchanged from last year’s projected deficit. 

 

In sharp contrast, Mr. Speaker, your Saskatchewan Party 

government has presented a balanced budget without raising 

taxes. It’s no wonder that a recent national poll found that 84 

per cent of people surveyed in Saskatchewan have a positive 

outlook about the economy, which reflects yet another 

disconnect from this opposition NDP and the people of our 

province. 

 

Our economy remains strong and growing, and our balanced 

budget will help keep it that way. Mr. Speaker, I understand the 

NDP don’t like us talking about a balanced budget because, 

based on their platform, they would have spent us into a deficit. 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to balanced budgets 

and keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Electoral Representation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when I asked the 

Premier if he had consulted with the Children’s Advocate about 

the legislation to exclude those young people under 18 from the 

electoral boundaries calculations, he didn’t answer. He let the 

Minister of Justice stand up and say they’ve “agreed to 

disagree” with the Children’s Advocate. 

 

Now Mr. Pringle co-chaired and facilitated the Premier’s CBO 

[community-based organization] summits. He co-chaired the 

province’s task force on housing authority. He was appointed 

the Chair of the independent child welfare panel. Mr. Speaker, 

the Sask Party supported the recommendations that came from 

these panels and task force. So why are they choosing to ignore 

the good advice from the Children’s Advocate on the issue of 

excluding young people from the electoral boundaries 

calculations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for 

the opportunity to answer the question. I had indicated 

yesterday that we have enormous respect for the Children’s 

Advocate. Mr. Pringle has done very good work on a variety of 

different issues, but on this particular one, we have agreed to 

disagree. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite that our goal is 

part of this process, and I think they have agreed on people that 

will be appointed to the Boundaries Commission so that we can 

come out of this with constituencies that have as close to equal 

representation as we possibly can. And with due respect to the 

children in our province, we think the appropriate count is the 

number of people that are going to vote in that province. Mr. 

Speaker, the children of our province will be very well served 

and continue to be very well served by the basis of the services 

and the things that are provided to them through our schools, 

through the Department of Social Services, through our various 

programs that are there, and we will continue to work with 

them on that basis. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a disturbing pattern that’s 

forming with this government. The Premier failed to consult 

with the film industry before he tackled and took away the film 

tax credit. He failed to consult with the tourism industry when 

they moved towards a Crown corporation instead of an 

arm’s-length agency like Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s going to waste millions of 

dollars on three more MLAs when just about everyone in the 

province is telling him we don’t need three more MLAs. And 

now they’re refusing to listen to the advice from the Children’s 

Advocate when he says, “It’s my opinion that this proposed 

amendment is contrary to the interests of children and youth.” 

My question to the Premier: who did he consult about this 

decision to exclude the young people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we just went through an 

election with highly disproportionate numbers in the various 

constituencies. I’d indicated earlier my own constituency of 

Saskatoon Southeast had some 16,343 voters in it. The member 

from Saskatoon Centre had approximately 7,000. Come the 

next election, I want to be able to look those voters in the eye, 

and I want to be able to tell them that we have done the best 

possible job at realigning and recounting the number of voters 

so that we ensure that every vote counts exactly the same 

amount. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the children in this province, we 

will ensure that they are well cared for and well protected, 

unlike the members opposite, because if they wanted to consult 

with the children in this province, they would have to go to 

Alberta because that’s where they drove them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s curious that the member 

opposite refers to the last election and the issues that took place 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

there because this did not show up anywhere in the election 

platform of the Sask Party. Mr. Speaker, the government’s 

refusal to listen to good advice costs Saskatchewan people 

money. The Sask Party failed to listen to people who told them 

that Bill 5 was a violation of the Canadian Constitution. As a 

result, Saskatchewan was condemned by the International 

Labour Organization, and eventually the Court of Queen’s 

Bench has ruled Bill 5 unconstitutional. 

 

My question to the Premier: how much did it cost 

Saskatchewan people because the Saskatchewan Party refused 

to listen to good advice? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we all obtain legal 

opinions. The legal opinion that we have obtained in this regard 

we feel is valid, and we feel that the process that we are taking 

will stand up to scrutiny of the courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the numbers of voters in this 

province, we will continue to focus on that. The constituency of 

Athabasca had some 6,511 voters, the constituency of 

Cumberland, 8,726 — just over 14,200, still less than the 

number of voters in Saskatoon Southeast. So combined those 

constituencies don’t count for the same thing that they do in 

Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will work to ensure that this is fair and 

equitable, and we will ensure that the citizens of our province 

have a good, fair, and well-balanced electoral system, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has just 

informed the House that he has legal opinions that support this 

particular piece of legislation, Bill 36. I would ask the minister 

to table those legal opinions so the people of Saskatchewan can 

see the advice that has been received by this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we obtain legal opinions 

on all the legislation that we prepare. We do not file it, but we 

have done a careful and will continue to do a careful job in 

preparing legislation that will well and adequately serve the 

residents of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that the voices of our children 

are heard. We do not want the voices of our children to be 

heard from Calgary or Alberta. We want them heard here by 

virtue of them having good job opportunities in our province 

and by virtue of them having good success in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that government spent many years driving 

children away from this province. We’ll not take advice from 

them on how to treat children in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate said that 

he has legal opinions that suggest that not including young 

people under the age of 18 in the equation that will be used to 

draw up the new electoral boundaries could be a violation of the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms in the Canadian Constitution. 

He said, “I’ve got access to legal advice that I believe 

compelled me to try and suggest to the government of 

Saskatchewan that we do not support this particular 

amendment.”  

 

The minister says that he and the government disagree with 

this. My question to the Premier: what will it cost 

Saskatchewan people if the Sask Party gets it wrong here as 

well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite used 

to have this position at one time in the past. He is very well 

aware of the capabilities of the people that work within the 

Ministry of Justice. They are some of the finest constitutional 

lawyers in Canada. They will work well to ensure that the Bill 

is appropriately and carefully drafted. It has taken place 

already. The Bill is before the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the members of this House 

and the citizens of this province that that Bill has received 

careful scrutiny, and we believe it will stand up to every 

possible court challenge, Mr. Speaker. We do not believe there 

will be a court challenge. People are entitled to express an 

opinion but, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is good law and it adequately 

serves the people of this province and it ensures that there will 

be a fair and equitable distribution for voting in the next 

election. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mental Health Care Services 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mental health 

care is a huge concern for our province, but it’s largely ignored, 

Mr. Speaker, when the government is making its decisions. I 

keep hearing, Mr. Speaker, from individuals who are suffering 

from mental health care issues and individuals who work in the 

mental health care field that we’ve a long way to go in this 

province in order to provide appropriate mental health care. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I recently heard some troubling stories 

about individuals from people working in the mental health care 

sector, individuals who needed mental health care, tried to 

access services and care, Mr. Speaker, at the Dubé Centre in 

Saskatoon but were turned away because of overcapacity in the 

system. 

 

My question to the minister, my specific question to the 

minister: does he know how often those in need of mental 

health care services are turned away because of overcapacity in 

the system? 

 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the issue of mental health and the delivery of mental 

health services within the province is a regional health 

authority. Having said that, we fund regional health authorities, 

but they are the deliverer of the services across the whole 

province, whether it’s the health regions in southern 

Saskatchewan or the two northern health regions. It is always a 

challenge to make sure that we have the proper services 

supplied. 

 

We don’t have necessarily a code knowing when people are 

going to be coming in or when they’re going to be having some 

mental health challenges. So it is always a sliding scale, Mr. 

Speaker. The system goes through times where it’s right up to 

capacity and times where there is some vacancy, Mr. Speaker. 

But what I will say is that the health regions work very hard to 

supply the appropriate level of mental health services across the 

province to ensure that people that are vulnerable at this time 

receive the services that they need. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mental health care 

challenges are especially problematic when they affect 

individuals that are poor and individuals that are homeless. One 

of the causes to do with capacity challenges in the mental health 

care system is the fact that there’s not nearly enough mental 

health care spaces in the community. So when individuals are in 

a facility such as the Dubé Centre, often they have to stay there 

longer than they would need to because there are not spaces or 

safe and reliable places where they’re able to go in the 

community. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite have taken 

urgent action on certain issues. In recent days we have seen 

government business cleared in order to push through more 

politicians. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that requires 

urgent action, real urgent action. So my question to the 

minister: when will he take urgent action in order to increase 

the number of mental health care spaces in the community? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, again we defer to the 

regional health authorities that deliver care at that level. The 

member opposite talked about the Irene and Les Dubé Centre 

for mental health in Saskatoon, which is a shining example of 

both provincial government and private donors. Irene and Les 

Dubé as well as Merlis Belsher who put millions of dollars into 

that facility, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that people that are 

suffering from mental health have a state-of-the-art facility that 

is on the banks of the Saskatchewan River — a very tranquil 

setting, Mr. Speaker, an absolute gem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Having said that, there is always more that we can do, 

especially on the community level, so that people, when they 

receive services in a centre like that, then can go back into the 

community and have support. We work closely with the health 

regions to make sure that support is available throughout the 

province. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, while we know that mental health 

care issues and concerns are great in our larger cities, we know 

they can be even worse and more problematic in rural areas, 

remote areas, and in northern Saskatchewan. And members in 

the Assembly and the public have heard the members from 

Athabasca and Cumberland speak about the unique challenges 

facing northern communities. Having recently been in the 

North, Mr. Speaker, I heard first-hand about the need for 

increased services and supports for those living in the North, 

especially to deal with the issue of youth suicide. 

 

So my question to the minister is this: will he commit today to 

develop a comprehensive mental health strategy for the 

province with a very strong focus on northern Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said in 

my previous answers, that there is always more that we can do. 

Building capacity within in the communities is extremely 

important, Mr. Speaker. But I am very proud of this 

government and the commitment that we have made to mental 

health services in the province. We had a provincial hospital, 

the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, that is 100 

years old, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government has not only made the commitment and talked 

about replacement of that hospital, but we’ve moved that 

project along, Mr. Speaker, with actual money — a far cry from 

when the opposition was in government, Mr. Speaker. I 

remember the member from North Battleford saying they put 

money towards the project. We came to government. No money 

had moved across, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely shameful. That 

facility was deteriorating for decades, Mr. Speaker, under the 

NDP. This government has a strong commitment to mental 

health, and you can see it in the new hospital in the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I asked the minister 

what specific and urgent action he was going to take in order to 

increase the number of beds in the community so that places 

like the Dubé Centre, Mr. Speaker, can do the job that they do 

so well, but can service and help more people in the province. I 

asked the minister, Mr. Speaker, if he would commit today to 

develop a provincial mental health strategy so that there’s a 

comprehensive strategy for the province with a strong focus on 

northern Saskatchewan, but he did not answer that question. I 

ask him again, Mr. Speaker: will he commit today to develop a 

provincial mental health strategy with a strong focus on 

northern Saskatchewan? Will he do that today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say to that 

member is that we wouldn’t have to start today. We are 

working with health regions and have been working with health 

regions for the last four and a half years, Mr. Speaker.  



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, there is, sure, more work to be done. And we 

know that when we made the announcement regarding the 

provincial hospital in North Battleford, we also knew that that 

was only one part of the overall strategy for mental health. We 

need to continue to work with health regions to ensure that they 

have the proper services, as well as CBOs that offer great 

services throughout our province, Mr. Speaker, on the 

community level. It is a continuum of care, Mr. Speaker, that is 

needed. We are working with that over the last four and a half 

years. I think we’ve made some great strides. Having said that, 

Mr. Speaker, there is still more work to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Agricultural Issues 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is still 

reeling from the effects of the Harper government’s recent 

budget. We continue to have questions about the negative 

impacts on Saskatchewan farmers and producers. One of the 

casualties of the cuts is the PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration] shelterbelt program in Indian Head. A recent 

independent study has estimated the public good from this 

program over a 20-year period was $600 million and that the 

trees planted in 2004 alone will sequester 1.8 million tonnes of 

CO2 by 2054. My question to the minister: what is his plan to 

assure that this essential program will be continued for the 

farmers of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we also have concerns what will happen to the 

Indian Head tree nursery at Indian Head. And one of the 

subjects that I’ll be talking to my federal counterpart on Friday 

is how that transition will work, and we will have more 

information on that at the time. 

 

But I will say, Mr. Speaker, that in the agriculture sector right 

now there’s more optimism than there has been for many, many 

years out there, whether it comes where the community 

pastures that the federal government is handing down to the 

province. I think producers, as late as the other night when the 

Saskatchewan cattle association was, actually held a reception 

in here, the positive atmosphere that was there. And the concern 

that they had is that they wanted to make sure that the 

community pastures would stick with the producers out there 

and they would have the first choice of those pastures. 

 

We agree with the producers out there. And I think the member 

opposite would agree with that, that we will make sure that 

producers come first, as they have in the first four and a half 

years under our government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The producers I 

spoke to the other night at the event also expressed actually 

quite a few concerns about the community pasture program and 

that it not be sold off, that it be retained by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And they’re very concerned about a potential 

sale of those pastures which could destroy the work that’s been 

done by PFRA for those so many decades, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the agroforestry issue and the shelterbelts that have 

been established by the PFRA, there’s a specialist named Doug 

Macaulay from Alberta who, he’s an agroforestry specialist. 

And he said that the agricultural world is showing renewed 

enthusiasm for shelterbelts, that they have the potential to 

return value far beyond the initial investment, that the PFRA 

shelterbelt program is home to the tools and corporate 

knowledge of the shelterbelt systems that work best for 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

A 2010 PFRA publication endorsed by Minister Ritz says that 

history shows that the centre is as relevant to the protection of 

Canada’s landscape today as it was more than a hundred years 

ago. A mere two years later, the federal minister states there’s 

no more need for this program despite what the experts are 

saying. 

 

My question to the minister: does he agree with the specialist 

that this program is important for Saskatchewan farmers, and is 

he prepared to continue it now that it has been abandoned by 

the federal government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would agree with the member opposite that the 

Indian Head nursery has played an important part of a role in 

agriculture right across this province for many, many years. 

And that’s ongoing; it still plays an important part. And I think 

we will be passing our concerns on to the federal minister of 

what happens to that tree nursery, whether it . . . From the 

comments that I’ve seen the federal minister make, that he’s 

hoping that the private sector will take that over. And we 

certainly hope that someone will take that nursery over and still 

provide that service to producers. 

 

We do know though that the private sector does now sell trees 

to farmers and acreages right across rural Saskatchewan out 

there and are providing some of those services. But we will 

certainly be talking to the federal minister about our concerns. 

And again I agree with the member opposite that the service 

they provided for many years has been very important when 

starting farmyards or shelterbelts around rural Saskatchewan, 

and we’re certainly going to pass along those concerns to the 

federal minister. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the fact 

that the minister is willing to pass on those concerns to the 

minister, and we look forward to what the federal minister has 

to say about this. But not only the experts are critical of this 

decision, but the pundits have weighed in as well. Bruce 

Johnstone has pointed out: 

 

But there’s ample evidence to suggest that prolonged use 

of zero till has . . . hardened the Prairie soil, which will 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

result in increased tillage, leading to more soil erosion and 

loss of soil moisture . . . with climate change, the Prairies 

will become hotter and drier . . . and trees help to keep that 

moisture on the land. 

 

In today’s Leader-Post, Murray Mandryk questioned how the 

minister came to the conclusion that the goals have been met. 

He said: 

 

Met its goals? What goals? Who did Ritz talk to when he 

came to this startling conclusion? Was it today’s farmers, 

who are now rightfully annoyed that a sound and relatively 

cost-efficient farm support program has just been 

sacrificed in the name of past Conservative government 

budget deficits? 

 

The question to the minister that I have, Mr. Speaker, is this: 

does he agree with the pundits and the agroforesters that 

Saskatchewan farmers need access to a shelterbelt program, or 

is he once again blindly supporting the ill-advised and 

regressive actions of his Conservative friends in Ottawa? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite and the pundits that think there’s so much pessimism 

going on in the agriculture sector, I’ve got to inform the 

member opposite that she should listen to the Saskatchewan 

cattle association. She should listen to farmers across this 

province. Many on this side actually have farms in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and we haven’t seen times like this for many, 

many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the 16 years previous under an NDP 

government I can see how they got that attitude, how that 

pessimism flourished because they paid no attention to rural 

Saskatchewan. And that’s why we represent every rural riding 

in the province of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, for the 

member’s information, I can’t see that changing any time soon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Plans for Provincial Highways 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Sask Party has lots of spin and PR [public relations], but they’re 

just spinning their wheels when it comes to fixing our 

highways. 

 

The CAA’s [Canadian Automobile Association] campaign on 

highways has seen more than 1,600 votes for the worst 

highway, Mr. Speaker. And a lot of people in Saskatchewan 

want to see better highways, not more politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

With record revenue, it’s a shame to see what we have — 

crumbling highways, potholes big enough to lose a vehicle, and 

unsafe driving conditions throughout the province.  

 

To the minister: with record revenues, why are people still 

referring to our highways as gravel goat paths? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — The short answer first, Mr. Speaker: 

because, Mr. Speaker, under 16 years of NDP rule, they did 

nothing for highways. Mr. Speaker, as far as the member’s 

comments about more MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], I find this just a bit surprising because I’m sure he’s 

on record in Hansard as supporting more MLAs in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize we inherited a massive 

infrastructure deficit. There are a lot of bad highways in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We, during the 2007 election campaign, 

we committed to $1.8 billion if we were given the privilege to 

serve as government. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

laughed at that. They scoffed. They said it couldn’t be done. 

Mr. Speaker, not only did we do that, we exceeded it. We spent 

over $2.2 billion on highways in our first term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize that there’s a lot of work left to be 

done, but we’ve made a good start. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know what’s disappointing? In 2007 Highway 22 was lined up 

to be fixed, and the Sask Party took office and did nothing, Mr. 

Speaker. They’ve axed it from the five-year plan and let it get 

worse and worse for the people of the Southey region. And here 

five years later, the highway is nominated for the worst goat 

trail in the West, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Highways department planned to have it done, 

but the Saskatchewan Party hasn’t even started. It’s a complete 

failure, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the minister to park his 

rhetoric. And my question again to the minister is, why did the 

minister fail to follow through on the plan to get the job done 

on Highway No. 22? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, directly to Highway No. 22: 

we recognize the deplorable condition it’s in. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

on our five-year capital plan. Some of the advance work is 

already being done. Mr. Speaker, we recognize that that needs 

to get fixed. 

 

But as far as the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, saying that 

they had it lined up to be done, it’s funny, Mr. Speaker, how the 

year before an election they have a lot of things lined up to be 

done. Mr. Speaker, they were committing federal money that 

didn’t exist to a new bridge in Prince Albert before this last 

election. Mr. Speaker, that member opposite’s a former minister 

of Highways and he never . . . He did nothing, virtually, during 

his entire tenure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize that there is an awful lot of work left 

to be done but, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting to it. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 — The Active Families Benefit 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today I rise to speak about The Active Families Benefit 

Amendment Act, 2012. The active families benefit is a proven 

success, and I would like to take this opportunity here today to 

acknowledge the impact the initiative has had already and to 

make sure that we expand the age range that it covers. That’s 

something that can make a good program even better, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now the active families benefit was first introduced four years 

ago by our government. It was Bill No. 33, An Act respecting 

an Active Families Benefit, 2008. Its intent was to encourage 

the development of healthy, active families to increased access 

to culture, sport, and recreation activities. The purpose of The 

Active Families Benefit Act was to help families with the cost of 

their children’s participation in cultural, recreational, and sport 

activities as mentioned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the benefit serves to help Saskatchewan families by 

offsetting registration costs for their children’s participation, 

thereby improving access and reducing financial barriers to 

participation. Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the results and the active 

family benefit is definitely making a difference. This program 

is particularly helpful for households with several children, in 

that if siblings participate in a couple of team sports, for 

example, football and hockey, or a sport . . . cultural activities 

such as a theatre school or music lessons, the tally can become 

daunting. Even for a single child in one activity with 

registration, materials, instruments, and possibly travel and 

accommodations, paying for all of that can indeed be a 

challenge for some families. 

 

Now we firmly believe that this program can and has made the 

difference between quite a few Saskatchewan young people 

participating and not being able to join the team, so to speak. 

Whether it’s parenting or voice classes, the local soccer team, 

the outdoor camping, cooking, or science classes, the active 

families benefit helps families ensure children and youth are 

connected to their communities while developing skills in the 

areas of art, in culture, and recreational activities. 

 

Four years later, Mr. Speaker, the active families benefit has 

been enthusiastically embraced by families all over our great 

province. In 2001, data from the Canada Revenue Agency 

showed that approximately 40 per cent of families with children 

at home are currently participating in the program, the first year 

for which statistics are actually available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to review how we developed the budget 

for the program. The budget for the program for each year is 

based on 75 per cent of the previous tax year estimate and 25 

per cent of the current tax year as a result of the difference 

between fiscal year-end and tax year-end. Using the population 

of children aged 6 to 14 — 2007 Statistics Canada data is 

available to support that calculation — and factoring in a 40 per 

cent uptake in the first year, the cost for the 2009 tax year was 

$5.6 million. There’s no inflation factored in to reach the $9 

million estimate for the program in the 2011-12 budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s anticipated that children in the expanded age 

categories might have a lower uptake to the program than has 

been seen in the 6- to 14-year age bracket. As well since the full 

$9 million budget has not been fully utilized in year 1 or year 2, 

an additional $3 million has been added to the budget to 

account for the expanded age range for active families benefit, 

bringing up the program budget to $12 million for the current 

fiscal year. That’s the way it’s reflected in the current budget. 

That means that the funds for the program are already set aside 

and will be in place as part of this province’s balanced budget 

— again, Mr. Speaker, most likely the only balanced budget 

coast to coast in this great nation. 

 

As we know, at this point the benefit only covers children aged 

6 to 14 years, registered in cultural, recreational, or sport 

programs. This change will expand the active families benefit 

eligibility to include all children all the way up to 18 years of 

age, allowing families to claim up to $150 of eligible expenses 

for each child per taxation year. As I said, it’s paid for and was 

mentioned in this spring’s budget. The expanded age criteria 

increases the accessibility of the programs to more families and 

gives the active families benefit the second largest age range in 

all of Canada. That’s second only to Manitoba, whose similarly 

focused fitness tax credit program includes young adults up to 

24 years of age. We’re up to 18; they’re up to 24. Saskatchewan 

still has the edge, however, as our plan is a refundable benefit. 

Mr. Speaker, the active families benefit in Saskatchewan is 

unique in Canada. It is in fact the most generous as it provides a 

dollar-for-dollar, refundable benefit so all Saskatchewan 

families are able to receive back the first $150 of eligible 

expenses. 

 

Now ministry officials surveyed similar kinds of programs all 

across Canada and found that’s not always the case. In most 

other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, the taxes saved range from 35 

to $75. This is a better program; there is no question about it. 

To date the active families benefit program has successfully 

provided tax rebates to nearly 57,000 Saskatchewan families — 

that is impressive indeed; colleagues agree — with the majority 

having a household income of $80,000 or less. Fifty-seven 

thousand families, Mr. Speaker — that is truly outstanding. 

 

Our government wants more dollars to stay in the pockets of 

Saskatchewan families for their use. That’s why we tried to 

make the active families benefit as straightforward and as easy 

to access as possible. As before, families will simply need to 

retain receipts and complete an application form as part of their 

Saskatchewan income tax return and submit it to Canada 

Revenue Agency with their annual return. Mr. Speaker, this 

isn’t an onerous task. Families won’t be required to submit the 

receipts with their tax returns. They’re just going to have to 

retain the receipts for future reference if and when they need to 

verify their claims. 

 

The Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport, the ministry 

that I have the honour to represent, has been consulting with the 

Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education to look for 

ways to enhance opportunities for youth during the critical 

after-school period of 3:30 p.m. to 7 p.m. We truly believe it is 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

important for youth to participate in positive and healthy 

programs and activities, especially during this time period. The 

expanded active families benefit could very well boost uptake 

of after-school period youth initiatives such as Kids in Motion, 

an excellent program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The non-profits and municipalities run a variety of programs in 

this after-school time period and costs to participate in these 

programs can be claimed through the active families benefit. 

Our children use positive opportunities to participate in a wide 

range of cultural, recreational, and sport activities vital to 

healthy, active living. 

 

As part of the 2011 provincial election platform, the 

Government of Saskatchewan promised to extend the active 

families benefit to include children under six and teenagers 15, 

16, and 17 years old, right up to their 18th birthday. This came 

into effect retroactively January 1st of this year. The expanded 

active families benefit removes the eligibility criteria pertaining 

to the age of children from the Act and interestingly, Mr. 

Speaker, places it in the regulations. This will simplify the 

process if further amendments to age criteria are desired in the 

future. This legislation will come into force upon proclamation 

to allow passing of required regulations that will, as I 

mentioned, be retroactive to January 1, 2012, helping more and 

more Saskatchewan families beginning this very year. This 

makes Saskatchewan stronger and contributes to our overall 

quality of life, part of the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

To conclude, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second 

reading of The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport has moved second reading of Bill No. 38, The Active 

Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

as we’ve indicated on a lot of the Bills that comes forward from 

the government, it’s important that we, as an opposition, have 

the opportunity to look at the Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

offer our initial comments on Bill No. 38, An Act to amend The 

Active Families Benefit Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the outset this Bill seems to be looking at ways and 

means in which they can promote and support the healthy 

families throughout Saskatchewan. And the amounts that they 

have presented, Mr. Speaker, are a far cry of what is needed 

right now in Saskatchewan, all throughout Saskatchewanland in 

terms of what is needed to really support a lot of families and 

young people that want to get very active with the sport and 

recreation and culture in their communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think one of the things that I want to raise is that when we 

looked at this Act overall, I don’t think there’s anybody in the 

province of Saskatchewan that’s going to argue with the notion 

that we should have more active families. One of the things I 

think is really, really important as you look at some of the 

health trends, it is important to a government that you do all 

you can to support and promote healthy living, of course. And 

part of the healthy living array of opportunities is also to have 

very active children and very active communities as a whole. 

 

And we support that notion certainly, as an NDP opposition, 

because it’s something that makes sense. It’s something that’s 

really important that we continue speaking about, and that we 

encourage all throughout our lives to have a healthy, happy, 

productive, and participatory family in every sense of the word, 

Mr. Speaker, not only in culture, not only in the arts, but in 

sport as well, and to involve all the family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think you’d look at some of the challenges specific to what 

this government has not addressed, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

point out that it’s something that has to be spoken about. 

Whether it’s the North or whether it’s rural or whether it’s 

urban or whether it’s Aboriginal, there are a lot more programs 

and opportunities that this government has given its record 

revenues to try and do things differently through the various 

areas that I spoke about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important, I think it’s vitally important that they 

hear some of the concerns that we have in northern 

Saskatchewan, of course, and some of the cities that we visit 

and certainly some of the rural areas that we have information 

from and of course the Aboriginal groups and organizations that 

are out there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan we know that 

there is a lot more work that needs to be done to encourage a lot 

of young people to get active in sport. I can tell you that I’m 

one of those folks over the years that was very, very blessed in 

terms of having the opportunity to play a number of sports, and 

it is through the school that we picked up a lot of the sport 

development opportunities. 

 

And I want to commend the schools as well, Mr. Speaker, that 

in northern Saskatchewan that it is really something awesome 

to see how some of the schools are really developing a new 

northerner, if I could use that phrase. And this new northerner 

of course is not only proficient in math but they’re also highly 

skilled in basketball or they’re obviously very committed to 

their community in many cultural ways, Mr. Speaker. So we see 

first-hand how active communities can have a significant effect 

and impact on communities in northern Saskatchewan, and of 

course we want to see that continue. 

 

The problem we have in the North, Mr. Speaker, is there’s a 

lack of programs. There’s a lack of facilities in general. There’s 

a lack of people that are going to try and make a big difference 

in terms of coaches and facilitators. And we need that kind of 

focus and that kind of effort, Mr. Speaker, because there are so 

many gifted athletes in northern Saskatchewan and so many 

gifted people that are involved with culture and with 

programming that a lot of times they end up out there doing a 

lot of work on their own and with very little support. 

 

And that’s why I think it’s important that the minister 

recognizes that it’s not just as clean-cut as a tax break for active 

families, that there is greater questions and greater demands out 

there that need to be addressed and need the attention of the 

government that has record revenues. I would suggest that some 

of the money that they’re planning on getting or spending, the 

millions of dollars they’re spending on getting more politicians, 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

that perhaps they should use that money and put it into more 

programs to really promote and really defend the notion that we 

ought to have more active families and thus a healthier 

population. And, Mr. Speaker, we would be . . . That was the 

first suggestion that we would have on this particular Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we see in some of these northern 

communities, as I mentioned, there is such a challenge for a lot 

of the local leadership, whether it’s a First Nations band or 

whether it’s a northern community, that I noticed the chiefs and 

councils and the mayors and councils always have a most 

difficult time in trying to find the skill set in a recreation 

director, to try and find program dollars in the community, to 

try and keep the facilities open, to try and encourage and 

engage the kids more and more and more, Mr. Speaker. These 

are some of the challenges that local councils face, and we 

often . . . I encourage them to continue that work. As daunting 

as it is, we’re seeing a lot of the local leaders are trying their 

darndest to make things work when it comes to recreational 

opportunities and certainly being able to get involved with and 

develop active families as a concept for all these communities. 

 

So many times, Mr. Speaker, at no fault of the recreation 

directors in these northern communities, they end up becoming 

fundraisers for facilities, primarily because there is no dollars 

for programs. And this is something that has to be addressed, 

Mr. Speaker, especially in northern Saskatchewan where those 

challenges are facing a lot of the communities on a daily basis. 

And this is where I think a small program, as the minister 

alluded to under the active families benefit program, is not 

going to be very good nor sufficient enough to deal with the 

northern issues. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think northern Saskatchewan is not asking 

in any way, shape, or form for a special deal or a handout. 

We’re just saying that there is a lot of organizations within our 

communities, a lot of corporate players within our communities 

that can certainly do their part to help develop more active 

families. They could look at programs. They could look at 

facilities. They can look at affordability issues. They can look 

at coordination. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the message we get from northern 

Saskatchewan people, is that we need to develop our young 

people in cultural opportunities, and certainly we need to look 

at them in sporting developments as a whole. We need to look 

at all these things that our children could become, Mr. Speaker, 

because I can tell you that it’s always an amazing opportunity 

for me as a northern MLA to watch and see how many of the 

kids in northern Saskatchewan can indeed become those elite 

athletes that we see often on TV and we hear about on the 

radio. So if they had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, no question 

in my mind that many of our young children and the young 

families can certainly do a lot in northern Saskatchewan if they 

had access to adequate program support, access to adequate 

coaching, and of course the facilities in general. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s an amazing opportunity, as I mentioned, 

for young people. The parents are ready to do what they have to 

do. But it’d be nice if they could get recognized by this 

government in trying to solve some of those problems. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say in the North, certainly some of the 

challenges that I’ve identified, we need to continue working on 

those issues and to make sure that the Saskatchewan Party is 

acutely aware that these are some of the challenges that 

northern Saskatchewan faces when it comes to recreational 

programming and of course cultural development of our 

Aboriginal youth and the non-Aboriginal youth as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important in rural 

Saskatchewan, it’s always about facilities. It’s an amazing 

challenge, I think, we face as a province. I think at one time it 

was something about 6 or $7 billion in order to replace some of 

the aging facilities in a lot of our rural areas. There’s no 

question that, as many of these communities struggle to keep 

their local rink open, it’s always a challenge to see how they 

can possibly rebuild it, and secondly of course, how they can 

continue to operate given the small amount of money they have 

to do so. So we know that in rural Saskatchewan that facilities 

are always a challenge, Mr. Speaker. The economy’s a bit better 

in some of the rural areas as opposed to the North, so there is 

that support that a lot of parents can afford to afford their 

children. And so a lot of times they do a lot of volunteerism on 

their own. So that helps quite a bit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And look at the urban issues as well, whether it’s the 

affordability of everyone to access some of these facilities out 

there. We know that there is a huge gap in terms of the need for 

more facilities, and this is not being addressed by this particular 

Act. And you look at whether FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] or the Métis Nation, what kind 

of funding programs have they got available to develop the 

sport in each of their areas that they . . . or each of the people 

that they are supposed to be working for. 

 

And that’s some of the things that’s important, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the North has specific needs and specific challenges. Rural 

Saskatchewan has specific needs and specific challenges. Urban 

Saskatchewan has the needs and their special challenges. And 

as well FSIN, the Métis Nation, and many of the programs out 

there to support other non-Aboriginal groups and people, they 

all have their special needs and they have their special 

challenges, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would point out that it’s important that we look at The 

Active Families Benefit Act and how the small change is about 

all the Saskatchewan Party want to do to recognize a lot of the 

hard work being done by many volunteers, many coaches, 

many parents, and many organizations out there. And we would 

suggest that perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be adequate time if this 

particular government would recognize all that work and do 

something very effective and very dynamic to assist all these 

communities in their recreational aspirations. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if you give them the opportunity to do that by 

affording them proper resources, then I think a lot of 

communities will do a lot of good, great work that can have a 

lasting and a bigger impact in terms of promoting and 

developing healthy families and active families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important that we, as the opposition, as I said at 

the outset, once we get the Bill we are going to look at the Bill, 

look through it and see where some of the deficiencies are. And 

we’ve identified a few in our opening comments. And we also 

want to make sure that we ask the different organizations that 

are out there to see exactly how effective this program is. And 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

we’re assuming that if people are taking advantage of this — 

and of course the minister alluded to 57,000 families taking 

advantage of this — we need to find out if there’s a better way 

that we can use, you know, some of the opportunities I 

expressed earlier by increasing, by increasing the support to the 

active families. And that’s what’s really, really important and 

some of the things that certainly the opposition would support. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that at the first blush, the Bill is 

basically straightforward. It has a lot of shortcomings in some 

of the financial demands that are out there as I spoke about, 

though very briefly. We need the time to take the Bill and take 

it apart and see what parts are important to emphasize and 

support, but which parts are lacking, Mr. Speaker. And we will 

suggest that perhaps if we had the millions of dollars that is 

being spent on more politicians as proposed by the 

Saskatchewan Party and put it towards recreational programs, 

that’s probably a better and a longer term value for dollars than 

having more politicians in this Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to have discussions with the 

FSIN, we need to have discussions with the Métis Nation, and 

we have to have discussion some of the rural organizations that 

are involved out there. We need to talk to the urban folks and of 

course we need to talk to the northern folks as to how this 

active families benefit package is going to be of any value to 

them. If there is opportunity, then we encourage them to apply, 

but we obviously know at first blush this is not enough. It’s a 

pittance of what is needed to really, really do the work to 

support the active families effort that is needed on a constant, 

continual basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that front I am pleased to offer our initial comments. We 

have more comments forthcoming and we encourage people to 

take an active interest in any of the Acts that is being proposed 

by the Sask Party. It’s important to watch carefully what they 

do. And if you have any particular concerns as a parent or as a 

volunteer or as an organization, then look through the Bill and 

then certainly present those findings and those concerns to your 

opposition caucus and we’ll make sure that we present that 

information for you. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, the first opportunity to see the 

Bill. We will take our time to look through it and we will 

certainly make sure that we have the comments on this Bill that 

are necessary to ensure that this is exactly what is the intent as 

the Sask Party alludes to. We don’t trust them, of course. And 

the second thing is we want to make sure that they have enough 

adequate dollars attached to this effort. And at first blush, and 

you can see on a continual basis, Mr. Speaker, it’s a far cry of 

what is needed to really support and promote an active families 

plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that note, I am pleased to today adjourn debate on this 

particular Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment on Bill 

No. 38, The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 41 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal 

Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 41, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal 

Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012. This Bill 

will amend The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act, and The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2010. These Acts, Mr. Speaker, 

provide the legislative framework through which 

Saskatchewan’s municipalities exercise their powers and 

provide services. These Acts and regulations have been in 

effect since January 1, 2003, January 1, 2006, and January 1, 

2011, respectively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill are required 

to address the issues of changes to incentives applied for early 

payment of education property tax and changes in the reporting 

of council decisions in regards to property tax exemptions. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of changing the application of incentives 

to education property tax, incentives are discounts and rebates 

that may be applied to education property tax. In 2008 and 

prior, each school division in the province established its own 

education property tax mill rate. This meant that ratepayers 

across the province paid different levels of education property 

tax, even if the assessed value of two homes in neighbouring 

school divisions was exactly the same. 

 

The equity issue is an important issue when dissecting 

government funding for public education. Formerly, school 

boards that were progressive or were willing to take criticism 

for raising their mill rates to make improvements or had the 

advantage of having high assessments for property or natural 

resource assessment revenue had the ability to fund educational 

resources for their students to a much higher level than others. 

There is very much a have and a have-not situation as to the 

funds school divisions had at their disposal. Even if the 

government reduced its share of funding to school divisions 

with high assessments, the wealthier divisions simply taxed to 

accomplish their desired level of service to students. For an 

extended period of time in Saskatchewan, property owners 

funded at least 60 per cent of the cost of K to 12 [kindergarten 

to grade 12] education. 

 

In 2009, Mr. Speaker, this government’s commitment was 

achieving a fair balance for education taxes, ensuring K to 12 

education was properly funded, and ensuring the education 

portion of property tax would be reduced. This government 

implemented province-wide education property tax mill rates so 

ratepayers will be paying the same mill rates for education. Mr. 

Speaker, this was in fact the largest education property tax 

reduction in the province’s history and the ratepayers are 

responsible for only 35 per cent of educational funding. 

 

Since 2009 this government has, over the past four years, 

provided $165.7 million in education property tax relief. 

Government now pays a much greater share of the cost of K to 

12 education — 65 per cent from provincial funding sources 

and 35 per cent from property taxes. Since 2009 the amount of 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

education property tax paid by Saskatchewan people has been 

significantly reduced. 

 

As mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, an incentive such as a 

discount or rebate provides a reduction on taxes. Municipal 

legislation continued to allow municipalities authority to apply 

incentives to education property taxes, even though this 

government had drastically reduced the portion paid for 

education property tax by introducing the province-wide mill 

rates for education property tax. 

 

The current discount rate for prompt payment or prepayment of 

education property tax can be as high as 15 per cent. Discounts 

or rebates may also be applied to payment of arrears and 

penalties on arrears. Without these proposed amendments, 

municipalities can choose to offer a discount or rebate on 

education property tax. Municipalities that do not offer a 

discount have ratepayers paying 100 per cent of their portion 

for education property tax. Municipalities offering a discount 

are reducing the amount of education property tax their 

ratepayers must pay, thus creating inequality. 

 

In 2010 school divisions lost approximately $20.9 million and 

$16.4 million in 2011 due to discounts, rebates applied to 

education property tax. If all municipalities were to offer the 

maximum discount, the shortfall could amount to 

approximately $93 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

School divisions set their budget to deliver educational 

programs. If the school divisions lost revenue through discounts 

and rebates, the government must transfer money from the 

General Revenue Fund to school divisions to backfill these lost 

revenues. This reduces funding available for programs or 

capital assets in other areas or ministries in order to provide 

revenue required by school divisions to deliver the programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, changing the ability for municipal councils to 

apply discounts to education property tax ensures property 

owners province-wide will be paying 100 per cent of their 

portion of property tax for education. It will also mean revenue 

should not need to be transferred from the General Revenue 

Fund to the school divisions to back the revenue lost due to 

discounts and rebates. 

 

Furthermore, changes to tax incentive discounts on education 

property tax must be consistent with the government’s desire to 

achieve a fair balance for education funding, ensuring K to 12 

education is properly funded and equity across the province is 

achieved. 

 

The second area of amendments, Mr. Speaker, relates to the 

transparency and accountability of council decisions pertaining 

to local tax exemptions and abatements. Currently 

municipalities have legislative authority to exempt, cancel, 

abate both municipal and education property taxes. Exemptions 

and abatements remove what otherwise would be an obligation 

to pay education tax on property. Exempt property does not 

appear on the tax roll and no taxes are levied on the property. 

 

An abatement compromise applies to non-exempt property in 

respect of which taxes are levied, and the obligation to pay the 

taxes levied is removed. Taxes may be exempted for a period of 

up to five years. There are statutory limitations councils must 

abide to to grant these exemptions. At this point in time, Mr. 

Speaker, there is no method of tracking or monitoring local tax 

exemptions granted by municipal councils. Councils have not 

been required to publicly report the exemptions. The local 

exemptions granted by councils are simply recorded in the 

minutes of council. 

 

My ministry, in joint co-operation with the Ministry of 

Education, has carried out an extensive review of the impact 

exemptions, abatements, discounts, and penalties have on 

education property tax. Throughout the review, throughout the 

review process, consultation meetings were held with both 

internal and external stakeholders. Various surveys were 

undertaken and results tabulated. Based on the input from 

stakeholders, it appeared there were inconsistencies in the 

application of discretionary, non-statutory exemptions. Any 

inconsistency of local exemptions leads to inequalities of 

taxation across the province. All legislated exemptions will 

remain status quo. The amendments will simply ensure property 

grant of local tax exemptions is shown on the assessment roll of 

the municipality. This will help to ensure the exemptions are 

transparent and that the public, school divisions, and province 

are aware that they are being given. 

 

The Ministry of Municipal Affairs will continue working with 

the municipal sector to provide transparency and accountability 

in all aspects of municipal work. In addition, we will continue 

to work with the Ministry of Education to refine the necessary 

reporting forms. Our government will work hard to keep the 

Saskatchewan advantage and keep Saskatchewan moving 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce to the Assembly the receipt of 

Royal Recommendation for the following Bill. This was not 

received in time to appear on the order paper; therefore, I beg to 

inform the Assembly that Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor, 

having been informed of the subject matter of Bill No. 41, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal 

Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012, recommends it to the 

consideration of the Assembly. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 41, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal 

Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to inform the Assembly that we 

have now received Royal Recommendation. The minister has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 41, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased once again to stand on behalf of the official 

opposition to certainly give our initial comments on Bill 41, 

which really talks a lot about the opportunity to really begin to 

penalize a lot of communities throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan when they offer incentives such as early payment 

supports when people that are paying their property taxes do so 

and on a timely basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I listened to the minister, we tried very hard to track 

what exactly he was making reference to. But to cut to the 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

chase very quickly and very simply, what the minister wants to 

do is he wants to take away the powers and rights and, I think, 

authority of a lot of the governments or the local governments 

throughout our lands to be able to offer incentives for people 

that want to pay their property tax early, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s a lot of people in the cities that go on a regular basis 

and they pay their property taxes on a timely basis, while others 

paid in advance, Mr. Speaker. And what the cities want to do, 

as well as all the northern villages and of course the towns and 

hamlets and so on and so forth, is they want to encourage 

people to continually pay their property taxes because it makes 

such a big, huge difference in their budget. And that’s one of 

the reasons why I think, Mr. Speaker, that some of the cities 

and some of the towns and villages opted to have this incentive 

put in place where, if you as a property tax owner paid your 

property taxes ahead of schedule and done so on a regular basis, 

that they’d give you a certain percentage off. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s all kinds of different ways that the 

incentive works, and I don’t want to get into the detail of that 

because obviously we will be going through some of that 

information as this Bill moves through the Chamber. What I 

think is important, Mr. Speaker, is for people out there, the 

taxpayers, the land, the property tax payers that are out there, 

you should know what the Bill is all about. It’s pure and simple 

that the Saskatchewan Party don’t want to allow you the 

opportunity to realize some savings on property taxes by paying 

your property tax bill on an earlier basis. 

 

Because a lot of times, your local mayor, your reeve, or local 

school division — not so much the school divisions would be 

involved — but the local council can give you an incentive for 

paying your property taxes ahead of time or on a timely basis. 

And sometimes the percentage, Mr. Speaker, is 2 or 3 per cent. 

And that makes a significant amount of savings to senior 

citizens or to young families or to struggling families. And, Mr. 

Speaker, again what we’re seeing here is that the old notion, the 

old notion, as the minister said, the government give it with one 

hand and they take it with the other. And that’s certainly what’s 

happening here in this particular Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a lot of folks that are paying 

attention to this particular Bill because there’s been so many 

different or there’s been a lot of media coverage on this 

particular Bill. And in fact I think there was such an uproar in 

terms of how this Bill is going to be moving forward that there 

was even an opinion page on The StarPhoenix about how this 

particular minister flubbed this whole process and that he never 

asked for consultation with the cities. And he steadfastly 

rejected any notion that he’s going to change his mind on this 

particular Bill. And I think a lot of the cities and a lot of the 

communities, the villages, and the towns were not happy with 

the way in which this particular minister and this government 

has dealt with this particular early payment incentive program 

that they had as it relates to property taxes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know in northern Saskatchewan and in rural 

Saskatchewan and small town Saskatchewan and the larger 

centres, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of people that have property 

taxes, by law they’re compelled to pay them and they continue 

paying them. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that they 

often took advantage of as citizens that are doing their part or 

meeting their legal obligations is they not only pay it on time 

but they pay it in advance. And that’s something that they’ve 

done for years and years and years. 

 

And now that the government is now saying, well hold it here. 

We’re not going to let you guys do that any more. We’re taking 

away that opportunity. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a complete 

shame because people were not consulted and people were not 

advised of this change. And now, Mr. Speaker, that all the 

different Acts that are being involved — The Cities Act, the 

municipal Act, and the northern Act as well — these are clearly 

an agenda by the Sask Party to make sure that nobody gets any 

breaks for being, for acting earlier when it comes to paying 

your taxes. And I think that’s not what you want to do as a 

government, Mr. Speaker; that you want to have the 

opportunity to be able to pay your property taxes ahead of time. 

It makes people feel good. I think they’re happy with that. And 

if they get 2 or 3 percentage points off their property tax bill, 

that’s certainly money that they could save overall. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know who the minister confided 

with or discussed this whole process with, this whole Act with. 

I can tell you that there’s probably a lot of cities and a lot of 

towns that are not happy with this. I think it’s meddling into 

their business which I don’t think is fair of a government to do. 

And for what the reasons are, Mr. Speaker, we certainly have 

our theories. But we’re going to really try and be fair in this 

process, as the case is on many of these Bills to make sure we 

reach out to different organizations and different people that 

can give us some very sound advice on how the municipal 

property tax issue is going to impact their local community. 

And we also want to make sure we ask the taxpayers 

themselves how they feel about this particular Bill and what the 

minister proposes. 

 

Now we know that The StarPhoenix ran an editorial and I’m 

sure we’ll have the opportunity to share that editorial and take 

some very good clips from their position. And I don’t think that 

the editorial in The StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, was 

complimentary at all to this particular minister but more so to 

the Saskatchewan Party government for what I think is 

obviously the case of them meddling into a program that really 

had a lot of incentive attached to it, Mr. Speaker. And this is all 

about how they want to control the agenda and do what they 

want, when they want, and how they wish. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that kind of arrogance does not bode well for the future of our 

province. It doesn’t really complement a healthy mound of 

admiration that we should have as a senior level of government 

towards our cities, towns, and villages. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we see that this is going to be an issue that’s 

going to impact every town, city, and village. We want to make 

sure we pay close attention to it. We want to share it with the 

different organizations that would have some effect or impact 

on this, and I think that’s something that we want to take our 

time and, you know, to do. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, at first blush this is something that the 

government shouldn’t be proceeding with. It is not something 

that we would want to see taken away from many of the 

ratepayers or taxpayers that do the proper thing and pay their 

property tax earlier or right on time. It allows them to get the 

incentive that I mentioned earlier. Now this Bill takes away that 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

incentive and, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is, who did the 

minister consult with? He didn’t consult with anybody. He put 

this Bill in place for reasons that we can certainly assume, and 

we’ll share those beliefs at a later date. 

 

[15:00] 

 

But what’s important is that, why would he meddle in this 

particular, in the affairs of a local government? Why would he 

meddle in the opportunity for people to pay their property tax 

ahead of time, thereby getting a small incentive, Mr. Speaker? 

It helps the communities. It helps the homeowner, the property 

tax owner, feel good about some of the things that they’re doing 

when they pay early, and they realize their obligation and 

they’re doing their part to make sure that the money’s received 

earlier. And that has a lot of benefit to cities. It has a lot of 

benefit to towns and to villages as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s much the same thing that if you make an 

early payment on your Mastercard or an early payment on your 

Visa, it really reduces the amount of interest and really helps 

your credit score. It helps a number of things by making earlier 

payments than planned. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the same 

principle that applies to the property tax that the minister was 

talking about in this particular Bill. 

 

So a lot of questions, a lot of concerns from the opposition. 

We’re hearing a bit from the media in terms of how this Bill 

was not properly discussed with the appropriate players, and 

we’re going to ask organizations out there that may want to 

participate in looking at this Bill and ask the questions, why is 

this minister doing it at this time? And why is this government 

doing this particular, what I would say is an invasion of 

opportunity that the communities have and the property tax 

owners have under this early incentive program? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s been a lot of people that have 

been paying attention. The minister obviously didn’t want this 

Bill to be highlighted. The minister obviously didn’t want the 

attention that he’s got on this particular Bill. Because we know 

he’s been getting a lot of concerns from different organizations 

and different people. And that’s kind of how the Sask Party 

operates. Whether it’s the whole notion of the education 

property tax, when they took away the right for school boards 

to set some of the local tax rates, Mr. Speaker. Not only did 

they take away their rights to have the school boards assess 

their own property taxes, Mr. Speaker; they then turned around 

and said, well we will negotiate a teachers’ salary package for 

you and the teachers have to live with it. For the school boards, 

you have to do so as well. 

 

So it becomes kind of a conflicting, confusing statement that 

they’re making when they get themselves involved with the 

property tax issue, Mr. Speaker. And once again we’ve seen 

complete failure on this government’s part to properly consult 

with people and do the right thing and do something that’s put 

in place to help the people. And this is one of the areas I think 

they’ve made another major blunder, Mr. Speaker. It’s blunder 

to blunder with this particular government when it comes to 

property taxes. And when people pay early, show that great 

incentive to help their local community, feel good about 

themselves, Mr. Speaker, this government has now taken away 

that opportunity with this Bill and has said, no more incentives 

for early payment, no more breaks for people that pay on time; 

none of that stuff is going to be of any value any more in the 

future. We’re taking away that right to do that. 

 

And that’s what this Bill says, and a lot of people don’t like it. 

A lot of communities don’t like it, Mr. Speaker. And as time 

goes on we’ll share some of the letters and certainly some of 

the articles printed by the media in terms of how this minister 

did not do his obligation to consult with different organizations 

and people. 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that I take 

the time to tell people out there, obviously their participation is 

valued. We would encourage them to share their opinions on 

this Bill. We look forward to getting some of that information. 

We ourselves as an opposition caucus — whose job we take a 

great pride in, the job of holding this government to account — 

it’s something that we’ll be undertaking as well. 

 

So it’s important to tell people out there that you can indeed be 

part of the process on this particular Bill or any other Bill that 

the Saskatchewan Party government wants to sneak through, 

that we make sure that we tell people, tell people exactly what 

is happening and what the impact is and how they have not 

consulted with anybody on any front, Mr. Speaker. So whether 

it’s Bill 36, The Constituency Boundaries Act, or whether it’s 

this Bill to take away the incentives to pay their tax, property 

tax earlier, or whether it’s Bill 5 or 6 to go to war with labour, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing a continuing trend by the Sask Party 

government to try and slip things under the radar. And, Mr. 

Speaker, our job is to make sure we tell people out there there is 

a way and means you can fight back. And certainly assisting the 

opposition in that regard is something that we would have an 

open invitation to all people and organizations out there to take 

advantage of. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say again that this is a Bill that has 

some ramifications to our local governments. We need to assess 

that. You know as a former mayor, I used to always watch how 

my budget was impacted by some of the government decisions 

of the day, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you there was some 

great thought processes when it came to northern 

Saskatchewan, that there was a lot of consultation, Mr. Speaker, 

when it came from the previous NDP government coming to 

the local government partners. And there was not that healthy 

amount of disrespect then, Mr. Speaker, as we see now. 

 

So I think the municipal leaders don’t like this at all. There are 

a lot of questions that they would have. And we’re going to take 

the time to go through the budget, see what the effects are, see 

what the impacts are, and to ask the minister and press the 

minister exactly who he consulted with and where is this 

coming from because it’s a good program that a lot of people 

took advantage of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in closing, on our initial look at this particular Bill, we’re 

going to pay close attention to it, take the time to understand it, 

invite participation by different organizations and people that 

are out there, and certainly expose it for its weaknesses and its 

lack of consultation. So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

we adjourn debate on Bill 41. 

 

The Speaker: — Okay, the member has moved adjournment 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

on Bill No. 41, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs 

— Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 37 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 37 — The 

Tourism Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 37, An Act respecting 

Tourism Saskatchewan. And of course this is an Act that is 

causing quite a stir in this sector because of the nature of how 

this has all played out in the last month or so. A month ago we 

had no idea we would be taking a look at something like this 

and how a month can change the face of an important sector 

like tourism in Saskatchewan. Many people, in fact the people 

involved quite in depth with tourism here in Saskatchewan, had 

no idea that this was going to happen. No idea. 

 

And before us now in second reading is, we have a Bill that will 

create a Crown corporation. It’s interesting that it would be a 

government, a right wing government, that would be yet 

creating more government. It seems that they have fallen in 

love with the idea of more government. They are talking about 

three more politicians because they think, how can we go 

wrong with three more politicians? And here we have one more 

Crown corporation. And we have to really ask, is this the right 

thing to be doing? Is this the right thing to be doing? 

 

We saw, right after the last election, this Premier introduced 

what he thought was a wonderful idea that would save the day 

in Saskatchewan, about Enterprise Saskatchewan and the 

enterprise regions. And here we are a few years later picking up 

the pieces of that failed experiment, that failed experiment 

called enterprise, the enterprise regions, at a cost of $4 million. 

Four million dollars that could be used for something else quite 

more beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan, like that 

Highway No. 22, the goat trail, the goat trail. We should do 

something. It’s not the go trail. I know in Toronto they have the 

Go lines. We have the goat trail here in Saskatchewan. 

 

But anyways, I digress here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 

know I’m supposed to be talking about tourism. But it seems to 

be a recurring pattern, recurring pattern about the kind of 

choices that government makes. And from that you set your 

priorities, and then you put your plan into place. And so this 

government has not made wise choices, and whether it’s the 

enterprise regions that now we’re picking up the pieces of $4 

million, $4 million. 

 

It’s hurting people in communities right across our province, 

these people who are dedicated to the tourism industry here in 

Saskatchewan. And they do such an incredible job, incredible 

job of selling our province to people inside the province to get 

out of their neighbourhoods and maybe go visit some relatives, 

whether they live in a small town, a small village, out in the 

farm or in a big city. 

 

And I got to tell you, as somebody whose riding is deeply, 

deeply involved in tourism, I’ve got to tell you that tourism 

plays a big role in Saskatoon Centre. And of course we have 

probably one of the most iconic features, I would bet, of this 

province. I mean it must be in the top five. We have the 

Bessborough hotel and we have the South Saskatchewan River. 

We’ve got Meewasin. We’ve got so much in my riding about 

tourism, so I have to say that this is a big deal for many people 

in my riding, in my riding. You talk about the festivals. The 

Saskatchewan SaskTel Jazz Festival is huge, huge. So tourism 

plays a big part in many of the folks who live in my riding. So I 

do have a concern about this. I do have a concern. 

 

And I do want to go through . . . So we’ve asked about this on 

numerous times and yet this minister, I won’t go through his 

remarks because I don’t think they’re particularly helpful 

because I cannot make out hide nor hair from his answers. Who 

did he . . . Where did they get this idea from? We have some 

real questions about the real motives behind this, but you know, 

our critic right after the budget raised this in the House in 

questions. And I just want to quote some of the people that he’s 

been quoting and some of the ideas our critic’s been raising 

because I do think it’s important to get this on the record. 

 

And of course the biggest one was just the day after the budget 

was released. The industry was taken completely off guard, 

didn’t know what had happened because nobody had really told 

them until just prior to the budget. But the CEO [chief 

executive officer] and president of Tourism Saskatchewan Dr. 

Lynda Haverstock was quoted in the papers as saying, and I 

quote, “We felt quite blindsided.” “We felt quite blindsided.” 

They had not significant or sufficient advance notice. There 

was just something probably the morning of where this was 

going to be the new direction. And of course this caught that 

group completely off guard. They did not know what was 

happening and where was this coming and why did this happen. 

 

Now we have the minister will often quote from this report that 

he refers to but . . . And I will talk more about it. But I think 

that as we’ve tried to say many times, if it isn’t broke, what are 

you trying to fix? And clearly you have a government who I 

have to think about what are the ulterior motives? What’s the 

real agenda here? What’s the real agenda? We understand that 

the budget is about $12 million for Tourism Saskatchewan, and 

the government pays a pretty big chunk of that. We grant that 

and that’s fair enough. But they do with many other 

organizations. 

 

But the best part of this organization was the fact that it was 

sector-driven. It was membership-driven. The folks who knew 

the field had the boots on the ground, were actually involved in 

the leadership. They were making things happen. And I’ve got 

to tell you like so many, so many areas where you have, 

particularly private sector, particularly when you have the 

entrepreneurial spirit involved, people go above and beyond to 

make things happen. They live, they breathe, they just totally 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

believe in their business. And we see that in tourism, whether 

it’s a small bed and breakfast or whether it’s a Bessborough 

hotel. People feel that special connection to tourism because 

they’re saying, hey, look at us. We’re worth looking at. Stop in. 

Have a visit. See what we’re all about. 

 

And this signal that this government is saying, whoa, we want 

to change the channel here. We don’t think that we want to 

have you involved any more because we know best. Now that 

really sounds like big government to me. That sounds like a 

government that’s lost its moral compass, that really doesn’t 

know why it found its way into power in the first place. 

Because now it’s all about the power. Now it’s all about the 

media. And so I wonder, is this about controlling . . . You 

know, so much of what Sask Tourism does is media, is 

advertising. Is that what they want, to have more control over 

that? 

 

[15:15] 

 

Do you know, when I was looking through the Bill, and I mean 

it seems relatively interesting, straightforward because it’s just 

another Crown corporation. But there are some parts I found 

very interesting that I think I don’t know why they did this. 

And I would have questions in committee about this. When we 

talk about the board, it does not talk about any representation 

from the sector. Isn’t it interesting? It says not more than 11 

directors be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 

but does not say, you know, where these people should come 

from. They can be 11 ministers. They can be 11 MLAs. I know 

we’re going to have more MLAs. It sounds like we’re going to 

have them. So they’re going to have to have some work, 

something to do. So maybe we’re going to get these three new 

politicians are going to be worked into this area. 

 

But it does not talk about the expertise that the sector has and 

values that, that expertise of the people who are driving the 

tourism industry in Saskatchewan. You would think that they 

would say, maybe not more than three, not more than five 

would be from the sector. Not the case. Who knows where 

these 11 people may come from? We don’t even know if 

they’re going to come from the province here, you know? Quite 

often we have situations where you say a director must live, 

their home address must be in the province. But not in this case. 

Not in this case. You just have not more than 11 directors. 

 

I will be very interested to find out, when this goes through, 

who those 11 directors are. That will be of interest. And I really 

hope — it would only make common sense, but this is 

something that we’re seeing that’s short on the other side, a 

little common sense in who they would appoint — I would 

hope that the majority, the majority would be people who are 

from the tourism sector. But that’s not a given. In fact they may 

be, as I said, politicians. They could be civil servants. Who 

knows? I just am going to look forward to seeing who’s going 

to be in this, who’s going to be on the board. 

 

So I have some real, real concerns about that because again I 

think if we were to ask the minister, we probably wouldn’t get 

an answer because that’s what he’s very good. And I want to 

talk a little bit about some of the questions that we had asked. I 

know my colleague, the critic for tourism had asked about . . . 

He pointed out one. It was April 5th. He was talking to the 

minister about questions around this very Crown, and he was 

asking that in fact it was interesting because, as I said earlier, 

Tourism Saskatchewan did not know, completely off-guard 

with the plans to add politics to Tourism Saskatchewan. And 

they ignored their own report that recommended Tourism 

Saskatchewan be kept as an arm’s-length organization. 

 

And following the budget, the Saskatchewan Bed and Breakfast 

Association apparently, apparently wrote to the minister and 

said, “Now it seems we and all the industry partners of Tourism 

Saskatchewan are being evicted so your government can take 

full control.” I want to read that quote again. The quote is, “ . . . 

it seems that we and all the industry partners of Tourism 

Saskatchewan are being evicted so your government can take 

full control.” 

 

So is this a political move? Is there a bigger agenda here? I 

wonder because when you don’t have a more prescriptive piece 

around who the board members are, you have to wonder, why 

are you getting rid of the industry members? And what are you 

trying to create here? And so I have real questions about that. 

And then the question is, we’ve seen other letters where they’ve 

quoted, despite what the minister has stated, there’s been little 

or no consultation with the actual industry. And so I think 

there’s some real, real concerns about what the real motivation, 

what the real motivation is here. 

 

You know, and of course there was that poll, and of course I 

know this government loves polls. When things are going well 

they often trot out the poll and say, look at the results. We’re on 

the right track. 

 

They don’t do a lot of consultations. They don’t do a lot of 

consultations, but they seem attracted to polls. And of course 

we know of one that was reported in the paper that over 600 

people responded, members responded. Almost 70 per cent 

disagree with this government’s decision to turn Tourism 

Saskatchewan into a Crown corporation. So why do they do 

that? I mean hardly anybody thought it was a good idea. Things 

were working well. So here you have a poll that would give you 

a snapshot to say listen, and they knew the results of this poll 

before this legislation came forward, so I do have some real, 

real concerns. 

 

And of course we, you know, I do have to say that our critic has 

raised some very, very good points about this. And of course 

one was this report from Mr. DeRyk who pointed to the CEO 

and Lynda Haverstock’s history as the Liberal leader and 

thought and said, the government’s decision is politically 

vindictive and poorly thought out. The minister had responded 

by saying, no other province has a stand-alone tourism agency. 

 

So here you have some bigger questions here. Are there 

political motives here? What is this the vehicle for? And so we 

have to ask some questions about this. We have some concerns. 

And as I said, if it’s not broke, then why fix it? What’s the real 

motive here? Are they trying to get more control over the 

media, the public relations dollars? Do they have people they 

want to see on the board, they want to control it more tightly? Is 

this some sort of brainwave similar to the enterprise region that 

we see after only a few short years this government’s going to 

have to rescue and pull back and disband it and go give it back 

to the tourism sector at a cost of millions of dollars? We know 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

the enterprise regions is costing $4 million or is going to cost 

millions of dollars to disentangle itself. And so I think that we 

have some real, real questions here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think that when we look at Tourism Saskatchewan, and we 

think what a good job they are doing. And we have some 

concerns because the minister tends to want to hide behind 

certain parts of the report. But we know that the report clearly 

states, and it’s on page 35, “One of the key areas of agreement 

among all parties to this review is that Tourism Saskatchewan 

should remain an arm’s length organization from . . . 

[Saskatchewan].” So if he’s talking about that report, and he 

seems to be picking and choosing, cutting and pasting parts of 

it, but clearly there seems to be one thing they all agreed on, 

that the single point of entry should be through the industry 

organization that exists now. 

 

Now I know I haven’t read the entire report. I haven’t looked at 

the report because I’m not the critic. But I can tell you, when I 

hear that kind of recommendation, I would have to say, I would 

have to say that makes some, some sense. I mean it’s pretty 

clear English, isn’t it? It’s pretty clear English that they’ve all 

seemed to agree. They all agree, “One of the key areas of 

agreement among all parties [and I would assume that when 

they say all parties that there were government people at this] to 

this review is that Tourism Saskatchewan should remain an 

arm’s length organization from government.” 

 

So I think, in plain English, it’s pretty well straightforward. I 

did not read in there that, oh, and by the way, what an 

arm’s-length organization means is that it should be a Crown 

corporation, a Treasury Board Crown where the government 

gets to pick who the 11 board members are. They get to pick 

who the 11 board members are. There’s no, no list of who these 

11 people should be, should they even live in the province. So I 

don’t know how that works. I don’t know how that fits 

together, but I do know that it is indicative of this government 

in the sense of priorities that it’s had demonstrated in its budget 

and the Bills it’s brought forward. 

 

They’ve not seen the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan 

where they’ve raised the cost of drugs on the prescription plan 

for seniors and for children. They’ve decided that that can be 

okay, with $5, going up. Other issues in terms of child care, 

investing in our schools, investing in our highways, that type of 

thing, they would rather see more politicians, more government, 

and a Crown corporation. 

 

I’d like to know. I’d like to see how this plays out over the next 

number of years. Is the cost of this organization going to be 

frozen at $12 million, or will it go up? And then will it have to 

be disbanded at extra cost at the end of the day because we’ll 

have to redo this all over again because we realize we had a 

good thing going in Saskatchewan, and why did we mess with 

it? It was because of some political interference, some political 

motivations that are unclear right now. But I have to say, 

there’s some pretty big questions out in the community when 

you have people writing or making comments about the CEO 

and her political past. I don’t know if that’s accurate, but it’s a 

big shadow out there. It’s a big shadow. 

 

And there’s a question mark about the 11 board members who 

can come from anywhere. They don’t have to have any tourism 

experience. I find that odd that there’s no prerequisite of that. 

And why, why would this government directly ignore one of 

the key, one of the key if not the key recommendations that 

Sask Tourism or Tourism Saskatchewan should remain as the 

arm’s-length organization, the single-point entry for people 

when they want to make contact to find out about our province? 

 

And I think it’s so, I think it’s so important because if it is 

politically motivated, we have some real questions about that 

because tourism is for everybody, absolutely for everybody 

because we all love this province, and we all want to showcase 

this province. We all want to make people feel welcome when 

they come here. And we don’t want to get into a political thing 

about who loves this place more. We all do. We all do. There’s 

certain things that rise above small “p” politics, and we know 

tourism should be one of them. And we all should be, in our 

communities we should all be together celebrating the 

wonderful things, the wonderful places, the built environment, 

the natural environment. We are truly a blessed province. 

 

And you know, I’ve been around this province, and I’ve got to 

tell you one of the best years we ever had was 2005, celebrating 

the centennial of Saskatchewan. People came together, came 

together and made this place a wonderful place for people to 

come home to, strangers and family to come and see our 

province. And whether it was the North and the forest and the 

lakes or the South and the prairies, and I think about Cypress 

Hills, you know, you can go through lists and lists of beautiful 

places that makes this province pretty special. 

 

But I really do worry that if this becomes a political football 

with no apparent reason, I have some, I have some deep, deep 

concerns. And I know this minister has not articulated that well. 

He’s turned it into a political issue, and that really causes me 

great concern of where we’re going to go into the future with 

tourism in this province. Is it one that we can all rally behind? 

 

Because you know, we all have people, we all have family or 

friends who are working in this industry, and they make this 

place a beautiful place, and you know, not only in terms of the 

location but in terms of the seasons. We have beautiful 

summers, but we also have beautiful winters most of the time. 

Sometimes we can get the odd blizzard that throws a curveball 

in there. But even that, some people like that. It just reminds 

them of their youth, school days, weather days. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that, you know, we all love our 

holidays, and when we think about whether we spend them 

further away in other provinces, other countries, but it’s always 

good to take a holiday here in Saskatchewan. And Tourism 

Saskatchewan has really stepped up, stepped up to the plate to 

make Saskatchewan a special, special place. And there’s hidden 

secrets right around this province. We all think we know this 

place very well, but it’s always interesting to know when you 

find a really neat bed and breakfast or a special lake, a special 

campground, you know, or a special hiking trail or a special 

place to go watching birds. It’s all . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Golf course. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Golf course. Yes, I guess you could do golf 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

course, cross-country skiing, you name it, you know, 

snowmobiling, whatever your interest is. I think this is a great 

place to be. 

 

But when we have this kind of interference, I have a lot of 

concerns. And it will be interesting to see how the public 

responds to this because if it’s about controlling the media, if 

it’s about getting a hold of the advertising dollars and trying to 

promote a political message, then I think people will back off 

and say, listen, this isn’t quite the place that we thought it 

would be. And I think that we have some real concerns about 

this, some real concerns. 

 

So I think that we will have more questions about this, and I 

know more of my colleagues will want to speak about this. And 

we’ll definitely have questions. I don’t know if we’ll get 

answers in committee. We have not yet seen that demonstrated 

by this particular minister, but we will have questions for sure 

in committee. But I know many people want to get up before 

me, before we get to that stage. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to just summarize the key points of, 

we don’t know where this came from. We didn’t see the 

consultation. There was no advance consultation. It seems to be 

budget driven, laden on with some other motives that we don’t 

know why. We don’t know why. And I guess the proof will be 

in the pudding. But we do think government can be a helpful 

tool in sectors that need that extra help or there needs to be a 

social issue addressed. But here was something that was 

working quite well. And if it’s not broke, then why, why fix it, 

and particularly in this area of tourism where the folks on the 

ground, boots on the ground, really know their industry? And 

why we’re involved and wanting to make it our industry, a 

government industry, I have some real concerns about that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment at this point 

of Bill No. 37, an Act to respect Tourism Saskatchewan. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 37, The Tourism Saskatchewan Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 39 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 39 — The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

gives me great pleasure to rise today to speak to the second 

reading of Bill No. 39, The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan Act. First off, Mr. Speaker, I’ll start 

by addressing the comments made here in the House yesterday 

by the minister when he introduced the Bill, just to give what I 

see as my general understanding of what the intention of this 

Bill is. 

 

It looks like this is the creation of a Crown corporation, just like 

the last Bill that we spoke to where the government is 

introducing a new Crown corporation for tourism. This is a new 

Crown corporation to be called the Financial and Consumer 

Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan or the FCAA. Once again, 

this is a new Crown that is replacing an existing body, and the 

existing body is called the Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission or the SFSC. So it’s converting, it appears to be 

converting a commission to a Crown, much like the previous 

speaker spoke about the conversion of the Sask Tourism 

Authority to a new Crown corporation that will manage the 

tourism affairs of the province. 

 

The minister went on to describe how this transition will 

happen. Because I wasn’t familiar with the SFSC or the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, until this Bill was introduced, and having done a little 

bit of reading on the purpose of that commission, I’m really 

glad it’s there because it is protecting consumers and protecting 

people who use financial services here in Saskatchewan. So 

apparently there are employees that are hired by the SFSC. It 

has a board of directors. It has the full weight and authority of 

hearings. And I will be speaking to its legislation a little bit in a 

bit, but this Bill is just creating a transition from the 

commission to this new Crown corporation called the Financial 

and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan. 

 

So it appears the government is using the Treasury Board 

Crown authority to create yet another body that will be 

controlled by the Executive Council. In this case, the transition 

from the old Bill or the old Act to the new Bill is going to deal 

with the transfer of employees, payment of revenues that are 

paid to the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Fund. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is something I think we’re 

going to have more questions about as we go through this 

debate. What exactly is that fund? And what does it represent, 

and what are the purposes of it? And we’ll look at the existing 

legislation a little bit to see that, and the payment of expenses of 

the SFSC by the authority, so that’s all part of the transition. 

And finally the transition would confirm that the pension rights 

and other rights of the transferred employees won’t be 

diminished, which is entirely appropriate and necessary, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

It would give the authority some corporate powers that it will 

need to manage its business in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan consumers of financial services and consumer 

goods and services. And then the minister indicated that the last 

transition measure in this Bill would continue the appointments 

of the current commission members and executive director into 

the new authority. 

 

Now it’s strange, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in the creation of 

this new Crown, the government has undertaken to keep the 

same members of the commission and the executive director, 

whereas in the creation of the new Crown for tourism, we have 

no indication from the government what its intentions are with 

respect to the current executive director. And that’s concerning, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think this raises a big question. 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

Why would we not deal with the executive director of tourism 

in the same way that we’re dealing with the executive director 

of the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission? Why is 

there a disconnect there? And why is it that the government has 

chosen in this case to keep the executive director, but in the 

case of Saskatchewan Tourism, they have left it as a mystery? 

And then indeed in estimates the other night, the minister 

declined to say if there is even any plan to deal with the 

executive director of Saskatchewan Tourism, which I think is 

unfortunate partly because she has indicated she was 

completely blindsided by this transition. I wonder if the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission was consulted 

before the government announced they were going to turn it 

into a Crown corporation. 

 

So that’s of concern. And I think there’s some questions there, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the choices and the way this 

government conducts business, if they’re going to continue 

appointments of some commission members and some 

executive directors but then on the other hand, when they’re 

creating another Crown, they give no indication whatsoever to 

the people working there what their future is going to be. So it’s 

disturbing, and you wonder why this particular commission is 

being given special treatment or at least honourable and fair 

treatment. And so those are questions that we’re going to have 

as we go along here. 

 

The indication from the speaker is that this Crown corporation 

will draw on the business expertise of a board of directors to 

assess the needs in the marketplace without compromising the 

government’s need to manage the province’s financial affairs. 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not really sure what that’s 

trying to say. And in this case it appears, if it’s the same people 

that are doing the work now as a commission, there’s already 

the business expertise there that’s needed, although it appears 

they’re adding maybe another layer of a board of directors. 

Although would you have commission members and board of 

directors? So there’s a lot of questions we’ll have about how 

this new Crown will be established. 

 

It says that the powers and the responsibilities of the SFSC will 

be retained, but that there will be a couple of new Acts added to 

it, and these appear to reasonable Acts to be added to the list 

that they currently administer and that would be The Real 

Estate Act and The Payday Loans Act. In fact the minister went 

on to say that they are already being administered by the 

commission, so this is just sort of regulating and ensuring that 

those two Acts are properly listed in the list of Bills that the 

commission is responsible for and ultimately the new Crown 

will be responsible for. 

 

So that’s basically . . . He talks a little bit about having a 

Treasury Board Crown corporation drawing on business 

expertise of a board of directors. We have questions about that. 

I’m not sure why that’s necessary and why the current 

commission isn’t operating sufficiently as it is. It may be a 

good idea; it might be a bad idea, but we’re certainly going to 

have to ask some questions about that. 

 

There’s a number of correcting type of clauses in this 

legislation as well and amends a number of Acts. And it will 

also deal with other transitional requirements to ensure that the 

Government of Saskatchewan’s rights and liabilities are 

properly transferred and continued under the new Crown 

corporation. 

 

They’re looking to have this in place by October 1st. That’s the 

deadline that the minister has indicated he would like to achieve 

this new Crown and secure the corporate governance and 

funding structure that they need. So this is obviously a Bill that 

requires budgetary drawdown. Again we’re not sure from this 

Bill how much it’s going to cost. We don’t have any indication 

from the minister what the costs are, but we do know that this is 

a budgetary Bill so there will be additional expenses for the 

taxpayer coming out of this. Already the commission seems to 

be well established. It files its annual reports. I assume it’s 

funded by the government already. So the additional costs, 

we’ll be looking very closely at those, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

ensure that this Bill and this new Crown aren’t costing the 

taxpayers extra dollars unnecessarily when there was a 

commission in place that already was accomplishing the needs 

and the objectives of the government. 

 

So that was basically the minister’s comments. They were quite 

short and I think disappointingly short in some ways, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because this is a fairly technical aspect of 

government and I think it would be helpful for the people to 

have the minister give more in-depth comments on this. 

Perhaps he will share some other comments at another time, but 

it seems to be a bit sparse on the face of it. 

 

Just one comment about the naming of the Bill to start off with. 

It seems strange that it’s not financial services. And again it’s 

just a question that I have because it’s an Act, Bill 39 is . . . The 

title of Bill 39 is An Act respecting the Financial and Consumer 

Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan and making consequential 

amendments to other Acts. So really this is financial services 

that this Crown corporation will be working with, so I’m not 

sure why that word was dropped when it was very clearly part 

of the previous commission and it is definitely part of the Act. 

So there’s an extended definition of financial services so I just 

. . . I don’t know if it was dropped for a reason or maybe they 

just thought it was too long already. But I think financial 

services means more to me than just financial, so I’m 

wondering why that is and just making a comment on that. 

 

So before we get into the new Bill, I think it’s helpful for me 

and the people that are following this to look at the existing 

legislation. Right now we have, as I said, the SFSC which is the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission, and it is 

governed by an Act called The Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Act. And this Act established the 

commission a number of years ago, and what it did, it 

integrated into one organization the financial services regulators 

in Saskatchewan. So there’s a number of them. There’s the 

Saskatchewan securities division, the financial institutions 

division, the pensions division, and the payday and loans 

division, as well as the consumer protection division. 

 

So you can see the first five are really related to financial 

services, things that we deal with in our banking all the time. 

Securities, we know that the securities division looks after 

shareholders and ensures that shareholders are properly 

protected in the case of share trading, and it’s a very highly 

technical area of the financial world. And so it reassures me as 

a shareholder that when I am purchasing shares in a publicly 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

registered company, that I know it’s being regulated and 

monitored. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think we 

can underestimate the importance of proper regulation, 

monitoring, and compliance of all forms of legislation — not 

just financial legislation, but environmental legislation. 

 

And to see deregulation occur in any area should be of concern 

to the public. Because quite often that’s where things like 

listeriosis will break out, is when regulations aren’t followed or 

that civil servants aren’t given the proper tools to properly 

implement, monitor, and ensure compliance of regulations. We 

live in a regulatory world. Every area, every area of industry is 

controlled by regulations — restaurants, retail stores, any food 

services, anything related to health, and obviously financial 

services as well. So knowing that the Financial Services 

Commission is there looking after our interests in the securities 

area is one that I think the public should take comfort from, as 

long as those public servants are given the tools they need to do 

the job properly. 

 

The same goes for the financial institutions division. Again, 

you know, most banks are regulated federally and we do have 

the credit unions that are regulated provincially. But knowing 

that there is a provincial watchdog making sure that banks 

aren’t doing improper things and credit unions are behaving, 

that is something that gives me comfort, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I think it would give the people of Saskatchewan comfort to 

know they’re there. 

 

Again, same with the pensions division. And we know pensions 

are very important. Especially as we get more and more grey 

hair, it’s something that we think about more from day to day 

and the future of our retirements and how we’ll look after our 

kids, ultimately through ensuring that there’s a pension there 

for us when we retire from the workforce. 

 

And then the payday loans division. Now that’s an area that I 

know has somewhat of a nefarious reputation from time to time 

because of the high interest rates that are charged, and people 

that are desperate often need to deal with these institutions. But 

it provides a service for people in that spot, and knowing that 

we have a regulatory watchdog looking after those 

organizations again is something I think that the people of 

Saskatchewan would take comfort from. Same with consumer 

protection division. There’s a number of Acts that this 

commission looks after, and I’ll get into that in a bit. 

 

At any rate, the SFSC’s regulatory functions include both 

prudential and market conduct regulation. And this I’m taking, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the web page for the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission. So they do regulation of 

prudentials and the market. 

 

Prudential regulation, what it does is it addresses the financial 

soundness of regulated entities while market conduct regulation 

refers to supervising compliance related to consumer protection 

divisions. So that is more in the retail area of the market, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and it includes disclosure, confidentiality, fair 

practices, and prohibited methods of doing business. So if I 

understand it correctly, the consumer protection provisions 

ensure that any agencies or businesses conducting 

consumer-related business are being watched and monitored by 

this particular commission. 

[15:45] 

 

So they have a mandate. The mandate of the SFSC is to oversee 

the protection of consumer interests through licensing. So that’s 

one area they work in. Also they work in registration, audit, 

handling complaints, and enforcement activities under various 

provincial statutes. 

 

So the types of Bills that they are administering, I can tell you 

in terms of financial services, they administer the credit union 

Acts. They administer The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage 

Administrators Act, The Pension Benefits Act, The Real Estate 

Act, The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, The Securities Act, and 

The Trust and Loans Corporation Act. So quite a wide range of 

financial services are being monitored and administered by the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission. 

 

Then they go into the following . . . That includes the following 

financial institutions and entities. So credit unions, insurance 

companies, mortgage brokerages, mortgage brokers, securities 

dealers and advisors, and trust loan and financing corporations 

— that’s quite a wide panoply of financial services institutions. 

And other financial services that are covered by the Act is the 

administration of pension plans, credit union services, financing 

and trust companies, lending generally, mortgage and loan 

brokering, sale of insurance products, and trading in or advising 

with respect to securities. Again a wide, wide range of financial 

services that are available to the citizens of the province. And 

this commission is responsible for ensuring that the services are 

conducted appropriately, and they oversee those institutions. 

 

They also look at a number of consumer protection legislations. 

And this is an interesting list, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 

there’s a story behind this historically in our province. It seems 

to be somewhat disparate, but I think overall that the thought is 

these are areas that require this kind of supervision by this type 

of commission or, in this case, in the new Bill, a new Crown 

corporation to supervise this type of legislation. 

 

So first off we have The Auctioneers Act — wouldn’t have 

thought of that one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but there it is. It’s also 

administering The Cemeteries Act. Not a heavy area of retail 

activity, but is certainly one that we will all deal with at some 

point in our life. The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act 

— I don’t know of any of those types of businesses, and I 

didn’t know there was an Act, so that’s interesting to see, and 

that’s something I think that we might have some questions 

about. There’s The Collection Agents Act, The Consumer 

Protection Act, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, The Credit 

Reporting Act, The Direct Sellers Act — and this is another Act 

that I’ve never had a look at, the direct sellers, so it will be 

interesting for me to look into that. The Film and Video 

Classification Act, that’s one that I think we have heard about 

more in the news. There’s also The Funeral and Cremation 

Services Act, The Motor Dealers Act, The Payday Loans Act 

and The Ticket Sales Act, and that’s things like Ticketmaster 

sales to ensure that sales are being done appropriately and fairly 

for all consumers and that there’s not advantages for big 

concerts where there’s a high demand for tickets. 

 

So again, now we know that this commission is actually 

looking after all of those items. And they were set up as a 

commission. The Act was passed originally in, it looks like, 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

2003. It’s been amended a few times since. So this is a fairly 

new agency that’s been set up, and indeed, a lot of the 

responsibilities and requirements under this Act are mirrored in 

the new Act, but there’s new twists on the new Act. 

 

So at this point I won’t go into great detail on the existing Act. I 

do want to take a look at the new Bill. In part I, which is the 

preliminary part of the Bill, they list the types of consumer 

protection legislation that this new Crown corporation will be 

looking at. And again, it’s The Auctioneers Act, The Cemeteries 

Act, and basically the same list that I just read that the previous 

commission was looking at. And there are some additions 

available under the regulations that are provided for in this new 

Bill. 

 

And they have a new definition here called the consumer 

protection regulator. So a lot of these Bills that are referred to 

for consumer protection — or legislation, not Bills — that I just 

referred to, have a registrar or a director or a board. For 

example, the Film Classification Board has superintendents or 

appeal committees or registrars. All of those now are caught in 

this Act as a consumer protection regulator. So that is an 

important term in the Act. 

 

Financial services is also defined in this Act and again it 

mirrors the types of financial services that we saw under the 

commission. So things like carrying on business as a credit 

union or a mortgage brokerage or administrator, administering 

pension plans, and dealing and investing in pension funds, 

selling and providing insurance, carrying on business as a 

payday lender, trading in or advising with respect to securities, 

lending money or dealing in or purchasing mortgages or 

security interests or accounts receivable, of course trading in 

real estate and acting as an investment fund manager and any 

other activity that the regulations may define. So the list of the 

financial services legislation is the same as that for the 

commission and then there’s the catch-all clause at the end of 

the definition that ensures that if other areas need to be brought 

in by regulation, they can be. 

 

Now we talked about the consumer protection regulators like 

the Film Classification Board. Now we talk about financial 

services regulators. Who are those people? Well it would be the 

registrar of credit unions, the superintendent of insurance or 

pensions or directors under The Payday Loans Act, and various 

other superintendents or registrars. So again this is another 

important term for this new Crown corporation and it’s one that 

will direct them as to who the regulators are that they need to 

deal with. 

 

So in part II of the Act under section 3, what it basically does is 

continues the commission and it now becomes the Financial 

and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan. Again I’m 

not sure why isn’t it financial services and consumer affairs 

authority because there is a defined term of financial services in 

the Act. However that was the choice that was made and that’s 

the way it’s been presented. This is going to be a corporation, 

so that’s the second part of the clause 3. And the third clause 

indicates it’s a Treasury Board Crown corporation within the 

meaning of The Crown Corporations Act and head office in 

Regina obviously. 

 

So in the previous commission there was a limit on the number 

of members. In this case, in the membership of this particular 

authority there’s no limit that I can see in the clause so I’m not 

sure why that change has been made at this point. It just says, 

those persons appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 

and then the minister also gets to appoint someone. So it 

doesn’t tell us if it’s a two-person board or authority or if 

there’s 25. We don’t know what the minimum or maximum is 

for this new authority. 

 

So the members of the authority are appointed. And they don’t 

hold their term for more than three years or until a successor is 

appointed, but they can be reappointed. And there’s methods in 

here in section 4 in terms of how vacancies will be filled and 

what the Lieutenant Governor in Council will do in that event. 

 

Here we have in section 5 the responsibilities of the authority. 

So here I want to read this one out because I think it’s important 

to understand what this new Crown will be doing. So it’s 

responsible to the minister. There’s a direct line to the Minister 

of Justice on this one and in the exercise of the powers 

conferred on the authority and in the performance of the duties 

. . . So they’re responsible to him for administering and 

enforcing the Act. They’re responsible for administering and 

enforcing consumer protection legislation, financial services 

legislation, and any other Act that confers a duty or power on a 

consumer protection regulator or a financial services regulator. 

So there you see it. They’re responsible for administering and 

enforcing this Act and the other legislation where there’s 

regulators in the area of consumer protection or financial 

services. 

 

They can also be assigned other duties by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, and I’ve spoken about this before. It 

always makes me somewhat leery when we don’t have the full 

extent of activities or functions described in the Bill itself and 

that it is pushed over to the regulatory sphere. Because once 

again, Executive Council and Lieutenant Governor in Council 

can make these changes with much less scrutiny. Indeed we 

don’t even see the regulations until after they’ve been passed, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s a road to go down very carefully, 

I think, for governments. And they need to be sure that, as 

much as possible, there’s scrutiny of the authorities and powers 

of things like a new Crown corporation, that they’re scrutinized 

prior to the regulatory authority being granted. But that isn’t the 

practice of this government at this point, and so just concerns 

raised about how the regulatory creation, creation of regulations 

takes place. 

 

Clause 6 tells us that this is an agent of the Crown, which is 

often the case with Crown corporations. But it does have 

capacity to contract in its own corporate name, and that’s 

section 7. So that’s something that we often see with Crown 

corporations. And then also the liability. The authority may sue 

and be sued. Of course when it is sued, it’s to the extent to 

which the Crown is subject pursuant to The Proceedings 

against the Crown Act, so there’s always the protection for the 

Crown in that other statute, The Proceedings against the Crown 

Act. 

 

Now here’s the next layer that the minister was talking about in 

terms of this authority. So we have now the people appointed to 

the authority, and then we’re adding a new layer, and it’s a 

board of directors. And this is the new feature, I think. And the 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

reason the minister says this is an important Bill is that it will 

draw, this is the sentence I referred to earlier where he said it 

draws on the business expertise of a board of directors. 

 

So I’m just wondering about this board of directors, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and how the government will choose those members. 

Obviously they need to have business expertise. Concerning, of 

course, to us is who these individuals will be because if it is 

people familiar to the government in terms of their own 

personal relations, that’s something I think that is of concern to 

the public, and we’ll certainly be watching with close eyes in 

terms of who the minister chooses for the board. 

 

Actually the board of directors, in terms of the organization, 

here is in clause 9, is established consisting of those appointed 

pursuant to 4(1). So not only are they members — I was getting 

the sense that it was another layer — but it’s actually the same 

people. The authority and the board seem to be the same 

people. So he will be drawing upon people from the business 

community, it looks like, to become authority members first 

under section 4, and then under section 9. It looks like it’s the 

same people. Section 9(1) reads, “The board of directors for the 

authority is established consisting of those persons appointed 

pursuant to subsection 4(1),” which is the people — we don’t 

know how many — by the Lieutenant Governor, and then one 

person appointed by the minister. 

 

So I question whether the minister’s going to be doing a request 

for proposals or an open job application for that. What the 

responsibilities and the remuneration, we don’t know what that 

is. Again the remuneration for these board members is fixed by 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. So again it’s done by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, and then there’s no 

opportunity for the public or the opposition to comment on the 

appropriateness of the remuneration. I’m not sure how it’s 

established in the current Act. 

 

Anyways, the board is responsible for managing the affairs and 

business of the authority. So if I am understanding this right, 

the authority and the board are one and the same. So I’m not 

sure why there’s a need for both, and perhaps the minister will 

elaborate on that at some point in time. 

 

There’s obviously the members are entitled to be reimbursed 

for travel and incidental living expenses in their performance of 

their responsibilities. That makes sense. And if there is a 

vacancy of a member, it doesn’t impair the board to act with 

that vacancy. 

 

Again, Lieutenant Governor in Council is the one who’s going 

to designate one member of the board as chairperson and 

another member of the board as Vice-Chair. We will look 

carefully at those appointments and try and understand why the 

government chose them, and on what basis. 

 

And then there’s a number of administrative clauses that close 

out this division of the Act in terms of how the meetings are to 

be conducted. Division 3 talks about the executive director and 

employees, so I think this is the transition clauses that the 

minister was talking about where the existing employees will be 

transitioned over to the new Crown corporation. It has to be 

done by appointment and the authority may do that. So as long 

as the Lieutenant Governor in Council is okay with it, the 

authority itself can appoint their own executive director. And I 

think the minister indicated that in this case it will continue the 

appointments of the current commission members and the 

executive director into the new authority. And I’m not seeing 

that clause here in the Act. I’m sure it’s here somewhere if the 

minister said it’s here. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Again it’s interesting to note that this new Crown corporation is 

continuing the executive director into the new authority but that 

for whatever reason the Tourism Authority is not having its 

executive director continued, or promised to be continued into 

the new Crown corporation. There seems to be a disconnect 

there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m not sure what the 

reasoning would be for such a one-eighty on the part of the 

government to treat executive directors in such a different way. 

And we certainly have no indication from the comments of 

either the Minister of Justice or the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport as to why this particular Crown continues the 

executive director but that other new Crown, tourism Crown, 

will not. And it’s not built into the comments of the ministers. 

So I guess we can only wait and see what’s going to happen 

with Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

So in clause 13 it describes about how the executive director 

shall act in the new role of the new Crown. And it goes on to 

talk about employees as well. Obviously remuneration and 

superannuation and benefits are dealt with in section 14. And 

then we go into part III of the Bill which is a substantive part of 

the Bill. Part III and part IV deal with financial services 

protection. And then part IV is the consumer protection. So 

what it does is it tells us what the responsibilities of the 

authority are for financial services. And we see that it’s 

responsible for a number of things — coordinating the 

regulators. So the regulators I talked about earlier, this 

authority’s now responsible for coordinating them and 

providing them with administration, development, promotion, 

all sorts of policies related to financial services, administering 

The Securities Act, performing other responsibilities. So there’s 

a big list of what the authority is responsible for in relation to 

financial services. 

 

And also the powers of the authority are described in section 16 

where they can exercise powers given to them under the various 

financial services legislations. And also they can make grants to 

people — although I know this government doesn’t like making 

grants — and they will make grants here to any person, agency, 

organization, association, institution, or body on any terms they 

consider appropriate for any purpose relating to its 

responsibilities for financial services. 

 

So I’m glad to see that financial service organizations get grants 

from the government because we certainly know that the film 

and tax industry isn’t. So at least it’s not wiped out 100 per 

cent. That’s good news. Do any other thing that it considers 

necessary. So there’s the last clause is the catch-all clause. 

 

If they do give a grant greater than $50,000, though — this is at 

least one thing that’s reassuring — that Lieutenant Governor in 

Council needs to approve it. So they are able to give quite large 

grants, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and anything under $50,000 they 

don’t need approval of the government for. 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

Again I guess because this is a budgetary Bill, we need to get a 

sense of what the actual costs are, and unfortunately the 

minister made no comment on that in his introductory remarks. 

So we’re left in a bit of a void here in terms of how this is going 

to impact the taxpayer. We’ll certainly look at the estimates to 

see if there’s more information there, but certainly in the 

minister’s comments we don’t have anything that tells us why 

this is a budgetary Bill. 

 

Now seeing that the authority can issue quite significant grants 

and certainly there’s no limit — the only limit being that the 

approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council is needed if it’s 

over the $50,000 — that tells me that this authority will have 

access to significant dollars to make these grants. 

 

There’s a number of other types of powers that are described in 

clause 16. And in clause 17 there’s an authority, if the minister 

so chooses, to create a list of persons to serve on a panel if the 

authority considers it advisable. And so the authority can also 

strike a panel to look after or at least to hear any matter that the 

authority is authorized or required to hear pursuant to the Act. 

So that’s established by order by the minister, and there’s a 

number of other rules in relation to the panel. 

 

Part IV, consumer protection, section 19, again the 

responsibility to the authority described there is similar to the 

responsibilities described in part III for financial services. And 

in section 20, we again see the similar powers of authority. In 

this case they can also “. . . make grants to any person, agency, 

organization, association, institution or body . . . for any 

purpose relating to its responsibilities for consumer protection.” 

 

So I suppose if one of the regulatory bodies decided they 

needed to do some sort of research for their particular area that 

they’re responsible for, the authority could provide them with a 

grant to do that kind of research. 

 

Part V is just the general powers, so there’s different ways for 

the authority to get evidence. And they can get evidence outside 

Saskatchewan or make an order if they want to get evidence. So 

it’s a fairly heavy authority, Madam Deputy Speaker, and it’s 

one that seems to make it somewhat quasi tribunal. So this is a 

board that is able to make rules regarding hearings, and make 

its own rules how it conducts its business. Again I think that’s 

something we’ll need to keep an eye on because those types of 

quasi court-type powers are great and can affect people 

severely. So we need to keep an eye on those. 

 

There’s an ability in section 24 to direct an inquiry on any 

question or matter before or over which it has jurisdiction. So 

they can have inquiries. They can have hearings. And in section 

25 they can have investigations as well. So again this is a very 

quasi court-looking Crown corporation. It’s not often, I think, 

that you see Crown corporations that have these kinds of 

powers in order to make those types of investigations. So we 

will be watching that with interest as well if this Bill is indeed 

passed and enacted. 

 

There’s a number of other clauses in this section about conflict 

of interest and non-compellability. And that’s one clause that I 

think a person has to read out loud in order to understand, and I 

will do that now because it’s an interesting clause in terms of 

language. So section 29 reads: 

Subject to section 30, a member of the authority, the 

executive director, any employee of the authority, a person 

authorized pursuant to section 21 to obtain evidence, a 

member of a panel, a person appointed to make an inquiry 

and report pursuant to section 24 and a person appointed 

to make an investigation pursuant to section 25 [there we 

are; now we get to it] are not compellable to give evidence 

in any court or in a proceeding of a judicial nature 

concerning any information that comes to the knowledge 

of that person in the exercise of the powers, the 

performance of the responsibilities or the carrying out of 

the functions of that person pursuant to this Act, the 

regulations, any financial services legislation or any 

consumer protection legislation. 

 

So I think, if I understand this, basically it’s that anybody 

who’s giving evidence or who’s involved in any of these 

inquiries is not required to give evidence in court. I think that’s 

what that section says. 

 

There’s a disclosure clause in section 30, and of course there’s 

an immunity clause which is even longer than the 

non-compellability clause. But again any person that’s involved 

in any of these types of things — which is about six lines in the 

section — they’re protected and immune if they’re doing it in 

good faith. So this is a protection for the people in these 

regulatory functions and these investigations. 

 

Now in part VI, we get into the financial matters of the new 

corporation, the new Crown corporation. And I guess that’s 

where my questions will be in terms of how this is affecting the 

budget and the bottom line for the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

And then we see . . . The first section that we find out is that the 

Minister of Finance can loan monies to the authority out of the 

GRF or the General Revenue Fund for the purposes of the 

authority. So we know they can get loans from the Minister of 

Finance and this is going to be done through Lieutenant 

Governor in Council authorization in accordance with The 

Financial Administration Act. 

 

So first of all, this new Crown corporation can borrow money 

from the government. They can also borrow temporarily, under 

section 33 by way of temporary loans from any bank, credit 

union or person, any monies by way of a bank overdraft or any 

other way they determine if they so choose. So that’s a 

temporary borrowing, which I guess I assume then any 

borrowing from the Minister of Finance is not temporary. And 

I’m not sure what that implies or what effect it will have on the 

taxpayer. And they can also invest their capital or operating 

monies in securities if they choose to do so and dispose of them 

in any way they seem expedient. 

 

So they can . . . In the second part of section 34, Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, here’s something: the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council could appoint the Minister of Finance or 

any other person to be the agent of the authority for the 

purposes of making investments. So if they need an agent, it 

looks like the Minister of Finance can act for them in that 

capacity if it is the will of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 

and it gives the Minister of Finance or any person that they do 

appoint all the powers they need to take care of that type of 

business. 

 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

So other than, you know, fiscal year Treasury Board orders and 

directives and the audit, it seems like these are fairly 

straightforward clauses for the rest of that part. And then 

finally, part VII is just the repeal of the current Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission. And there’s a transitional 

clause that the minister referred to in his opening comments 

yesterday, which is section 43. And this talks about the 

transition of, the transfer of employees. And the first section 

reads: 

 

Notwithstanding any Act, law or provision of a contract, 

for the purpose of facilitating the administration and 

enforcement of this Act, consumer protection legislation, 

financial services legislation and any other Act that 

opposes or confers a duty, power, or function on a 

consumer protection regulator or a financial services 

regulator, the chairperson of the Public Service 

Commission may transfer any employees in the public 

service within the meaning of The Public Service Act, 

1998 to, and cause them to become employees of the 

authority. 

 

So it looks like not only employees from the commission are 

eligible to be transferred over but it may mean that there are 

other employees as well within the public service that could be 

transferred to this new Crown corporation. 

 

And the Act goes on in section 43(2) to say that any transfer 

described in the previous section does not constitute the 

abolition or termination of any position or job. So I think it tells 

us that those jobs they are coming from may not be abolished, 

although if they come from the Financial Services Commission, 

that doesn’t exist any more so those jobs will certainly be 

abolished. It doesn’t require advance notice and does not 

constitute constructive dismissal of any person or a breach of 

contract. So it’s a fairly technical job protection clause. And it 

doesn’t tell us for certain that all the employees from the 

current commission will be transferred although the minister is 

indicating that it will. So maybe this wording is a bit more 

complex than I can sort out at this point, but I will take a closer 

look at it, and I’m sure my colleagues will as well because I’m 

not quite getting to the minister’s comments where he said it 

continues their appointments. And I’m sure the language is 

there, but it’s a bit more obtuse than I can get my head around 

at this particular point. 

 

The former fund is being transferred over. Again I’m not 

certain how much money is in the former fund, and we’ll be 

looking at that with interest, Madam Deputy Speaker, because 

this is taxpayers’ dollars that we’re dealing with. So we’re 

going to make sure that the winding up of the former fund is 

appropriate and that the funds were transferred appropriately 

over to this new Crown. 

 

Similarly clause 45 is the transfer of assets and liabilities of the 

existing commission, so that’s going to take place as well. 

 

Oh and I think I may have arrived at the clause that I was 

looking for, transitional 46, and this is the one I think the 

minister is referring to. Those persons who were members of 

the commission on the day before the coming into force of this 

Act constitute the members of the authority and members of 

this board, and they’re deemed to have been appointed. So we 

know now at section 46 that the commission members are 

carried over from the Securities Commission over to this new 

Crown corporation. And they will hold office for the remainder 

of the terms that they were appointed in their original 

appointment and then this Act will then take over. 

 

The people that were chairperson or vice-chairperson are also 

deemed to be designated as the new chairperson or 

vice-chairperson. And then here’s the clause of interest to me, 

Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 46(3): 

 

The person who was the executive director of the 

commission on the day before the coming into force of 

this Act: 

 

is deemed to have been appointed pursuant to [this Act] 

. . . 

 

So we know for certain that the existing executive director has 

job protection and will be carried on in the transition to this 

new Crown. 

 

What we don’t know is the fate of the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Tourism Authority, which is now being 

converted to a similar Crown corporation. But there are no 

assurances in that Bill that leads us to believe that that 

executive director is being provided the same security as this 

director. That raises some very serious questions, Madam 

Deputy Speaker, and I think it would be a great concern how 

this government can do a complete one-eighty when they’re 

treating people who are respected executive directors in public 

authorities. 

 

So that’s something I think we’re going to need to look at very 

closely, Madam Deputy Speaker. And that’s section 46(3) of 

this new Act, the Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan. Part VIII is the consequential and coming into 

force sections, which I won’t go into any great detail because 

they’re consequential and just necessary amendments that make 

sure all the other Bills are properly referring now to this new 

Crown corporation. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So I think in conclusion on this particular Bill, Madam Deputy 

Speaker, there’s a number of questions that we have. Why is 

this necessary? Why wasn’t the commission good enough? 

What is it afforded any difference now that it . . . Why are we 

creating another Crown, other than it gives the government 

more control over the activities of the commission? 

 

And it says the idea of the corporation is to draw on the 

business expertise of a board of directors to assess the needs of 

the marketplace without compromising the government’s need 

to manage the province’s financial affairs. I would really like to 

get more explanation from the minister on why this new Crown 

is designed to do that when it appears to be based on the fairly 

similar functions and authorities that the commission was based 

on. So it’s just a bit of a mystery about that. 

 

And as I said earlier, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the 

biggest issue with this particular Bill isn’t what it does but how 

it treats people differently than the tourism Crown corporation 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

that’s being created right now, which has no such assurances 

for the board of directors and the executive director and the 

employees of that particular authority. I think it’s unfair 

treatment and certainly would like some explanation from this 

government as to why they feel it’s appropriate to treat people 

so differently. 

 

So at that point, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that’s the 

extent of my comments on Bill No. 39, An Act respecting the 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

and making consequential amendments to other Acts. So I 

would like to move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member has moved to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 39, The Financial and Consumer 

Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 40 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 40 — The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 portant 

modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Again 

this is a consequential amendment Act resulting from the 

enactment of The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act. And given that it is three clauses long, I 

think my comments on this one will be somewhat shorter than 

my previous comments. 

 

First of all though, I will want to take a look at the comments 

from the minister when he introduced, spoke to the second 

reading in this Bill yesterday. And his comments are quite short 

as well, with reason, and I totally understand that. At any rate 

he indicated it was the consequential amendments to the 

previous Bill that he introduced, and he restated the goal for 

Bill 39 — it’s to respond quickly and effectively to market 

demands facing regulation of financial services and consumer 

protection. 

 

So again this is, we hear a lot from this government is the 

ability to act quickly when dealing with regulation. And that is 

somewhat concerning because regulation can be complex. And 

unless the civil service, the civil servants are properly equipped 

with resources and staff to ensure that these complex 

regulations are followed properly, there’s always concern that 

monitoring compliance of regulatory structures are not able to 

be followed. And that applies not only to financial services and 

consumer protection, but obviously environmental protection 

and other types of protection that exist within our regulatory 

sphere. 

So I always am worried when people are in a rush to get 

through regulations. They’re there for a reason, and they should 

be. It should be followed to the law and not overlooked at all. 

So if this is the reason why we need a Crown instead of a 

commission, the minister’s comments don’t really tell us why 

that is. And we will look to him for more explanation of why a 

Crown is necessary to do this kind of regulatory supervision 

when the commission was doing just fine as far as we, as far as 

we understand. 

 

At any rate, he goes on to say that this Bill No. 40 is just a 

companion piece to Bill No. 39. It’s bilingual which is always 

good to see when we have notre loi en français, alors. 

[Translation: our law in French, then.] He also made a couple 

comments about the fact that Royal Recommendation was not 

received in time to appear in the order paper. But he made the 

point and informed us that the Lieutenant Governor did in fact 

recommend it to the consideration of the Assembly although it 

didn’t appear in the order paper. So he amended that oversight 

in his comments yesterday. 

 

So this Bill has three clauses. And the first clause is basically 

the name of the Bill. And although it’s a short title clause, it 

isn’t short at all. It is The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 

2012. That’s the first section. Second section only changes the 

definition of “board” in The Co-operatives Act, 1996. And I 

assume that wasn’t one of the consequential changes in the 

previous Bill because it is a bilingual Bill, so it had to be 

carried through separately in this Bill. And of course this Act 

will come into force on the day that the section 1 of The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

comes into force. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s all the comments I’ll make on 

this particular Bill at this point in time. I know my colleagues 

will want to speak to it as well. So I would like to . . . I hear one 

of the members think there’s more to this than there is, but 

maybe if he reads it he’ll see that there really isn’t much to this 

Bill. So I think at this point I’d like to move to adjourn this Bill. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 40, The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 26 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join in on the adjourned debates and specifically look 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

at Bill No. 26, an Act to repeal miscellaneous obsolete statues 

. . . statutes, pardon me, not obsolete statues. We’re actually 

adding statues here at the Assembly, I’m told. But this is to 

repeal miscellaneous obsolete statutes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this Act here, No. 26, it’s a bit of a catch bag of a few 

different things. There’s five different components to this piece 

of legislation addressing different pieces of legislation that now 

need to be repealed, in the government’s opinion, based on 

changes that have occurred in the province or the fact that the 

pieces of legislation aren’t current or that they have, there’s 

been review and changes have occurred. And therefore the 

legislation ought to be adjusted, in this case repealed, in order 

to reflect the current reality that is seen. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the first . . . I should state actually that the 

minister responsible, the Minister of Justice moved second 

reading of this Bill, Bill No. 26, on March 5th, 2012, for 

individuals who are curious about reading his second reading 

speech. And in his remarks, Mr. Speaker, he did provide some 

comments about what the different components of this Act are 

and the different bits of legislation that are being addressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first piece of legislation that is being 

addressed here, it is being repealed, is The Collective 

Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act, and it was 

passed, Mr. Speaker, in 2005. This piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, deals with some specific agreements that were 

between IPSCO and the United Steelworkers of America Local 

5890 and Shaw Pipe Protection Limited and the Construction 

and General Workers’ Union Local 180. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister’s remarks stated that in 2008 the government enacted 

amendments to The Trade Union Act which repealed subsection 

33(3), and as a result, the employers in eight unions are able to 

negotiate collective agreements for a term that is appropriate for 

the parties. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, changes were made, according to the 

minister’s remarks, that allowed the parties to decide what is an 

appropriate duration for the contract and, as such, this piece of 

legislation that was in place, The Collective Bargaining 

Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act, is no longer needed in 

the government’s opinion. This piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, I guess by the minister’s own explanation, it would 

appear to be fairly straightforward and not having a very wide 

application because it does state which Locals are affected here 

and which companies are affected here. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, when we look at members opposite 

track record when it comes to legislation having an effect on 

working people and organized labour in the province, there 

have been a number of problems that we’ve seen with the 

government’s approach over the past number of years. And I 

can think of different pieces of legislation, whether it’d be Bill 

5, Bill 6, whether it’d be Bill 43 or Bill 80. We have seen 

instances, Mr. Speaker, where the government charted a course 

in what they thought was appropriate without the necessary 

type of consultation and discussion with the parties being 

affected by the proposed changes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while this one component here of Bill No. 26, 

which is the repeal of The Collective Bargaining Agreement 

Expiry Date Exception Act, it may not seem that significant, 

whenever we’re dealing with pieces of legislation that are in the 

realm of labour and working people and organized labour, Mr. 

Speaker, I do have some concerns that members opposite have 

done the appropriate type of consultation and discussion with 

the groups and organizations that will be affected. And I hope, 

Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t have any cause for concern. But 

based on the track record, I think there is some need, and I think 

concern is warranted to some degree. 

 

So that is the first component, Mr. Speaker, of this 

miscellaneous statutes repeal Act, and that was the repeal of 

The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exemption 

Act which was passed originally in 2005. 

 

The next component, Mr. Speaker, that we see is the repeal of 

The Communications Network Corporation Act. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this Act that established the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network, or SCN as it’s commonly referred 

to. When we think of, Mr. Speaker, the issue of SCN, it’s really 

tied into a much larger discussion that has been playing out in 

the province over the past few weeks and the past couple of 

months, I would say, but actually going back further than that, 

Mr. Speaker, going back to actions that members opposite have 

chosen to pursue over the last number of years.  

 

And this, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the type of activity that 

we want in our province and want to encourage in our province 

and see in our province when it comes to film and television 

and when it comes to encouraging local productions that do 

very important things, Mr. Speaker. We know that the type of 

activity that occurs with the film industry for film and 

television is very important. 

 

And this is a discussion that does tie into current changes, fairly 

recent changes that we saw come down in the recent budget, 

and that was the elimination of the employment film tax credit 

and the negative effect that that is having and will have in the 

months and years ahead here in the province. And so I think, 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at issues like SCN and the role that 

it played and once played, and with the sale of SCN to 

Bluepoint and the current situation, and then it really ties into a 

larger story and larger concerns that many people here in the 

province have about this government’s approach to the film 

industry. 

 

We know the film industry is so important to our province for a 

number of reasons. But I would divide those reasons up into 

perhaps two categories. And the one, Mr. Speaker, would be for 

economic reasons it’s very important. And we think of the large 

number of people here in the province, especially in Regina I 

should say, that have made a living and have earned their 

dollars and paid their taxes because of their involvement with 

the film industry. And so we know that there’s individuals that 

are involved. 

 

And we also know, Mr. Speaker, that many of the businesses in 

the community have benefited greatly because of the film 

industry in Saskatchewan. When there is film activity and 

television activity here in the province, many businesses 

benefit. You can think, Mr. Speaker, of retail stores that sell 

clothing and the amount of costumes and wardrobes that are 

purchased for different productions and how important that is to 

the businesses. Members will recall stories of one individual 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

business here, Mr. Speaker, that a production was being made 

and someone came in, a wardrobe person came in and bought, I 

think it was, $8,000 worth of clothing. And that has a real 

positive effect on local businesses. 

 

Other examples, Mr. Speaker, could include car rentals. When 

there is a production and that sets up shop in a particular area, 

they will of course rent vehicles of different sizes. And that’s 

very important to local businesses. 

 

We can also think, Mr. Speaker, of the hotels that would be 

present and the restaurants that would be present in this city. 

How individuals could do their day working of course, but then 

of course also in the evening go out and have meals, go to pubs, 

go to restaurants, and support the local industry either for hotels 

or for restaurants or for pubs. And that’s very important of 

course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So there’s most certainly the economic argument, but there’s 

also a very strong cultural argument that can be made and is 

made and is very clear in my opinion of how, when we have 

Saskatchewan stories and we’re able to tell them through film 

and television, that that really benefits all Saskatchewan people 

and it puts us on the map in many important ways. 

 

Of course the most commonly known example is Corner Gas. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that this is a series that plays 

around the world, across Canada and helped, I think helps show 

Saskatchewan people as down-to-earth people, common sense 

people, a people with a good senses of humour and with a 

unique culture here on the Prairies that we like to share. And I 

think Corner Gas played a very important role. And we have 

heard from individuals involved with that production, Mr. 

Speaker, how some of the negative steps and approaches that 

we’ve seen by members opposite, how Corner Gas wouldn’t 

have come to pass in the province if the members’ decisions 

had been in place at the time of its creation. 

 

When we think of telling this story, and this certainly has a 

relevance for SCN because SCN, Mr. Speaker, traditionally has 

played a very important role in telling Saskatchewan stories. I 

can think of the Wapos Bay production in Saskatoon. And I’ve 

had the pleasure to visit the production area in Saskatoon where 

Wapos Bay is created. And it’s a, I’m not sure if I have the 

correct terminology, but claymation, and they have these . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Stop-motion animation. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Stop-motion animation is the correct term, Mr. 

Speaker. They have these amazing little displays and sets where 

they take these photos and link them together and make a great 

production that tells a uniquely Saskatchewan story, again, to a 

very wide audience beyond our borders. It tells the story to 

people in Saskatchewan, but it tells the story also to those 

beyond our borders. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that this has 

been widely recognized in the broader public and in the 

Canadian context because, when we look at Wapos Bay 

production, we know that they’ve received Gemini Awards and 

received international acclaim as well through different venues. 

 

So when we look at this decision here, Mr. Speaker, when we 

look at the consequence of previous actions by the government 

of repealing The Communications Network Corporation Act, it 

really ties in to a much larger story, and a story where we’ve 

seen steps taken by members opposite that have not been 

positive for Saskatchewan people, in my opinion, and not 

positive for the Saskatchewan economy, in my opinion. 

 

So I think it’s important always, and it’s a good example and a 

good reminder to all of us, when we have a small piece of 

legislation, when we look at Bill No. 26, it really is just a few 

short sentences saying certain that Acts are repealed. But when 

you look at the information that is there, when you look at what 

is actually being repealed, it tells a much broader story and a 

very important story and one that I think doesn’t deserve to be 

glossed over. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the first component that was being repealed 

through this miscellaneous statutes repeal Act is The Collective 

Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act. The second 

piece, Mr. Speaker, is The Communications Network 

Corporation Act. 

 

And now the third piece of legislation that’s being repealed 

through The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 is The 

On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act. And this, Mr. 

Speaker, is an Act that came into effect in ’98, and the purpose 

of it was to provide a way for on-farm food safety programs to 

be recognized in Saskatchewan. So producers who wanted to 

do, I assume, value-add opportunities with what they were 

doing and wanted a way to have their product licensed and 

determined that it was safe and good for market, this was a 

mechanism that allowed for that to occur. 

 

Now by the minister’s second reading speech it indicates that 

this was all done, that the Act that was brought in in ’98 was 

done before the Canadian Food Inspection Agency agreed to its 

role in on-farm food safety, or OFFS as the acronym would 

suggest. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, there 

are changes that occur in government policy and changes that 

occur between agreements between different orders of 

government, between federal and provincial. And in this 

instance, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, 

the CFIA, has agreed to take on this type of work and provide 

this type of service for producers. And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps 

whether that’s a good or a bad decision, that’s a discussion, a 

different policy discussion for a different day. 

 

But it does raise a few concerns, especially as it relates to 

current events and current changes that we’ve seen from the 

federal government. And we know with CFIA there have been 

significant concerns raised in the media over the past number of 

months and how the federal government has been treating the 

CFIA with respect to allowing it to do its role as it ought to and 

as it needs to do in order to ensure that the food that Canadian 

consumers eat and the food that we ship abroad for trade, Mr. 

Speaker, is in fact as safe and sound as everyone wants it to be 

and expects it to be. 

 

So while the change can be made by the provincial government 

in going down this path, I think we do need to keep on our radar 

the concerns that have been voiced and raised with respect to 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

the ability of CFIA to do the job that it needs to do. And I 

would hope, Mr. Speaker, that that is something that would be 

recognized by the provincial government and it would be 

recognized indeed by the federal government. Because as has 

been mentioned in recent days, there have been steps, Mr. 

Speaker, by the federal government to the province with respect 

to agriculture that have been detrimental and that have not had a 

positive effect or will not have a positive effect in the months 

and years to come. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that when we see that kind 

of example and that kind of treatment from the federal 

government to the province of Saskatchewan, it is my sincere 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial government would be a 

strong voice in promoting Saskatchewan’s interests, a strong 

voice in ensuring that Saskatchewan is being treated well. And 

that includes, Mr. Speaker, of course within the realm of 

agriculture, and would include agricultural activity and in this 

area, Mr. Speaker, would include the role that CFIA does in the 

province. I think that is very important. 

 

So the first piece of legislation being repealed in the 

miscellaneous statutes Act, Mr. Speaker, is The Collective 

Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act. The second 

piece is The Communications Network Corporation Act. The 

third piece is The On-Farm Quality Assurance Programs Act. 

And the fourth piece, Mr. Speaker, is The Soil Drifting Control 

Act. And as the minister stated in his second reading speech, 

that this is in fact a fairly old piece of legislation. It came into 

force back in 1941, before I was certainly around and before 

any of us were sitting in the legislature. Perhaps some of the 

members here were around then, but that would be . . . perhaps 

not as well. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, the soil drifting Act goes back to ’41. 

And this is an example, as I said in my remarks, where policies 

change. And as the minister has stated in his speech — I’ll have 

to take him at his word here, Mr. Speaker — that this is a piece 

of legislation that has been rarely used and accordingly is 

perhaps no longer appropriate, especially with development and 

changes that have occurred in the area of agriculture and 

throughout rural Saskatchewan. So it is in some ways a 

housekeeping piece of legislation. This change to repeal it is in 

fact housekeeping, determining that it is not appropriate or no 

longer necessary. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, members 

opposite, the minister has suggested that it be repealed at this 

time. So that covers the fourth piece. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, the final piece, the fifth component is 

the repeal of The Special Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act. 

And as the minister said, this was something that was brought 

in in 1999. And it basically provided a mechanism for widows 

whose workers’ compensation benefits were terminated due to 

remarriage prior to September 1st of ’85. And as the minister 

stated, to receive payment a widow had to apply within a 

two-year period following enactment of the legislation, and sign 

the waiver. The minister said that given the limitation on 

application of the benefits, there is no further need for the 

legislation. Furthermore, two court challenges to the Act have 

been dismissed. 

 

So again this is in some ways, Mr. Speaker, it would seem, by 

the minister’s explanation at least, that it is of a housekeeping 

nature, no longer relevant because of the timelines involved 

with the piece of legislation, and that there haven’t been 

problems that have come about as a result of court action. So 

again, Mr. Speaker, I will take the minister at his word that this 

is appropriate. If it is not, Mr. Speaker, that is concerning. 

 

But we do know when we’re dealing with special payments, I 

guess when we’re dealing with issues of wills, when we’re 

dealing with issues of entitlement for widows or widowers, it’s 

a very trying and troubling time for people when they lose their 

life partner and their loved one. And I can think of just recently, 

Mr. Speaker, helping out a constituent who had come into the 

office with respect to some pension matters of her partner. And 

it is a trying time. It’s a difficult time in one’s life. And it’s 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that the policies and the legislation 

that we have in place as a provincial government truly allow for 

the government to respond in such a way that is appropriate for 

the individual and allows the individual to conduct their 

personal business and have their orders in affair and receive any 

entitlement to pensions or benefits that they are entitled to in a 

timely manner so that they can have the quality of life that is 

needed. And I know it was the member from Nutana who was 

in her previous speech talking about, or two speeches ago, 

talking about the role of pensions and how very important that 

is for pensioners and seniors in the province. 

 

And I would say, Mr. Speaker, when we consider some of the 

possible changes, I guess, not possible, but some of the changes 

coming with old age security and what that means for 

individuals approaching retirement in the years to come, these 

are issues that we need to keep in mind and ensure that we’re 

responding in a way that is appropriate, effective, and in the 

best interest of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, I said that this piece of 

legislation, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, was quite 

diverse and bit of a catch-all of a number of different 

components. I think it would be fair to characterize that most of 

them, Mr. Speaker, as housekeeping in nature and in cleanup, I 

suppose, or modernizing of legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, in 

each piece of legislation, though they are all different, though 

they have and had different application and had different levels 

of relevance to Saskatchewan people, it’s important to 

remember that each of these pieces of legislation tell a story and 

raise very important issues for Saskatchewan people. 

 

And whether it is issues to do with collective bargaining, 

whether it’s issues to do with the film industry here in the 

province, whether it’s about the safety and quality of our food 

here in Saskatchewan, whether it’s about environmental 

practices in rural Saskatchewan with respect to soil 

conservation, whether, Mr. Speaker, it has to do with pensions 

and benefits for widows and widowers, it’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, that we look at every piece of legislation thoroughly 

and ensure that the changes and, in this case, the repealing of 

these pieces of legislation is in fact the appropriate and smart 

course of action. 

 

So I have enjoyed and appreciated the opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to provide my thoughts and my views on Bill No. 26, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 and with that I 

would conclude my remarks. 

 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

But I would move to adjourn debate on this piece of legislation 

at this time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 33 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 33 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 

certain interest I rise to participate in debates on Bill No. 33, An 

Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act. 

 

This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, of course, was the Sask 

Party’s offering when it came to the whole question of 

skyrocketing rents in the province of Saskatchewan, and means 

to, I guess, appear to be doing something. But in terms of the 

real effect on the ground, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the situation 

with renters dealing with a particularly tight rental market — 

last stats I’d seen, Mr. Speaker, with CMHC [Canada Mortgage 

and Housing Corporation], the vacancy rate being point six per 

cent in the city of Regina alone, and certainly that’s not unusual 

in terms of the circumstances around the province — obviously 

there’s still some huge problems as regards housing in this 

province. And that this government brought this legislation 

forward as some kind of a . . . I don’t know what other way to 

term it other than perhaps as a PR exercise, as an attempt to 

appear to be doing something as the members brought this 

forward. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not sure 

where this is winding up with the sector itself, whether or not 

this legislation, should it reach — I presume it’ll be passed in 

this session — what happens to it from there, Mr. Speaker, and 

whether or not the sector will actually take this forward. 

Because we hear different things through channels around 

continued sort of solicitation of opinion and advice from 

different actors in the sector. And again, Mr. Speaker, it sort of 

moves in lockstep with the way that this piece of legislation 

first came forward, where there seemed to be surprise on the 

part of actors that are being relied upon in this legislation to 

help out in the terms of this. So whether or not this even 

proceeds, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be very interested to see how that 

works out. 

 

Certainly there’s a broad front of action that is required when it 

comes to dealing with the housing crisis as it presents in 

Saskatchewan. But I guess, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that 

we found very frustrating on this side of the House in terms of 

surveying the actions of the government since they took power 

in 2007 is one of the first acts undertaken by those members 

was to cut the budget of the Sask Housing Corporation and then 

after that to appoint the Pringle Merriman task force to buy 

some time. And then it spends its time roaming the province 

coming up with solid recommendations and then the way that 

that didn’t put a dent into the housing crisis, Mr. Speaker, but in 

fact we saw things get worse. 

 

Then there was a change in minister in that department, Mr. 

Speaker, and again a lot of good words put forward in terms of 

wanting to address the problem, but the main sort of concrete 

action that we saw coming forward was to hold another 

conference and then to top that off with a nice summit, and then 

of course we’ve got these different action plans going forward. 

 

And it’s not to say that there haven’t been some measures that 

are worthwhile on this front, Mr. Speaker. I think we agree very 

much with the move around Habitat for Humanity and I’m 

certainly on the record agreeing with that move on the part of 

this government as regards providing funds to Habitat for 

Humanity to do a better job of what they do in the province. 

And certainly I know in inner-city Regina, Habitat, especially 

after the reorganization in 2006, has been a much more active 

partner in the inner city, operating in conjunction with things 

like for example, T-CAP, the Thom carpentry apprenticeship 

program or with the Transition to Trades program, the good 

work that is done there, but also helping to underwrite the work 

of Habitat for Humanity. Again we’re on record as saying that 

it was the dollars that were extended to Habitat for Humanity, 

those were good dollars extended. 

 

But again the housing crisis ground on and, you know, for too 

many years, Mr. Speaker, under this government, we saw the 

main actor, the main fighter on the housing front being Habitat 

for Humanity when the government should’ve been there in a 

much more vigorous way, instead of standing back, punting 

things off to committees and to task forces and summits. And 

it’s only of late, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve seen any sort of solid 

action on this front. 

 

And again there’s some good, good programs, good measures 

that have come forward in the relatively recent past as regards 

increasing the housing supply, which is a vital part of the 

problem. If you’re going to take on the housing crisis in 

Saskatchewan, certainly the good work of the folks at Ranch 

Ehrlo and work as the units that have been just opened up over 

on Victoria, just off Victoria, which is in Regina Elphinstone, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re glad to see that the government can see 

clear to partnership, to partner with a valuable organization like 

Ranch Ehrlo that has a very solid and commendable track 

record when it comes to working for children, working for 

families, working for people in risk, but also working on the 

housing front, Mr. Speaker. We were glad to see that come 

forward. 

 

We’re also glad to see the work with Street Culture Kidz and 

the opening of the youth shelter, and certainly that’s worth, 

worth applauding, Mr. Speaker. But again in my constituency 

in inner-city Regina I know that these measures, which are 

positive, are in the balance with the fact that rent has gone up 

considerably. The fact that Sask Housing units, which used to 

be rent-geared-to-income and which used to be a much more 

vital benefit for many seniors on fixed income in Regina 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2012 

Elphinstone-Centre, we’ve seen rents increase significantly for 

seniors on fixed income in various of those units through 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

And also the kind of gains that have been made in terms of the 

work that it unfolded under the aegis of the inner city 

community partnership and the good work of the housing 

bylaw standards enforcement team, and the way that that had 

improved, root and branch, the quality of housing stock in 

communities like my home community of North Central. We 

saw a lot of good progress that had been made be stalled for the 

first four years of this government. And again, some good 

measures on the one hand in terms of the work of Habitat for 

Humanity, some good work in terms of the community partners 

like Ranch Ehrlo finally getting projects through the gates, or 

Street Culture Kidz. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, if you talk to people in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre and if you knock on doors as I did, you 

know, certainly during the election, or if you talk to my 

neighbours as I do quite often, Mr. Speaker, if you talk to 

people coming into my office on 5th and Retallack, and if you 

go knocking on doors as I had the opportunity to do so last 

Sunday afternoon in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, housing is still 

a big crisis. And it’s still a big problem in terms of how people 

put it together to make a good life for themselves and their 

families. And too many people are still in that circumstance 

where it’s very, very hard to keep body and soul together and to 

put food on the table and to make sure that they’ve got a decent 

roof over their head. 

 

And in terms of the kind of gains that were made in the 

improvement of housing stock, that relied on people having 

options and places to go in terms of alternative accommodation, 

in terms of shutting down places that shouldn’t be operating 

and shouldn’t be deemed fit for human habitation, but were, 

Mr. Speaker, and are being again because of the tight 

circumstance where people are being confronted with this 

terrible bargain of choosing between bad accommodation and 

no accommodation. And you know, still, Mr. Speaker, we see 

cases come forward where we talk to people who are living in 

tents, Mr. Speaker, where we see people that should be 

enjoying the golden years of their lives, and I think about one 

couple in particular, Mr. Speaker, that spent the summer living 

in a teepee over by the firing range by the Dojack Centre, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And again this is very much part and parcel of a housing crisis, 

hugely tight housing market, and the way that this government 

has not responded in a sufficient manner to solve the problem. I 

think also about the fact that the voluntary compliance sort of 

aspects of this and how they are, I think, less than satisfactory. 

And again we’re not sure if they’re even going to carry forward 

with this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s a lot more to be said about this, but in the interests of 

making sure that other of my colleagues can get into the debate 

— and certainly I would attach myself to the comments of our 

critic, the member from Saskatoon Centre, on this file — but 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 33. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 33, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 34 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 34 — The 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure at this 

hour of the day to join in on discussion . . . rejoin discussion on 

Bill No. 34. And having had a chance to make some remarks 

earlier on, Mr. Speaker, on this piece of legislation, my remarks 

today will not be too extensive. 

 

But I do want to perhaps actually first start off, Mr. Speaker, by 

saying congratulations to the Minister of Agriculture. I think since 

the time that I spoke, he announced that he was leaving cabinet at 

some point and I know that’s probably a difficult, or perhaps 

maybe not that difficult of a decision for one to make in their 

working career, having served and . . . But I spoke to him today 

in the lunch line, and he seemed quite positive about the future. 

So I would like to offer him my congratulations. 

 

This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is to provide the 

legislative authority for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation to administer the crop insurance and AgriStability. 

And, Mr. Speaker, as was stated by the minister in his remarks 

that there was temporary legislation in place but this, Mr. 

Speaker, is to provide a more permanent solution. The 

legislation that’s being proposed here by the minister also 

provides the possibility for future programs such as coverage 

for livestock. So that is, that door is left open and the possibility 

is there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see in the minister’s remarks some changes 

and some things that he’s talked about in terms of his steps that 

he’s wanted to make. And, Mr. Speaker, I will say that I 

haven’t had the good fortune of growing up on a farm, but I’ve 

married into a farming family, so I know how important these 

types of programs are for farm families. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would hope that the changes will in fact help producers here in 

the province. But, Mr. Speaker, there are of course always 

concerns. 

 

But this piece of legislation that we see here, Mr. Speaker, is for 

the most part, Mr. Speaker, moving the legislative authority for 

a program from a temporary basis into a more permanent one. 

And again, similar to the speech I gave earlier on today, Mr. 

Speaker, about the miscellaneous statutes, that this is more of a 

program of housekeeping in nature, or more of a legislative 

proposal, I suppose, of a housekeeping nature as opposed to a 

reworking how everything is done. 

 



April 18, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, there always are important 

considerations to look at when any sort of legislative change is 

being proposed or is being made. And, Mr. Speaker, I know 

that colleagues in the Assembly here will have voiced questions 

and concerns that they’ve had so far with respect to these 

programs and will do so in the future. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

saw with some recent changes, as has been talked about 

recently from the federal level to the province, we know that 

when we look at programs and services provided to farmers 

here in the province that there have been some changes that do 

cause some concern. 

 

So it is important, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at the 

programs and the services in place to assist producers here in 

Saskatchewan that they are in fact as current as they should be, 

as relevant as they should be, and as effective as they should be. 

I know that’s the intent of all members. We may have different 

opinions and different approaches in terms of how we think that 

should occur. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I have enjoyed the opportunity on 

two occasions to speak to this piece of legislation, Bill No. 34, 

The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act. And, Mr. 

Speaker, having had the opportunity on two occasions to speak 

to this piece of legislation, I thank the Assembly for the chance 

to do so and I would move to adjourn debate now on Bill No. 

34. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It being very 

near the time of adjournment, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned till 10 

a.m. Thursday morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1119 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1120 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1120 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1120 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1120 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1120 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1120 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1121 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Volunteer Week 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1121 

 Holocaust Remembrance Day 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1121 

 Moose Jaw Field House and Mosaic Place 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1121 

 Saskatoon Literacy Volunteer Receives Award 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1122 

 Environmental Engineering and Design Collaboration 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1122 

 Sexual Assault Awareness Month 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1122 

 Saskatchewan Budget 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Electoral Representation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 

 Mental Health Care Services 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1125 

 Agricultural Issues 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1126 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1126 

 Plans for Provincial Highways 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1127 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1127 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 38 — The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1128 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1129 

 Bill No. 41 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1131 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1132 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1135 

 Bill No. 39 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1138 

 Bill No. 40 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Financial and Consumer Affairs  

 Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1145 



 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Broten ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1145 

 Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1149 

 Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 

  Broten ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 1150 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


