




















































Hansard: December 06, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 25A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2421 

 December 6, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I would ask leave of the House to make, it’s two 

introductions, and they will likely take a little more time than 

usual. So I’d ask for leave for an extended couple of 

introductions. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for extended 

introductions. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to agree? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks to members for the leave. And, Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you, we have some very special 

guests who have joined us today in your gallery. I’m going to 

begin today with the introduction of a gentleman and his wife 

who’ve joined us from Medstead, Saskatchewan, Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, Reed Ludwig is accompanied today by his wife, 

Sheryl. Reed, maybe just give us a wave. In a moment . . . You 

probably didn’t have to give us a wave because it’s about 

Movember, and I guess we could tell who he probably was up 

in the gallery there. 

 

Like many of us, Reed participated in Movember to raise 

awareness about prostate cancer, to raise money for prostate 

cancer as well as men’s mental health. He’s still got his 

moustache as you can see, Mr. Speaker, today. And it’s a lot 

better than some of them that were grown in this Assembly; I 

think we’d all agree with that. Mr. Speaker, I can tell the House 

this: Reed raised $96,000, Mr. Speaker. In fact I can also tell 

you and the members this: he raised more money than any of 

the 1.1 million participants in Movember worldwide. 

 

He works as a maintenance electrician at MEG Energy. This 

year the company decided to have a grow-off in the days, in 

October, I think, to see who would actually represent the team, 

the company in Movember. Reed was the man. I think they 

made a good choice. I think we might want to do that in the 

future. He says he’s been amazed by the support that he’s 

received from friends and family and colleagues. It’s important 

to point out the MEG Energy matched all employee donations. 

 

Later today I’ll have a chance to present a small certificate and 

a token to Reed in the rotunda to thank him for what he’s done 

and to congratulate him for this great effort. I’m sure that 

Sheryl and their two kids, Brett and Larissa, are very proud of 

their dad and his moustache, as they should be and so are all of 

us. And we welcome him here today to this Legislative 

Assembly this morning. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s also a pleasure and a 

honour to introduce eight representatives from the Salvation 

Army who have joined us today. They are seated in your 

Gallery. I’ll maybe just list all of them, and ask as I do if they 

would just give us a wave. Major Wayne Bungay is the 

commander of the prairie division, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, 

and the Northwest Territories; Major Joanne Binner is the 

Saskatchewan area commander; Captain Tiffany Marshall is the 

divisional government relations liaison officer; Major Doug 

Binner, executive director of Haven of Hope Community 

Ministries; Lieutenant Lynda Wakelin, executive director of 

Grace Haven/Gemma House; Captain Ben Lippers, executive 

director of Waterston House and Kate’s Place; Captain Isobel 

Lippers, assistant executive director Waterston House and 

Kate’s Place; and Ivy Scobie, the executive director of the 

William Booth Special Care Home and Regina Wascana Grace 

Hospice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know what the Salvation Army does in our 

communities, not just at this special time of year but all the year 

round. We want to acknowledge them for this. We want to 

thank them for ensuring that we all remember what Christmas 

is all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as we acknowledge them today and visit with them in the 

rotunda a little bit later and maybe share in some donations that 

we’ve been able to collect, we do want to take this chance to 

remind people right across the province that as they’re busy 

doing their Christmas shopping and heading to find that special 

gift for someone, that’s very important and good, but it’s likely 

that someone we’re rushing to buy a gift for probably has a lot 

of what they need. And they’re going to probably walk by, as 

they do this shopping, many kettles that represent those who 

don’t have quite what they need. 

 

We want all to remember this and to give to the Salvation Army 

so that they can give to those who are in need, especially at this 

special time of year. We welcome these individuals to the 

Legislative Assembly this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll assume I have a 

little bit of latitude on my time in welcoming the special guests 

that we have today. It’s a great pleasure to welcome both 

groups, but I’ll start with the five representatives of the 

Movember movement in Saskatchewan. 

 

I have a special connection with you, and you may not know 

that. But when I was born at Saskatoon City Hospital, my 

mother took me home to Medstead to the little white parsonage, 

which you know is in town, and that’s my first home. And so 

there are many good things that come from Medstead. And I 

say that another person from Medstead that everybody knows is 

Wayne Rostad from national television. 

 

But anyway I want to say congratulations for the work that 

you’ve done. For obvious reasons, I wasn’t part of the 

Movember competition here in the legislature. But it’s 

important to focus attention on both the mental health issues 

and the prostate issues, and we very much appreciate what 

you’ve done. 

 



2422 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

Also I want to say welcome to the members of the Salvation 

Army. The work that you do in many places is often 

unrecognized. But one area where I worked very closely with 

the Salvation Army over many years was in the criminal justice 

corrections issues. And those are the kinds of things that the 

Salvation Army does that don’t always get the same profile as 

everything else. And I want to thank you especially for that 

work. 

 

I also want to say on behalf of a Parkbeg boy, Mortlach, that the 

Binners are classmates and friends of the member from 

Saskatoon Centre and he makes a special point of welcoming 

you here. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 

to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I would like to 

join with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 

welcoming Reed and Sheryl Ludwig, long-time constituents of 

the Rosthern-Shellbrook area living in Medstead and raising 

their family there. 

 

I would like to acknowledge both Reed and Sheryl because it is 

a team effort for their efforts in Movember. It has, as many 

people in this room can attest to, it is much more than just the 

man that takes part in Movember. But I would like to 

acknowledge them for having the largest amount raised in 

Saskatchewan, in Canada, and in the world as an individual. 

And your community and most definitely your province is 

proud of your efforts for this very worthwhile initiative. So 

thank you very much. And I would like all members of this 

Legislative Assembly to welcome both Reed and Sheryl 

Ludwig to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, requesting leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has asked 

for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

recognize and welcome a great friend to all of us, someone that 

we all care for, that’s Mr. Ben Walsh. 

 

Of course we’ve had the Ben Walsh tie auction that’s been 

ongoing here this week, and many bids have come in from both 

sides of the Assembly. It has in fact, without any great surprise, 

has ended in a tie, Mr. Speaker. And that tie will be, is awarded 

to the member from Saskatoon Sutherland here today, Mr. 

Speaker, a bid of $325 that will go directly to the Regina and 

District Food Bank, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the spirit of the season, I’ve spoken with the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. We’ve agreed that we would challenge 

our caucus colleagues to step forward with a donation or to 

consider making a donation themselves. There’s envelopes on 

the desk of the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. He’ll be 

circulating those through the beginning of proceedings, and 

we’ll be doing the same on this side here. And we’ll be making 

a presentation to the Regina District Food Bank, recognizing 

the need that exists. 

 

I would like to thank our Sergeant-at-Arms, our security staff, 

our commissionaires, specifically Mr. Moe Riou and 

specifically Mr. Guy MacDougall, for their support of this 

initiative, urging the bidding and for the goodwill extended by 

so many MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in this 

Assembly. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask all the members to thank Mr. Ben Walsh for the 

contribution of his tie that I suspect will have generated quite a 

few dollars by the end of today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to take the 

opportunity to introduce a group of 13 grade 5 students from 

the Harvest City Christian Academy. Give us a wave. 

Excellent. I’m looking forward to have an opportunity to 

talking with them a little bit later. I already met them in the 

rotunda. And with them today is their teacher, Mrs. Justine 

Glover. Give us a wave. And also the parent chaperone for 

today is Katherine Gagne. And no stranger to the education 

system; she’s the Chair of the Regina Public School Board. So 

nice to see you, Katherine. 

 

I’ll be looking forward to having a chat with the students, 

probably in an hour. And make sure not to stump me, all right, 

kids? It’s going to be easy. I’d like to offer our welcome from 

the Legislative Assembly to this group of kids. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

join with the member opposite and welcome the group of 

students and teacher that’s here today from Harvest City and 

Johnson, but most importantly here today, the Chair of Regina 

Public Schools, Ms. Katherine Gagne, who’s joined us here 

today. Thank you for your service to the people of our city and 

our province and to students in Regina public schools. And of 

course everyone here would know that Ms. Gagne has long 

roots back to this Assembly. And I believe at one point in time 

her father sat just right about right here, Mr. Speaker, and has 

occupied various chairs in this Assembly. So welcome to your 

Assembly and thank you for your work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to the House in the west gallery, a group of 55 grade 12 

students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate, their chaperones today, 

their teachers Donarae Deringer, Mandy Crossman, Shelby 

Hersberger. They’ve been at the Assembly three times since 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2423 

I’ve been elected only in one year. So it’s good to see them 

again. I look forward to having a chat with them after question 

period. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — I’d like to take this opportunity to 

introduce, in the Speaker’s gallery, Lynn Madsen of Wauchope, 

Redvers area and from RM [rural municipality] No. 32, which 

is my RM . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m there very often. 

I’m getting heckled. 

 

Lynn’s wife, Yolanda, is attending a math conference in the 

city. And this is Lynn’s first visit to the legislature since he was 

in university some decades ago. I would ask that members 

welcome Lynn to his Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to rise today to present a petition on cellphone coverage 

for northwestern Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along with 

the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nations, along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the people that have signed the petition are all 

from throughout northwestern Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 

as a whole. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of people from across our province 

as it relates to concern over our finances. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting, reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Lloydminster, Cut Knife, Regina, and Humboldt. I so submit. 

 

[10:15] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

National Day of Remembrance and Action on 

Violence Against Women 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène Colgan, Nathalie 

Croteau, Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward, Maud 

Haviernick, Maryse Laganière, Maryse Leclair, Anne-Marie 

Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, Annie St-Arneault, 

Annie Turcotte, and Barbara Klucznik-Widajewicz. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the names of the 14 women that were 

murdered on December 6th, 1989 at l’École Polytechnique in 

Montreal. On this day, the National Day of Remembrance and 

Action on Violence Against Women, we remember these 

women, along with many others who have been murdered, hurt, 

or violated just because they are women. 

 

This devastating demonstration of misogyny happened 23 years 

ago. And, Mr. Speaker, Canada is still not a safe place for 

women. Fifty per cent of Canadian women will face 

gender-based violence in their lifetime, and the majority of 

these women will experience this violence before they turn 25. 

What is worse is the staggering count of missing and murdered 

Aboriginal women in our county. This not only points to a 

deep-seated pattern of violence against women but also a 

deep-seated pattern of racist violence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we owe it to these 14 women and their families to 

use this day as a mirror in our own lives to reflect on the 

violence against women that still occurs. On a personal note, 

my good friend’s granddaughter is growing up without her 

mother who was murdered in Saskatoon six years ago. Daleen 

Bosse is missed every day by her families, and her daughter 

Faith is a living reminder of the impact of violence against 

women. This one’s for Faith. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to remind all members that this is the International Day of 

Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. 

December 6th marks the anniversary of the 1989 murders of 14 

female engineering students at l’École Polytechnique in 

Montreal, the act of gender-based violence that shocked the 

world. I’d like to thank the member opposite for reading their 

names into our history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, violence against women and girls happens in 

every region, country, and culture, including here in 

Saskatchewan. In between April the 1st, 2011 and March 31st 

of this year, more than 1,700 women and girls in Saskatchewan 

entered emergency shelter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us have the right to live in safety. That’s 



2424 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

why our government supports many programs and services 

delivered by community-based organizations that help people 

experience interpersonal violence. Today my colleagues and I 

are wearing white ribbons as a symbol of our pledge to work 

towards a future with no violence against women and girls. 

 

We are also showing our support for men and boys who must 

actively participate as allies in solving this problem. I ask that 

we also take time today to remember the women who live daily 

with the threat of violence and commit ourselves to helping 

them however way we can. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise with a thankful heart for 

the statements made by the two members previous. And I rise 

today on behalf of the official opposition to state that it’s the 

National Day for Remembrance and Action on Violence 

Against Women, and I rise to acknowledge the role that men 

have to play in making sure that this terrible thing in our society 

shouldn’t continue to grow, Mr. Speaker, but should be, should 

be, should be everything we should do against it as a society 

should be brought to bear. And I recognize today, Mr. Speaker, 

the special role that men have to play in this equation. 

 

And I rise today to recognize those people, those men that stood 

forward to bring the White Ribbon campaign to the attention of 

the public, to do their part, to take the pledge to do what they 

could to stand against violence against women, to recognize the 

role that men play in violence against women, and to recognize 

that not just as a society we have to do better on this, Mr. 

Speaker, but we as men have a particular responsibility to do 

our part. 

 

I’m glad that members today are wearing that white ribbon 

showing their support for putting an end to the violence against 

women, not just men but women. And, Mr. Speaker, if we can 

do that together as men and women, if men can recognize their 

special responsibility in this, I think we’ll be a whole lot better 

off as a world. And the kind of heartache represented and the 

kind of loss and tragedy referenced by the two members 

previous, may that come to an end and may we all do our part 

in that way. May we as men take that pledge and do our part as 

well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Care & Share Program 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d first of all like 

to thank my colleagues on both sides of the House for their 

moving statements this morning. 

 

I rise in the House today to recognize an outstanding Saskatoon 

business-based partnership, the Care & Share program 

developed over 15 years ago in an effort to partner local 

business with inner-city schools. This program began with my 

mother, Marie, and my father, Ted, working with local 

businesses to partner with Saskatoon community schools to 

provide a Christmas meal as well as assisting the school with its 

ongoing needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most recent Care & Share partner involves 

Alliance Energy of Saskatoon and Mayfair Community School. 

After touring the school in September, Alliance was determined 

to rewire the school kitchen, add a new dishwasher, a proper 

countertop, and a row of cupboards. Mr. Speaker, Alliance went 

above and beyond their generosity and donated $3,000 for the 

school for miscellaneous needs. They will also be providing a 

few of their young electricians to train a senior class at Mayfair 

that will teach students how to build a lamp, with Alliance 

Energy providing all of the materials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during this Christmas season it is especially 

gratifying to hear Saskatoon businesses going the extra mile to 

lend a helping hand in the community. 

 

I ask that all members join me in thanking Alliance Energy and 

all the businesses who have participated with the Care & Share 

program over the last 15 years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Community Shows the Spirit of Giving 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, far too 

often we hear of a very young child being diagnosed with 

cancer. Such is the case for 11-month-old Peyton Wagner. 

Peyton was recently diagnosed with a type of cancer that is 

present in many parts of her body, and she has already 

undergone one round of chemotherapy. 

 

As you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, these are very difficult days 

for her parents, Nicky and Danny Wagner. As many 

communities do in a case like this, my hometown of Cupar has 

rallied around this family to support them. A trust account has 

been opened and already $30,000 has been raised. 

 

Last Friday evening over 300 people crammed into the 

community hall to support the Wagner family. The Lions Club 

sold beef on a bun, two silent auctions and a live auction took 

place, and at the end of the evening, Mr. Speaker, over $56,000 

was raised for the Wagner family. 

 

Although this event took place in the season of giving, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t believe that the timing of this event had 

anything to do with the generosity of the community since, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that the Christmas spirit and the spirit of 

giving is alive and well in this great province of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

National Day of Remembrance and Action on 

Violence Against Women 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, in lieu of the next member’s 

statement, I would ask that all members stand in a moment of 

silence in recognition of the women that lost their lives in 1989 

in Montreal. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2425 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 

 

Christmas Message 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker Mr. Speaker, Christmas 

is a special time of the year. It is a season filled with joy and 

anticipation. We all look forward to the gathering of family and 

friends, the enjoyment of good food, and the giving of gifts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Christmas story is also a message of hope, 

peace, and joy for each and every one of us. I believe Anthony 

Kelly penned it well when he said: 

 

There’s this Christmas song on the radio 

As you fight through the traffic and snow. 

But are you listening, are you listening? 

They’re singing about bringing joy to the world 

There’ll be presents for all the good boys and girls. 

But are you listening, are you listening? 

Someone’s ringing bells at the corner store 

They’re collecting coins to give to the poor. 

But are you listening, are you listening? 

There’s an ancient tale being told again 

About a boy being born in Bethlehem. 

But are you listening, are you listening? 

While the angels sang on that day 

It was long ago and so far away. 

Someone was listening, shepherds were listening. 

And the message of hope was so loud and clear 

Sung for every age for all to hear. 

But are you listening? 

Are you listening to what is being said? 

It was written down and it’s meant to be read 

It says, “Peace on earth, goodwill to men.” 

But I ask you, friend 

Have you really been listening? 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you, the members of this Assembly, their 

families, the people of Saskatchewan, Merry Christmas and a 

Happy New Year. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Performance of Government 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This has been a 

session where the Sask Party has delivered unwelcome 

surprises for the people of Saskatchewan. In the past year, 

they’ve gutted the entire film industry. They’ve returned to 

their 2003 ideology of privatizing the Crowns, starting with ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], and they 

brought in a massive overhaul of labour laws. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier didn’t mention this ideological agenda in his platform 

or his booklet or the Throne Speech. Why has the Sask Party 

used this session to introduce so many unwelcome surprises for 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for the question. I think it’s reasonable to review this 

fall session, Mr. Speaker, in the light of the growth plan that 

was released by the government just a few days before we 

began. The growth plan formed really the largest part of the 

Speech from the Throne. And, Mr. Speaker, our government 

has now undertaken to keep the commitments that we made in 

the growth plan, which can be really summarized in two ways: 

(1) that we’re going to do everything we can on this side of the 

House to sustain the unprecedented growth that we see in the 

province of Saskatchewan today, because growth is a good 

thing; and (2) that we meet the challenges that come along with 

growth. There are challenges that are new in this province that 

we haven’t seen before; ones that we welcome versus the 

challenges of decline that we used to face in the past, but they 

must be dealt with. They relate to infrastructure. They relate to 

housing. They relate to the labour shortage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the measures taken already just in this early part of the 

session we’re in — it’ll continue this spring — indicate that this 

government is committed to implementing that growth plan, to 

sustaining growth in this province, to ensuring that it is a leader 

for years to come, and also that we would deal with the 

challenges of growth and ensure that the people of this province 

are sharing in the prosperity. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier neglects to mention 

all of the surprises that came in this session. The Sask Party 

said they wouldn’t spend a dime on the labour review, but they 

went back on their word and spent more than half a million 

dollars. They said they wouldn’t privatize the Crowns, but out 

of nowhere came this sale of ISC even though the Premier 

himself has swore he wouldn’t be a privatization Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they said they would admit their mistakes and 

work to fix them, but when it comes to the film industry, they 

refuse to admit that they put ideology ahead of common sense. 

They won’t admit a single mistake, Mr. Speaker. Why has the 

Sask Party failed to own up to its mistakes? Why have they 

failed to lead an honest, accountable government for the people 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this is the same 

line of questioning we’ve seen from the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] now for a number of weeks. It’s all related to surprises. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can understand, as the NDP look around 

the province today and look around the government today, that 

they would be surprised, that they would see things that maybe 

they thought when they sat on these benches that would never 

happen in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That there would be 80,000 new people living in this province 

in just five years, that’s quite a surprise, Mr. Speaker. That 

there would be 37,000 new jobs created in this province in just 

five years, I think that caught them by surprise. I don’t think 

they thought that might happen in Saskatchewan. I don’t think 

they ever believed that this province would move out of the 

middle of the pack or the back of the pack in Confederation to 

lead this country in almost every economic category. I think 

that caught them by surprise. I think record investment in 

highways caught them by surprise. I think 900 more nurses 



2426 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

serving in this province caught them by surprise. I think more 

doctors practising in Saskatchewan caught them by surprise. 

 

They never thought it would happen when they sat on this side 

of the House, but that too has changed, Mr. Speaker, and that I 

think has been a pleasant surprise. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

waited until the last hours of this session for the Sask Party to 

table their labour legislation. And after six months and over half 

a million dollars of expenses, they still haven’t finished their 

work. And we still have the essential services fiasco on top of 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in committee the minister said the Sask Party 

needs yet another 200,000 for spin and PR [public relations] to 

convince a province of something they didn’t ask for. Mr. 

Speaker, clearly the best way to use any further resources on 

this labour bill would be to allow workers a chance to give their 

opinions to the minister himself and not just through a website 

or his email address. Mr. Speaker, will the minister get out of 

this marble palace and meet with the people of Saskatchewan, 

hold open and public consultations this spring for real feedback 

from working people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

question. To the member opposite and to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, I’m pleased to say we’ve held a large number of 

meetings in different parts of the province. And I can also add, 

Mr. Speaker, that we’ve received correspondence; we’ve acted 

on the correspondence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite seems to be preoccupied 

with a lot of things on this. Yesterday he did an interview on 

CJME, and I quote from Don Saxon, the announcer: 

 

An overhaul to the province’s labour laws has the NDP 

concerned about unions are being weakened. David 

Forbes wonders what the Wall government is hiding in 

fine print with all this legislation rolled into one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I quote the member’s response: 

 

. . . a former set of bills that were easily understood 

because they had titles, and you knew the minimum wage 

was under The Minimum Wage Act. Clearly you have a 

situation where they’re all rolled in together. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, who is a former Labour 

minister, ought to have known The Minimum Wage Act was 

repealed in 1969. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Very, very clever. Mr. Speaker, I understand, I 

understand the provincial government has just released its new 

Rights and Responsibilities: A Guide to Labour Standards here 

in Saskatchewan — another surprise just in time for the holiday 

season. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sections of this guide appear to be based on the 

new Saskatchewan employment Act that hasn’t even been 

passed yet. Specifically the section I refer to is the Sask Party’s 

surprise, in the surprise guide, is in regards to layoffs, but there 

may be other such surprises in this new guide. The Sask Party 

didn’t bother tabling the legislation until a few days ago. It 

hasn’t revealed the complete set of regulations needed to fully 

inform us of the details of the legislation. But certainly they 

seem to have had the time to rewrite the guide to labour 

standards that appears to be based at least on the new 

legislation. 

 

To the minister: is this government so arrogant that it thinks it 

can do whatever it wants, whatever it wants, including enacting 

a new guide for employers before their labour legislation is 

scrutinized and passed in this legislature? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the members 

opposite wanting to raise questions and ask questions, and we’ll 

certainly work through all of those as we go forward in the next 

few months. We will look at their questions on an individual 

basis, and we will look at them with some sense of wanting to 

do the right thing with all the issues they raise. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to put the member’s issue in context. 

On the 5th of December, a reporter asked the member opposite: 

 

Some of the other concerns that you mentioned yesterday 

when you spoke to the press is now employers would be 

allowed to pay their employees with payment cards. Is that 

a real broad concern? Are we sort of nitpicking now? 

 

The member from Saskatoon Centre replies, “I think we are 

into a bit of nitpicking.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question, and I will take the 

question seriously, Mr. Speaker, but I think we’re now getting 

into a fair bit of nitpicking. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Information Services Corporation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this session saw the 

surprising return to the 2003 Sask Party ideology of 

privatization at any cost in a move no one voted for. The Sask 

Party trotted out its privatization legislation. Seems that 

government spent its summer pondering their own policies and 

were nostalgic for privatization of one of the Crowns. Why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because the Sask Party has repeatedly put ideology 

ahead of common sense. Saskatchewan people stand to lose 

tens of millions of dollars of dividends from ISC, all so the 

Sask Party can launch a fire sale, hoping to temporarily plug the 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2427 

fiscal hole they’ve created. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party privatizing ISC when they 

didn’t campaign on it, they didn’t put it in their ideas booklet, 

and they didn’t include it in the Throne Speech? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that ISC is in a very good position. It’s been 

serving the people of Saskatchewan very well. We think these 

services could be broadened, not only across Saskatchewan but 

other jurisdictions in Canada and internationally. Mr. Speaker, 

in fact the former government, the NDP, felt that very same 

thing. They tried to sell ISC. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would say it is an ideology of this 

government that when a company is working as well as ISC is, 

is that we should probably see if it can grow outside the 

province. The ideology of the NDP was to try and sell a 

company that was not functioning very well, Mr. Speaker, and 

then go out and buy companies for exorbitant prices, such as 

Navigata and every other company that they tried to buy, and 

then sell very low. That was the NDP ideology. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure where the minister 

bought his broken record of this party trying to sell ISC. That 

never occurred, it was never intended, and it didn’t happen. The 

minister would rather walk away from the millions of dollars of 

profits for ISC just for the sake of ideology. It doesn’t make any 

sense. The Sask Party’s own Crown dividend policy requires 90 

per cent of the dividends of ISC to return to the people to help 

pay for valuable services. Under the new privatized model, the 

people of Saskatchewan don’t have the same guarantees. In fact 

they may not receive a penny in dividends under the new 

corporate structure. 

 

Since the Sask Party has returned to its ideology of 

privatization, what’s next, Mr. Speaker? How many more 

Crowns is the Sask Party contemplating selling in the spring? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone through this 

many, many times but it is very curious why the NDP would 

not only have ISC in their Crown protection legislation and 

then take it out at hour 11 just before it goes into the House. So 

they took that out, Mr. Speaker. At the same time they did an 

evaluation of ISC, Mr. Speaker, to see what it would be worth. 

Very, very curious. 

 

But do you know what is more curious, Mr. Speaker, is when 

the Leader of the Opposition, with his photographic memory, 

who sat on the legislative instruments committee, could have no 

recollection that ISC was in and now ISC was out, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we can coin this session, the end of session, on a 

lot of different things, Mr. Speaker, and a lot of different 

phrases, but I would like to coin this session on the session that 

John forgot. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Reporting and State of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor said clearly 

that the Sask Party needs to stop its improper creative 

accounting with the people’s money. She said the Sask Party 

books were “misleading,” “wrong,” and “contained errors.” 

Unlike this government, other provinces have progressed, 

stepped up, and made changes to use proper accounting. Now 

this Sask Party government is out of line with the rest of 

Canada, out of line with public sector accounting standards, and 

out of line with common sense, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, why 

is the Sask Party clinging to and defending books that the 

auditor has called misleading? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the 

record for the people of Saskatchewan the actual timetable for 

when things changed in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, up until 2004-2005 when the NDP were in 

government, Mr. Speaker, there were one set of books. They 

were the General Revenue Fund. And, Mr. Speaker, the auditor, 

along with the Saskatchewan Party, lobbied that the then NDP 

government, that they needed to move towards summary 

financial budgeting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in 2004-05, as I indicated in this House already once, Mr. 

Speaker, the government moved. The government of the day, 

the NDP, introduced summary financial statements. Mr. 

Speaker, those two systems have been in place since introduced 

by the NDP. We continue to follow the same two systems, Mr. 

Speaker. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that with the summary 

financial statement depicting the entire financial picture of 

government, it is in fact supported by the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the public isn’t just 

concerned by the unacceptable accounting of this government. 

They’re also concerned with the management of our books — 

three consecutive deficits masqueraded as surpluses by that 

government; $1 billion more debt this year alone; 

overestimating resource revenues by more than $400 million; 

and a government that’s scrambling with short-sighted moves, 

including the sell-off of a profitable Crown corporation, ISC, 

affordable homes, and land; a costly private infrastructure 

scheme; broken promises that mean hiding debt on school 

boards and universities, ultimately students paying the price. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why won’t that Sask Party serve the people of the 

province instead of their own petty, partisan self-interest? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we do both systems. We do the summaries and 



2428 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

we do the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker, and in fact, in 

an article in the Public Accounts Committee of May 2011, I 

want to quote, and this is the quote, and it says this: 

 

The NDP held the very same position as the Saskatchewan 

Party government does now [that there is a place for the 

General Revenue Fund and summary financial statements] 

and we held that position for five years [as I’ve indicated]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the quote is by Pat Atkinson, the former NDP 

leader. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at what the member opposite is 

claiming, he’s claiming that in fact there’s some degree of 

secrecy. Mr. Speaker, we have two systems. We have two sets 

of books that are very understood by the public of 

Saskatchewan. There’s a General Revenue Fund operating 

budget and there’s a summary financial statement, Mr. Speaker. 

Anyone can understand that. The auditor has indicated that the 

summary financial statements are reliable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — “Wrong,” “misleading,” and “contain 

errors”: that’s the words of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 

Every other province has progressed while that government 

stuck its head in the sands. That government has put more effort 

into its own spin and billboards than putting forward a sound 

fiscal plan. They cherry-pick the numbers and manipulate the 

story they want to tell. While municipalities’ debts skyrocket, 

while universities’ and school boards’ debts skyrocket, while 

the Crown corporation debt skyrockets, while rate hikes are 

being forced upon families on their power bills, Mr. Speaker, 

while that government scrambles with selling off profitable 

Crown assets, that minister says, that Finance minister says 

everything is A-okay, Mr. Speaker. When will that government 

acknowledge the true financial state of this province and put 

forward a real plan that works for Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

What is being recognized across Canada, Mr. Speaker, is that 

Saskatchewan is the only province with a balanced budget. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not a secret. I was in Toronto on Monday and I 

met with the financial institutions and many have indicated that 

they are very, very pleased with the fact that Saskatchewan is in 

fact the only province with a balanced budget. The comment by 

Warren Lovely with CIBC World Markets is this. He says, 

“Consistent with its relative economic outperformance, 

Saskatchewan maintains a healthier budgetary position than 

other provinces.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand the NDP’s jealousy, the fact that the 

NDP planned for decline, Mr. Speaker. This is an opportunity 

for Saskatchewan people and we’re going to make sure that 

Saskatchewan remains number one, with a balanced budget. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Health Care for Refugees 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There have been a 

few instances this session, Mr. Speaker, when the government 

has responded constructively to an issue raised by the 

opposition. One example is the government’s response to 

refugee health care here in the province. 

 

I’d like to thank the Premier for his harsh words towards the 

Harper Conservatives on this issue and I’d like to thank the 

Health minister for stepping up and providing the coverage for 

the anti-nausea meds for the man in Saskatoon who was denied 

cancer care by the federal government. 

 

My question to the Health minister: beyond the harsh words 

that the Premier has had for the Harper Conservatives, what 

concrete steps has the Health ministry, is the minister currently 

taking to pressure the federal Conservatives to act in a manner 

that is based on compassion and that is based on common sense 

with respect to refugee health care here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, first of all, within the province, the Ministry of Health 

has communicated with all of our health regions to ensure that 

health regions and our Cancer Agency is continuing to provide 

coverage to refugees who are in Saskatchewan waiting for their 

refugee hearing and determining their status, future status. So, 

Mr. Speaker, we have communicated that information to health 

regions to ensure that emergent and urgent care is still provided, 

Mr. Speaker, along the lines of what other provinces — some 

other provinces, not all — are currently doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have followed up, written a letter to the federal 

Minister of Immigration asking, not only in this case, but 

similar cases, but as well as a review of the entire program, Mr. 

Speaker, and we await his reply. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I thank the minister for that information. Mr. 

Speaker, while I certainly agree with the minister’s approach in 

providing cancer care for this man after he was denied by the 

federal government, I don’t fully agree, Mr. Speaker, with the 

approach that the government has taken in providing care to 

refugees on a one-off basis. I think when care is provided on a 

one-off basis, it allows individuals to fall through the cracks. 

And the fact that the man who needed cancer care had to turn to 

charity to get the anti-nausea medication is a prime example of 

how people do fall through the cracks. 

 

Other provinces, as the minister suggests, have responded, Mr. 

Speaker, by filling the gap left by the federal Conservatives, 

namely Manitoba. My question to the minister: is it his opinion 

that the province will continue down the path of one-off 

addressing of issues for refugees who need health care, or are 

they prepared to fill the gap as other provinces have done? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is we 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2429 

are continuing to provide — as I think it’s important to note, as 

we did prior to this issue being raised in the House, prior to it 

even being public knowledge, Mr. Speaker — we’re continuing 

to provide care when it’s urgent and emergent, for example 

cancer care, Mr. Speaker. But we also want to make sure that 

we are working with Immigration Canada because there are a 

number of different programs that still exist where coverage is 

still provided — whether that be physician care, and other types 

of care — that have not for some refugees been removed by the 

federal government. 

 

So in terms of working one by one or one-offs, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s the way that we will continue to progress because there is 

still some coverage, but it’s determined by that specific 

individual’s circumstance, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll continue to 

work with the federal government in pushing this issue forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, coverage is provided for the 

cancer care, as the minister said, and that is, thank goodness, 

there for the man who needs the care. But the fact that the 

anti-nausea meds were not covered, as we’ve discussed here in 

the House and through the media, Mr. Speaker, put the man in a 

situation that is not humane, that is not compassionate. And 

that’s because there was a one-off approach. Does the minister 

recognize that people fall through the cracks when there is a 

one-off approach? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we want to make sure that individuals that need 

medical attention in this province while they’re awaiting their 

refugee status hearing, Mr. Speaker, that they do not fall 

through the cracks. And that’s why the deputy minister of 

Health has had discussions with all of our health regions to 

ensure that our health regions are paying close attention to any 

of these situations that do arise. Mr. Speaker, fortunately I think 

we are not talking about a large number of individuals that may 

fall in these situations. But we’ve asked our health regions to 

pay close attention so that we can provide that medical care 

when it is needed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Asbestos in Public Buildings 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another issue where 

the government responded in a constructive manner, going part 

of the distance, was with respect to the call for an asbestos 

registry here in Saskatchewan, in order to ensure that the public 

has all the information they need to make informed decisions 

about their health and the health of their families. Yesterday, 

Mr. Speaker, the Cancer Society was here in the Assembly to 

lend their support to the call for legislation, legislation that 

would make the registry mandatory and comprehensive, two 

very important aspects, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: while it’s the last day of the 

sitting, Mr. Speaker, there is still time to do the right thing. The 

opposition co-operated earlier this week in passing an RESP 

[registered education savings plan] bill in one day. We can do 

the right thing, Mr. Speaker. My question to the minister: what 

is the government’s position on the establishment of an 

asbestos registry through legislation that is mandatory, that is 

comprehensive, and will the Sask Party government pass this 

legislation today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question 

from the member opposite. I had indicated earlier that I had met 

with the family of the late Mr. Willems and I appreciate the 

positions that they are putting forward. We are working with 

the ministry officials to determine what best practices are with 

regard to asbestos, not just with regard to a registry but by way 

of signage, notification, and removal processes. We may well 

want to do something by way of an update and do that in 

recognition of Mr. Willems’s contribution. 

 

With regard to a legislated registry, we want to look and see 

what information is available. The information is coming in 

from various government agencies. And, Mr. Speaker, I can 

advise the members opposite, in some cases it has greater detail 

and it has sub-links on the page which provide specific 

information. So we may want to look and see how we may want 

to advance that. I certainly wouldn’t want to rule out having a 

mandated registry but I’d like to work with all of the agencies 

that are affected, not just government but also within other 

semi-government sectors, health care agencies as well as school 

boards and the like. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Mineral Administration Registry Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today 

Saskatchewan is taking a major technological step forward that 

will mark an important milestone in the history of mineral 

development in Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to inform the House 

of the launch of the mineral administration registry 

Saskatchewan better know as the MARS system, that will take 

the mineral land acquisition into the electronic age. 

 

Today is the go-live date for MARS. It’s Saskatchewan’s first 

web-based system for ensuring mineral . . . for issuing mineral 

dispositions. From now on, all staking will be done online from 

a computer any time, anywhere in the world. MARS system 

will allow industry to easily manage mineral dispositions using 

state of the art information technology. 

 

The former claim-staking system was modelled on one that 

existed in Eastern Canada prior to settlement. The new system 

will alleviate a number of problems, including delays over the 

issuance of claims, especially during staking rushes; uncertainty 

over the location of claim boundaries in unsurveyed areas; 

disputes over the order of priority of claim applications. 

 

Offering services through online programs is a major step that 



2430 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

will allow . . . that will make the difference between those that 

move ahead and those that are left behind. Our province plans 

to move ahead. 

 

The ability of industry to redirect savings from physical ground 

staking into actual investments in mineral exploration is a key 

to both the companies and the province. MARS will also offer 

industry a 24-7 self-service for a wide variety of activities 

relating to disposition administration, including transferring the 

ownership and submitting work from expenditures. 

 

Mining is increasingly important to the Saskatchewan 

economy, directly contributing 20 per cent to our provincial 

exports. It employs more than 30,000 people, both directly and 

indirectly. Mineral exploration expenditures for 2012 are 

estimated to be about $325 million. I’d like to express my 

gratitude to the Saskatchewan Mining Association, the MARS 

focus group, and those who participated in the training 

programs for their valuable contribution to making the MARS 

system a reality today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you to the minister for his comments. I just would like to 

respond by first of all commenting on the amazing notion that 

you can now stake mineral claims in your pyjamas, having 

coffee in the comfort of your own home. This is truly a 

significant change in mineral staking in Saskatchewan. So we 

can all now become mineral stakers. You don’t even have to go 

out of your house, and you can actually make a claim. I think 

that’s a significant accomplishment, and it shows the 

importance of the electronic age and how we do business, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And indeed the whole notion of the MARS system actually 

came out of the ISC system and their cadastral layer for the 

province, actually using GIS [geographic information system] 

to create a cadastral layer of both the surface of land rights in 

Saskatchewan but also the mineral layer. And a part of my 

work in my former job was to work on the mineral layer as a 

representative of the federal Crown, and we actually saw a lot 

of effort being put into improving the quality of Information 

Services Corporation’s mineral cadastral layer simply because 

it was incomplete under the old paper system. 

 

One of the things that’s a key feature of Information Services 

Corporation’s suite of responsibilities is something called the 

abstract directory, and that’s not a land registry. It’s an abstract 

directory, and that abstract directory is actually the repository 

of all the Crown interests that we see still in the control of the 

Crown either federally or provincially. 

 

And one of the things I think that we need to be concerned 

about with the conversion of ISC to private interests is that this 

abstract directory, which is a representation of all the Crown 

holdings, will now be managed by a private corporation. And 

that’s not something I think that was intended certainly at the 

time when the land registries were created and certainly the 

land surveys registry. I think the way that MARS came about 

— and I was involved at the beginning of it through my work, 

Mr. Speaker — was that it is a direct reflection of the work of 

land titles and the land registry people over at ISC and the good 

public servants that are working there managing our Crown 

holdings. 

 

And it’s truly, I think, a tribute to the work of those people, and 

it’s a tribute to the efforts of the good folks over at Energy and 

Resources who saw an opportunity when ISC LAND [land 

titles automated network development] system came along. 

They said, you know what? Mr. Speaker, we can do this. We 

can do this with our mining staking system, and we see other 

advancements being made with the PRIME [process renewal 

and infrastructure management enhancement] project as well. 

 

So congratulations, I think, on this amazing achievement. It’s 

an important milestone, as the minister indicated. And also I 

want to extend congratulations to the very hard work of the 

good people over at Energy and Resources for making this a 

reality and for the inspiration that the ISC people have been in 

this type of technology. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It being the final 

day prior to the adjournment of the House for the Christmas 

season, I would ask for leave to make a statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a statement regarding the final day of the fall 

session. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

An Expression of Thanks 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

this is the last day that we’ll be in session for the next couple of 

months, I would like to take the opportunity on behalf of the 

government to express thanks to those that make it possible for 

all of us to do our jobs here in the legislature. 

 

First are our spouses and families. We are here long hours, Mr. 

Speaker, as you well know, working over the course of that 

period of time both here and in the constituency as well. And I 

think it’s very proper and apt that we recognize the sacrifices 

that our spouses, our families make in order for us to be 

servants to the people and do our jobs. 

 

I also want to very much thank the staff here in the building. 

Your staff, Mr. Speaker, the Clerks that do such a great job for 

us, the Pages, Sergeant-at-Arms, visitor services, the 

maintenance personnel — all of whom do their job with a great 

deal of pride and a great deal of professionalism. And it’s 

something that I know all of us here in the Chamber really, 

really appreciate. 

 

[11:00] 

 

I’d like to thank our staffs, whether that be in the constituency 

office who do some great work for all of us, the staff in the 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2431 

ministers’ offices, and all of those that really do make it 

possible for us to do our job here in the Assembly. 

 

I want to thank my friend, the Opposition House Leader, for the 

very productive and professional relationship that we’ve 

developed over the course of the last year-plus. We actually got 

to the point of joking this morning, Mr. Speaker, about perhaps 

staging some sort of incident which may have been reminiscent 

of what happened in another Chamber, but decided, decided 

against that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I do just want to say Merry Christmas to everybody here in 

the Assembly, here in the building, those that work for us in our 

constituencies, and to all the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Merry Christmas, Happy New Year, and have a 

safe season. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to respond to the statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a statement regarding the final day of the fall 

session. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess I just want to start off by saying thank you very much to 

everybody and Merry Christmas. I want to get in to the record 

my appreciation for the relationship that exists between the 

sides in terms of open line of communication and being as good 

as your word in the dealings. And not to give away too many 

secrets of what makes that run, Mr. Speaker, but the 

Government House Leader has undertaken not to yell and swear 

and threaten me, and I in return have undertaken not to threaten 

him with my leader. 

 

But in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, these are the things that 

need to be done between the sides in order to make sure that the 

process is addressed and works for the bringing forward of the 

people’s business, which is why we’re all here. The government 

of course has a mandate to bring that business forth and the 

opposition certainly at this stage of the cycle, Mr. Speaker, has 

a responsibility to provide that scrutiny, to hold that 

government to account for those measures. 

 

And of course as has been said, Mr. Speaker, to do those 

important jobs that the people have sent us here to do, Mr. 

Speaker, it takes a lot of sacrifice on the part of friends and 

family, for which we are very appreciative. It takes a lot of 

support and sacrifice as well from staff, both on the different 

sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, but certainly the people that 

make this place go. From the Speaker’s office to the Clerk’s 

office to everyone that, you know, from the library to the 

cafeteria and back again, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people 

that make this thing possible. There are a lot of people that put 

in some long hours, and they’re very devoted to providing that 

excellent service. And for that, Mr. Speaker, we are thankful. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of not just the staff in the 

building, but I know for myself and I know this is the 

experience for members across the House, those staffers that 

are keeping the constituency offices rolling and making sure 

that the needs are being addressed as they’re brought forward 

by constituents, for that we are thankful as well. 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, to get back to where I’d started in 

terms of wishing everyone a Merry Christmas — Christmas, as 

the member from Moosomin on an annual basis reflects very 

well in terms of the spirit of the season, this time of hope and of 

celebration. But also, Mr. Speaker, these are times when it can 

be particularly hard for folks that are missing a loved one and 

they have that seat at the table that goes unfilled. But certainly 

in these circumstances, Mr. Speaker, we wish for healing and 

for the good memories to rise to the fore. And for the heartache 

that is there, that that may fade. But certainly that everyone has 

themselves a merry Christmastime. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, again on behalf of the opposition, 

thank you and Merry Christmas. 

 

The Speaker: — Well at this time, since both the Government 

House Leader and the Opposition House Leader have taken 

time to do their Christmas message, I will do likewise. 

 

I would like to thank the House leaders and all of the members 

for their co-operation in this session. I didn’t have to wear my 

voice out with too much responses to the members’ enthusiasm. 

I would like to thank the clerks: Mr. Putz, Mr. Ring, Ms. Lang, 

and Ms. Burianyk; and the committee staff for their service this 

session. Also our Pages: Sarah, Samantha, Rikki, Breanna, 

Lambry, and Joel for their help and their service to all of the 

members in the Chambers. 

 

I’d like to thank the House leaders and the Whips for the good 

job they have done. We didn’t have too much drama, and that’s 

always a good thing. I’d like to thank the staff in my office, 

Irene, Sheila, and Connie, as well as the staff in both the caucus 

and especially the House business staff in both of the caucus in 

ensuring that the business of the House was organized and 

moved forward in a professional manner. 

 

I’d like to thank all of the LAS [Legislative Assembly Service] 

staff, the staff in the ministerial offices, and the constituency 

office staff who are an integral part of this operation but that we 

don’t see on a regular basis when we’re in session. So I’d like 

to wish all of your families and you a Merry Christmas and a 

Happy New Year, and may you spend quality and loving time 

with your family. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table 

answers to questions no. 183 through 205. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

question 183 through 205. 

 



2432 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Investments in Education 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

delighted to help us move forward with the 75-minute debate, 

and at the close of my remarks I’ll offer the following motion: 

 

That the Assembly commend the government for its 

record investments in education after 16 years of NDP 

neglect. 

 

And as I say, I’ll get back to that towards the end of my 

remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start with a story from August of 1929. 

It’s August 22nd. It’s right here in our capital city. It’s in 

Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, we have a distinguished 

parliamentarian that’s just arrived by rail at that point here into 

Regina, into our capital, and that is Winston Churchill. And as 

he addresses a crowd downtown, he speaks directly of the cities 

of science that he’s seen, of the significance of Saskatchewan’s 

agriculture, of our natural resources, and our technology. And 

he identifies these aspects of our economy as being chariots that 

will help to drive forward prosperity on our prairies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of that was premised on the significance of 

education, certainly something that our first premier 

recognized, and the first government of this province, and has 

been recognized significantly since. Mr. Speaker, we’re very 

pleased with the progress that we’ve been able to make, with 

the knowledge and understanding that there’s a lot more to do. 

 

I thought what I’d do is speak a little bit about our support for 

post-secondary education and get into some student supports 

that we’ve put in place, also focusing on areas of investment 

that we’ve made regarding First Nations and Métis students. I’ll 

talk a little bit about student housing and some of the progress 

that we’ve made, some child care initiatives, and then some 

areas of innovation. I know that others will focus on our pre-K 

to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] system. I’ll touch briefly 

on that as well, as time permits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m especially pleased to say that as we reflect on 

the opportunity over the course of the last five years to serve 

the people of this province, we’ve had a $3.5 billion record 

investment for post-secondary education and skills training; 

$3.5 billion is an all-time record over the course of five years. 

What it’s allowed, Mr. Speaker, and there will be a number of 

statistics that come up, but it’s allowed us to make significant 

investments in institutions, which ultimately means that we’re 

investing in our faculty members and our lecturers, in our 

researchers, and in those running labs. Most especially it’s 

allowed us to make investments in our students and those that 

support our students. 

 

So for example, in 2007 as we came into office, funding for 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] was just over $118 million. We’ve increased that 

funding by more than 21 per cent. It’s now at over $143 

million. At the University of Regina, the funding in 2007 was 

just over $73 million. Today it’s over $100 million for a 38 per 

cent increase at the University of Regina in funding from this 

government. At the University of Saskatchewan in 2007 it was 

just over $208 million. Today it’s over $304 million, a 46 per 

cent increase. 

 

What we had promised in 2007, Mr. Speaker, was that we 

would increase operating funding by $125 million over the 

course of our first four years. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we increased 

funding by $274 million. We made promises, we kept promises, 

and we exceeded promises regarding support for our key 

post-secondary institutions. 

 

I think what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that on occasion 

from the other side there is a notion that the NDP would be 

considered the defender of the disadvantaged. But in fact what 

we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is that between 1994 and 2007 we 

saw an incredible onus and burden put on post-secondary 

students by the members opposite. So we saw tuition at the 

University of Regina go up by more than 88 per cent. We saw 

tuition go up between 1994 and 2007 under the NDP. We saw it 

go up at the University of Saskatchewan by more than 99 per 

cent. And again between 1994 and 2007, we saw it go up at 

SIAST by more than 260 per cent, having a dramatic effect and 

impact on students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve not only put real funding into our 

institutions; we’ve also put real support in place for our 

students in a number of ways. We can think about these as a 

continuum of support essentially stretching from the time that 

parents want to support their and encourage their children to go 

into post-secondary education. And we’ve seen recently, in 

passing legislation, the creation of the Saskatchewan advantage 

grant for education savings. 

 

We then, Mr. Speaker, have put in place the Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship to assist grade 12 graduates to help 

reduce the cost of tuition, where they are now eligible for a 

lifetime maximum of $2,000, that it’s applied directly to their 

tuition at $500 per year. That’s significant. It’s significant, Mr. 

Speaker, substantively. That is, it helps students and it helps 

their families. But it’s also symbolic. That is, it serves as a 

catalyst for parents and for counsellors and for friends to bring 

up the question, what are you going to do after you graduate? 

Because these dollars are right there ready for Saskatchewan 

grade 12 graduates to go to post-secondary education. 

 

We then put in place, Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago, the 

Saskatchewan innovation and opportunity scholarship that 

provides $3 million annually to match funding raised by 

post-secondary institutions. And we did that in response to 

requests by post-secondary institutions. That has offered real 

opportunities for more upper-year undergraduates and for 

graduate students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course we have in place the graduate retention program, 

the most aggressive youth retention program in the country. 

And along the way, again listening to feedback that we were 

receiving from the opposition but also from citizens, we went 

from just simply focusing on the retention — that is, making 

sure that Saskatchewan graduates actually stayed here in the 

province — but that we also used it as a recruitment vehicle, 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2433 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Today there are more than 40,000 graduates from 

Saskatchewan institutions and institutions across the country 

and around the world — more than 40,000 — that are 

benefiting from the graduate retention program, the most 

aggressive youth retention program in the country. That’s 

significant, Mr. Speaker, when we begin to think about the 

population growth of more than 80,000 people. This is helping 

foster and fuel that kind of population growth, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

also helping to send a strong message about the strength of 

Saskatchewan’s economy and the strength of our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we went beyond this. Mr. Speaker, we put in new 

dollars for student financial assistance — the first new dollars 

since 1994. We also listened directly to students, and that is we 

reduced the provincial student loan interest rate from where it 

was under the NDP to put it at prime. We eliminated the vehicle 

value from the calculation of student loans, and we allowed 

full-time students to earn as much as they could and to control 

their own schedule without being affected by student loans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the initiatives that we’ve 

undertaken to help foster and facilitate the success for students, 

helping to make sure that we can focus on excellence as well 

affordability and accessibility for students across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak directly about investments that 

we’ve made in partnership with some key partners that we 

have, and these partners are reflected right across our 

post-secondary system. Importantly in 2007 there were about 

13,000 students in our post-secondary and in our skills training 

programs — about 13,000, Mr. Speaker, out of about 72,000. 

Today that number is up over 15,000. We have seen an increase 

in enrolment at the post-secondary and skills training level by 

an additional 2,000 First Nations and Métis students. Along the 

way, we’ve seen an increase in funding for many of the key 

institutions that foster and facilitate their success. 

 

For example we’ve seen under this government a more than 38 

per cent increase in funding for SIIT, Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies, under this government. Compared to 

2007, we’ve seen an increase for First Nations University of 36 

per cent. At the Gabriel Dumont Institute, an increase of 34 per 

cent since 2007. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we see is that there 

have been millions of dollars put in every year, this current year 

being $47 million in direct investment for our First Nations and 

Métis education and employment supports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s just a small sampling of the kind of work 

through our partners that we think is helping to make a 

difference. We know there is more to do. In fact, most recently 

here within Regina, thanks to the leadership of the Regina & 

District Chamber of Commerce, we’ve worked with our 

post-secondary partners and especially with the Regina & 

District Chamber of Commerce to see a career expo that was 

focused on all nations with an emphasis on our First Nations 

and Métis people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than 1,000 people arrived and went through 

those doors. We had more than 50 employers and, Mr. Speaker, 

we know that jobs were on offer. We also know there were 

many conversations where young participants came and asked 

questions of employers and they were referred directly to the 

post-secondary and skills training initiatives and institutions 

right on the floor. Those are the kind of steps — 

grassroots-based, community-based — that are helping to make 

a difference here within the capital but right across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is significant. Its significance speaks to a 

historic reality that we’re also working to overcome that 

certainly exists for decades, but specifically between 1996 and 

2006 the gap in education completion rates between First 

Nations and non-Aboriginal groups in Saskatchewan actually 

grew. It was a lost decade between 1996 and 2006. From 1996 

to 2006 the gap in high school completion rates grew from 20 

per cent to 27 per cent for First Nations people and from 1996 

to 2006 the gap in post-secondary education grew from 17 per 

cent to over 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We know there is much 

more to do, Mr. Speaker, but we’re going to have to work to 

overcome lost decades like that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to highlight, and I know we don’t have 

much time left, a couple of other areas. I’d like to talk about the 

3,000 per cent increase — not 30 per cent increase, not 300 per 

cent increase, 3,000 per cent increase — over the course of five 

years in funding for student housing. When we think about 

communities like La Ronge and Meadow Lake and Prince 

Albert and Saskatoon and now with work getting under way 

right here at the University of Regina, Mr. Speaker, we know 

how significant it is. So when we think about the University of 

Saskatchewan and I think about being a student there, it was 

obvious and apparent a long time ago that there were new 

residences that were needed. 

 

Nothing was done under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. So what we did 

was pledged $15 million for what we anticipated would be 400 

beds and we said it had to be a public-private partnership, Mr. 

Speaker. Well that public-private partnership helped foster and 

facilitate a philanthropic gift to the university of millions of 

dollars. So it’s not 400 beds, Mr. Speaker. The university was 

able and capable of coming forward with the public-private 

partnership. We’ve been able to move forward, Mr. Speaker — 

more than 1,000 new beds on that campus alone — offering 

new opportunities we’re seeing again right across the province, 

knowing that there’s more to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more to talk about and we know that, 

Mr. Speaker, about some of the significant improvements and 

enhancements that we’ve made in child care, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

going to allow other speakers to do that because, Mr. Speaker, 

at this time, I’d like to move: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for its 

record investments in education after 16 years of NDP 

neglect. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone: 

 

That this Assembly commend the government for its 



2434 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

record investments in education after 16 years of NDP 

neglect. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m a 

little surprised and a little shocked about this motion. I 

shouldn’t say surprised really because it does continue the 

tradition of this government of its arrogance in face of a real 

problem that we are facing in Saskatchewan, that it actually 

would prefer to step back and pat itself on the back, 

congratulate itself, especially at this time of year, when we 

should all be resolving to do whatever we can to resolve the 

issues that are facing our young people in Saskatchewan. But 

what does this government choose to do but to give itself a little 

pat on the back as it’s closing down the session to say, aren’t 

we great? Aren’t we the best? Merry Christmas to us. 

 

You know, we’ve got a lot of work, a lot of work to do. And I 

found it really interesting that it took the member 12 minutes to 

actually acknowledge that there is some more work to be done 

— after 12 minutes of self-congratulations about we’ve done 

that, we’ve done this, you know. And they still continue over 

there with this arrogant attitude of what’s happening in our 

classrooms in Saskatchewan. And then they couple it with . . . 

Now they always love a little throw in the blame. It’s not our 

fault. It’s not our fault. It’s somebody else’s fault. Don’t blame 

us. Don’t blame us. 

 

And what the partners and the stakeholders and the educational 

system are saying, let’s get down to work. Let’s do something 

about this. We have the resources in this province. We are 

blessed with our natural resources. Things are going well. Let’s 

get to work. 

 

But not this government. It wants to celebrate all the things it’s 

done, rightly or wrongly, and paint this picture that everything 

is A-okay. And we see this arrogance. We saw it in question 

period today. We saw the Finance minister and other ministers 

who want to deny the comments that the auditor has made 

about how we keep track of our financial records. But no, no. 

It’s deny, deny, deny. We are doing great, and we look for 

outside validators. And they have a real method of spin and PR 

to make sure that everybody thinks everything is A-okay. Mr. 

Speaker, there is a lot of work to be done. There is a lot of work 

to be done. 

 

Are there some things that have happened that are good? You 

bet there are. There are. And I was actually surprised that the 

member didn’t raise today in Saskatoon I believe the St. Mary 

School is being opened. And that’s a really good example of a 

school being opened. But there are many other circumstances 

where there is work to be done. And we should congratulate the 

school boards and the people who have put those things 

together that we see schools being opened. 

 

But we see down the road, we see down the road, Pleasant Hill 

School, who’s being neglected, that actually was higher up the 

list of some other schools but got bumped off, got bumped off 

for no apparent reason. Other things, other schools moved 

ahead. And here we have the kind of circumstances we have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am deeply, deeply concerned about this 

motion, that it is so, so flawed and so inappropriate, so 

absolutely inappropriate, especially this time of year when we 

see families and communities looking at how can we instill a 

sense of hope and faith in our communities? And yet what this 

government does is go to the arrogant place, go to the 

big-blame place and not accept the responsibility it has as a 

government. 

 

And we know and when we talk, we can talk about some of the 

issues that are out there. You know, this government’s record of 

cutting educational assistance is real, is real. And we’ve gone 

through that a few years ago, and they love to deny that. And 

we can talk about how they’ve pushed school boards to the 

brink in terms of overcrowding, particularly in the large urban 

centres because schools are full to the brim. And they force 

school boards to make very difficult choices not knowing if this 

government would actually deliver on their PR. They keep 

waiting. They keep waiting. They’re being told that there’s 

financial support coming, and it doesn’t, doesn’t come. 

 

And there are some real, real issues out there, Mr. Speaker, and 

I’m surprised that the government over there didn’t bring 

forward a resolution in terms of for example issues around 

student bullying. That’s a real issue. That’s something that we 

have to come to terms with. And we can all work together to 

improve our student’s lives and the mental health of kids in our 

schools, and that’s critically important. But instead this 

government chooses to congratulate itself, to congratulate itself 

— how inappropriate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have some real concerns about that. And 

you know, the issues around bullying are not something to be 

downplayed because we know many, many students wrestle 

with that on a daily basis, and the social and mental health 

outcomes of that are real. And you know, one of the issues that 

we talk about, I can remember talking about it today in terms of 

physical, and physical abuse and violence against women. And 

we know we’ve got work to do. We have huge amounts of work 

to do. This is not a time to congratulate ourselves. This is a time 

to commit ourselves to further, further work. 

 

And you know, the other issue I want to just raise on that, on 

that point of course is the whole issue around suicides and 

young peoples’ suicides and how much more work there is to 

be done in that area. And clearly when this government instead 

chooses to talk about, chooses instead to talk about how good it 

is, how great it is . . . And young people are at real risks. When 

it comes to mental health and the tragedy of suicides and what 

that means for families at this time of year, is something . . . We 

have to do, we have to commit ourselves to doing as much as 

we can. So I just don’t think that it’s appropriate that we even 

be talking at this level about a government congratulating itself 

when there’s so much work to be done. 

 

And of course, you know . . . And I know we’ll talk more about 

this. But our member from Regina Rosemont and the work that 

he’s done around Shannen’s dream, and the whole thing about 

closing the gap in First Nations education, it’s not just the 

passing oh, it’s more work to be done. It’s not just a passing 

thing, Mr. Speaker. We have to seriously commit ourselves to 

this, seriously commit ourselves because of the lost potential, 

both in terms of economic contributions, whether it’s a job as 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2435 

the member alluded to, but also just having strong, healthy 

communities and strong, healthy families. This is a real, a real 

issue. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that he’s just not, he’s not dealing . . . 

This resolution does not deal with the reality of our 

communities. 

 

I want to take a moment too, Mr. Speaker . . . And it’s amazing 

how quickly time goes by. But we all had a chance to meet with 

our teachers on October 19th, and they shared this book. And I 

think this is a much more appropriate perspective or lens to take 

a look at what’s happening in our educational system. And I 

just want to say that I really think that the member missed the 

point. He chose to quote Churchill. And that’s kind of an 

interesting thing, you know, that a British politician from back 

in the ’30s and ’40s . . . And he’s often quoted. But I think that 

really, I think we have to think about what people are saying 

here in Saskatchewan, what some of the teachers are looking 

for. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And I think this is one that the teachers chose to frame the 

discussion when we talk about education. And it is, the true 

measure . . . And this is from the UNICEF [United Nations 

International Children’s Emergency Fund]:  

 

The true measure of a nation’s standing is how well it 

attends to its children — their health and safety, their 

material security, their education and socialization, and 

their sense of being loved, valued, and included in the 

families and societies into which they are born. 

 

So we’ve got a lot of work here, Mr. Speaker. And I know the 

government likes to trot out statistics and all the things that 

they’ve done, but this is a thing that we need. This is what we 

need to commit ourselves to doing. And it’s about eradicating 

poverty in our communities, supporting young children to make 

sure they have the best start in schools. And we’re seeing the 

report cards that are coming out, whether it’s Saskatoon Health 

Region and their disparities report, talking about kids need a 

stronger start to school and then they will do better. And so 

these are the kind of things that we need to deal with. And we 

need to do all we can to address bullying, suicides, mental 

health of our young people. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, clearly there is work to be done, but I 

cannot support this resolution. I think at this time of year, with 

Christmastime, it’s so incredibly arrogant that this government 

would even put forward a resolution to commend themselves on 

the work they’ve done in education when clearly there is much, 

much more work to be done. And we can all get behind that. 

We can all get behind that as we enter into the season ahead. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure 

to second the motion by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. Education is one of the cornerstones of the new 

Saskatchewan. Education is the future, not just for each 

individual but for our province and our country. Without 

education you cannot build the other cornerstones of our future. 

In fact you might say without education there is no future; there 

is only decline. 

 

The NDP was leading us down a spiralling path of decline. Mr. 

Speaker, under 16 years of the NDP, 176 schools were closed. 

Unbelievable — 176 schools were closed. And now the NDP 

tell us that we’re not doing it right. I would say we’re doing it 

right because the left didn’t work. 

 

For generations the standard graduation gift in Saskatchewan 

for a student leaving home was a suitcase because they were 

going to get a job. For decades and decades our largest and 

most precious export has been our children. The only positive 

outcome of this has been the Roughrider nation which spread 

from east to west following the exodus of former Saskatchewan 

youth who have yet remained faithful to the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders. You see, they would have rather stayed in 

Saskatchewan, but there were no jobs. 

 

Our government had to get the ball rolling at ground level. We 

introduced schools of opportunity which allowed schools slated 

for closure to remain open for up to three years to determine if 

economic activity in that region might result in increased 

enrolment. A brilliant move, Mr. Speaker, that let communities 

build on their own future. But this was just a starter of things to 

come. 

 

One of the biggest steps forward was the historic reduction of 

the education portion of property tax. Mr. Speaker, that one 

move saved the Saskatchewan taxpayers over 165 million. 

What had the former NDP done? And I quote former Premier 

Lorne Calvert at the 2003 SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] convention: “Our priority in tax reform 

for government over the next several years must be the matter 

of the funding of education.” And then he said, and again I 

quote, “. . . the status quo is not on.” What really happened after 

that was the status quo was on, and there was no tax relief. RMs 

finally went into tax revolution. They couldn’t take any more 

NDP taxes. The whole system was collapsing. Without jobs, we 

had less people. With less people, we couldn’t afford our 

education. Without education, we were in decline. 

 

Education is the cornerstone and must be built upon. Education 

is now a lot more complex than years ago. When people my age 

attended university, they stayed at Aunt Sally’s house and off to 

university they went. Now student housing is very important, 

very expensive, and in short supply. The former government 

between 2000 and 2007 spent 700,000 on student housing. 

That’s the NDP record: 700,000 from 2000 to 2007. Since 

becoming government the Saskatchewan Party has invested 24 

million on student housing alone. Mr. Speaker, that’s an 

astounding 3,000 per cent over the NDP. That equals over 

1,000 new beds for students in communities like La Ronge, 

Meadow Lake, Prince Albert, and Saskatoon. Another win for 

the people and students of Saskatchewan, where you’re no 

longer in decline and we have a vision of a very bright future. 

 

I have already stated that university students’ needs are 

changing. In the past there was no post-secondary child care. 

Today it is an urgent need. Our government has set up 624 child 

care seats at post-secondary institutions. In 2011-2012 alone, 



2436 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

the budget provided over 150 child care spaces for 

post-secondary institutions. In total we have provided funding 

for 3,935 — that’s quite a number — new child care spaces 

since 2007 and a promise to create 1,500 more. We have 

increased post-secondary child care by 80 per cent. 

 

Daycare is very important to the growth of Saskatchewan. We 

have ever increasing numbers of two-income families. In order 

to make this work, we must have more high quality daycare. 

We now have 13,240 licensed child care spaces operating or in 

development in Saskatchewan. The NDP record on child care is 

best stated by the former queen of the left, Pat Atkinson. And I 

would quote from Hansard, March 29th, 2011. And I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan has the poorest record when it comes to 

child daycare. And, Mr. Speaker, I take some 

responsibility for that because I was part of a government 

that did not put a lot of new resources into child . . . care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she also said on May 9th of 2011, and I quote, 

“More needs to be done, but the opposition agrees that we have 

come a long way because I agree that this has been a significant 

ramping up of child care.” Mr. Speaker, when you consider 

who spoke these two quotes, is there any doubt left? Can 

anyone on that side make any negative comments on how we’re 

handling child care? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to do an overview of 

post-secondary education funding. It is very critical to our 

students and to our province’s future. In order for them to 

facilitate this growth, we have put 3.5 billion for post-secondary 

education and skills training over the past five years. SIAST has 

received 143 million, a 21 per cent increase from 2007; U of R 

[University of Regina], 100.9 million, a 38 per cent increase 

over 2007; U of S [University of Saskatchewan], 304.5 million, 

a 46 per cent increase from 2007. 

 

We promised in 2007 campaign to increase operating funding 

by 125 million over four years. We increased it by 274. Now 

that shows how much our government depends on our young 

people, the youth of Saskatchewan. That shows our 

commitment to their future. We’ve also made a huge 

investment of 378 million in post-secondary infrastructure over 

the past five years, including 112 million for the health science 

project, 24 million for student housing, and 118 million in 

combined provincial-federal through infrastructure programs. 

 

The flip side of what the NDP did is from 1994 to 2007 . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Never were truer words spoken, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker . . . [inaudible] . . . that last speech. I guess I sort of 

join along with my colleague from Saskatoon Centre in terms 

of, you know, different motions that come forward in this 

House and the way that the Sask Party, you know, they can 

never resist blaming somebody else for certain circumstances, 

and they can never resist throwing themselves a 

self-congratulation parade, Mr. Speaker. The kind of 

back-patting over there I’m sure has got their massage 

therapists working overtime, the chiropractors, in terms of the 

way they must throw themselves out, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

all the back-patting that goes on. 

 

But they want to congratulate themselves for making 

investments in education. Well guess what, Mr. Speaker? It’s 

the job of government. You’re supposed to be there as a partner 

with the sector. And I guess the thing that I find kind of 

interesting in terms of the speech, a gain it’s always I think 

another sort of hallmark of the way that the Sask Party does 

their business, you know. The gloss and the hype on the top end 

of it looks pretty good, but when you get down to where things 

are on the street, where things are in the communities, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a different story that emerges. 

 

And again I’ll tell you about a speech I’d like to be giving some 

day, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to be giving a speech congratulating 

that government for completion of the North Central Shared 

Facility, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to be able to get up on my feet 

and say, you know, it was number two in the province-wide 

capital list in the summer of 2007, and you’ve seen the course 

and you’ve made this happen. And it’s a valuable institution for 

the inner city of Regina, and it has triggered the revitalization 

of Scott Collegiate. And what we’ve gotten instead from the 

members opposite on this, and you know, again it’s certainly 

not in keeping with the parade team that they’re putting forward 

today in the motion, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve gotten instead 

from that government opposite, you know, we’ll have a statue 

of Walter Scott before we have a revitalized Scott Collegiate, 

Mr. Speaker, a high school that was named for the premier of 

this province. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So you know, I’m as fond of a nice statue as much as the next 

person, Mr. Speaker. But when it comes to the way that issues 

have been addressed on the ground, the way that it’s playing 

out in reality, what we’ve seen in the case of the North Central 

Shared Facility I think is instructive when it comes to the way 

that this government has botched priorities or slow walked what 

should be a priority project for the city of Regina or indeed for 

southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Scott Collegiate, I’d remind the speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s right 

in the middle of North Central, the youngest neighbourhood in 

the city of Regina. It’s a city that has partnerships with entities 

like the Regina and region chamber of commerce. The member 

from Saskatoon Greystone referenced their good work. Well 

there’s a school where there’s a partnership with the Regina 

region, Mr. Speaker, where Paul Martin’s foundation was 

brought in to help foster that interest in entrepreneurship, and 

there are good things like that taking place, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

very high percentage of First Nations and Métis students. And 

it should be an anchor institution for the community, and it 

should be supported much more aggressively, much more 

adequately than is the case. 

 

But what we’ve seen instead was the health region and the 

Regina Public School Board in the earlier part of the last 

decade, Mr. Speaker, came forward with a proposal around the 

renewal of Scott Collegiate where they’d have a shared facility 

that incorporated the community, that incorporated the need for 

a new library space, Mr. Speaker, in terms of Albert library in 

the neighbourhood, that would incorporate space for the health 

region, Mr. Speaker, in terms of addressing different sort of 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2437 

primary health care needs in the neighbourhood, which again, I 

know they don’t like to talk about the social determinants of 

health or of population health strategy, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 

seen how they acted when it came to Station 20 West. But 

again, Mr. Speaker, North Central Shared Facility was a joint 

project between the health region and the school board, and that 

was the spirit it was brought forward to the government in at 

that time. 

 

We were also aided in those days, Mr. Speaker, by a vital 

inner-city community partnership in the city of Regina. So 

when it came to who was going to be doing what, well, Mr. 

Speaker, the city of Regina was able to come forward with 

funding to nail down their part in terms of the community 

centre. The library was able to forward the dollars to get that 

squared away, Mr. Speaker. The Regina Public School Board 

had made it a priority. And it again had moved to number two 

on the provincial capital list in the summer of 2007. In February 

of 2007, planning dollars had been forwarded in the amount of 

$2 million for the project overall, and there was a significant 

health region component to the plan. And then the budget of 

2009 came, Mr. Speaker, or pardon me, 2008. It was 

acknowledged as a priority by that government, and I was glad 

of that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m on record as saying so. 

 

But what happened after that is that the project got scaled back. 

The efforts that been extended to the federal government to 

perhaps interest their federal cousins in the priority of this 

project, Mr. Speaker, in terms of how it relates to First Nations 

and Métis education needs in this province, Mr. Speaker, the 

efforts that were made on the part of those members opposite 

with their give-peace-a-chance strategy and looking forward to 

their federal cousins to make sure that priority projects like this 

were being supported in the manner they should be by those 

different levels of government, Mr. Speaker, those came up dry. 

And then they moved the health region in this last couple years, 

Mr. Speaker, right out of the equation altogether, and suddenly 

there’s no more health support for the project. 

 

And maybe there’ll be an anticipation of that in some future 

date, but as it stands, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve got was a 

radically scaled back proposal, which again, they were able to 

make the education announcement before the election, Mr. 

Speaker, but we’re not seeing the sod being turned, and we’re 

not seeing those plans progress. 

 

And I remind you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is five years 

on from when it was declared a priority for the people of 

Saskatchewan in the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] capital 

list, which leads into another question, Mr. Speaker. The K to 

12 capital list used to mean something in this province. And I 

guess it’s not a surprise that when that government moved to 

take over the total levers of finance in terms of the education 

system, K to 12, Mr. Speaker, it shouldn’t be a surprise that 

then they said, well you know, the kind of partnership we used 

to have around the K to 12 capital lists, we’re going to start 

playing a lot of games with that. And the kind of games we see 

with the K to 12 capital list in terms of what is really a priority 

and what gets moved up and around and back again, Mr. 

Speaker, those games continue to this day. 

 

And earlier in this week, Mr. Speaker, we saw that being 

commented on by the Provincial Auditor in terms of the kind of 

manipulation of the province’s books that is entailed in the way 

that the K to 12 capital is being handled by this government and 

what that means for the capacity of the school boards as they 

address local priorities. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the speech I’d like to be giving, 

but you know, if they don’t make progress on the thing that 

they’ve said they’re going to be addressing as a priority, what 

are you to do? And I guess all I can do, Mr. Speaker, is say that, 

you know, it doesn’t square with the kind of self-congratulation 

that is entailed in this motion, let alone the kind of revisionist 

history they like to get into in the other side of the equation, Mr. 

Speaker. But again, one of the sure signs to know that 

something is not right with the picture, Mr. Speaker, is to see 

those members opposite throwing themselves a 

self-congratulatory parade because you know that the difference 

is not there in terms of the way it’s being addressed on the 

ground. 

 

You know, the resolution before us is about education. And the 

first entrant into the debate talked about post-secondary 

education, which is interesting, Mr. Speaker, because there’s an 

entirely . . . There’s a vital debate that need be had on that as 

well. But it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, again the kind of 

selective approach made by a member opposite, which of 

course that individual served as a member for Advanced 

Education, Mr. Speaker. And you know, the kind of rendering 

of the record that we’re provided with in this House, I think the 

actual record speaks something very differently, Mr. Speaker. 

And it also has a bit more to say about why that member is off 

to do some other work on part of the government. 

 

And I guess that leads me to another question, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of First Nations on-reserve underfunding by the federal 

government. Again, in terms of the give-peace-a-chance 

strategy that was lauded by this government opposite, what 

difference has that made in terms of the terrible underfunding 

that goes on in terms of on-reserve funding for education, Mr. 

Speaker? There’s a task force loose in the land, and I wish them 

luck, Mr. Speaker, but if they don’t get that support from the 

federal government that again are the cousins and the fellow 

party members of the members opposite, if they don’t get that 

support, we’re going to have a vital part of the front in the 

province of Saskatchewan that goes wanting. 

 

So again, for many reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t 

support this resolution, and I look forward to the question 

period. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 

pleasure to rise in the House, and I’m happy to support the 

motion from the member from Saskatoon Greystone. I think it’s 

a very good motion. I certainly have a certain interest in this 

area, K to 12 education. Being a teacher myself, I served in 

Regina public for 15 years as a substitute teacher, one of the 

toughest jobs maybe in the system, but certainly enjoyed that 

time no doubt, Mr. Speaker. Of course I’m a ratepayer in the 

government of the day, and also I have three boys that are in the 

separate system here in Regina. So like I said before, I’m very 

proud of our record when it comes to education in this 



2438 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

province. 

 

You know, after inheriting a $1.2 billion deficit from the 

members opposite, we’ve gone to work, Mr. Speaker. And just 

here in Regina I’d like to highlight a few capital projects that 

are on the go right now. One was just — I was at the opening of 

it, Mr. Speaker — was Douglas Park School, and it’s a 

beautiful building. It was built right next to the old one. It’s a 

silver LEED [leadership in energy and environmental design] 

certified building and it’ll pay a lot of dividends in terms of 

energy efficiency, Mr. Speaker, over the years to the board. 

Arcola School. I drive home a lot that way. You can see it right 

on Arcola there by Park Street, Mr. Speaker. A beautiful new 

building, and that’ll be officially opened in January. Excited to 

go to that. 

 

Campbell Collegiate, Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest schools in 

our province. $26 million went towards underpinning and 

working on the foundation, and certainly that’s an important 

build. And there is a new fitness facility. I was talking to the 

teachers. They are excited to get into that. That was in the 

basement before, Mr. Speaker. They had to renew that. 

 

Seven Stones School has been announced, Mr. Speaker. It’ll 

replace Herchmer, Wascana School here in the north central 

area, Mr. Speaker. École St. Andrew renovation and addition 

and Monseigneur de Laval High School renovation. Again as 

the member opposite mentioned, the new Scott Collegiate, it’s 

been announced, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking forward to that. 

That is happening in north central. 

 

And in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, Campus Regina Public is 

transitioning from Cochrane High School to CRP [Campus 

Regina Public]. Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about this a little bit 

before. I’d like to mention how I was at the opening just 

recently and they’re doing great work, the administration over 

there. It’s a tough thing to transition from a traditional school to 

more of a trades school, which it’s doing. And they’re doing a 

great job over there. They’re bringing in sort of a trades 

campus, as I’d call it, Mr. Speaker. And this year, this year they 

have the aesthetics, health sciences, social justice, video game 

design and applications, electrical trek school, and I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a good program and certainly more to come. 

They’re looking to expand into plumbing, into welding, and 

into auto mechanics, those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that happens currently in the system, not at every school; 

some have lower populations. But what it allows us to do is 

there is significant capital put into that building, Mr. Speaker. I 

was in the aesthetics area. I didn’t have enough hair to get 

something done, but it’s a beautiful new place. And what that 

allows it to do is students that are serious and they want to try it 

out and want to maybe get into the trades, Mr. Speaker, they’ll 

have state of the art equipment there. Not every school around 

the system can have auto equipment for example, diagnostics. 

That stuff’s very expensive. But if they are serious about it, 

they can go over to Campus Regina Public. So that’s an 

exciting area. 

 

So in total, Mr. Speaker, just in the Regina area alone, 110 

million, 110 million in capital spending plus 50 million towards 

maintenance projects, smaller maintenance projects. So 125 just 

in the Regina area alone since this government was first elected 

in 2007 — 500 million in the total budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I was listening to the member from Saskatoon Centre I 

believe it was, talking. And he was saying we haven’t done 

anything; we’re failing on all counts. But he mentioned two 

schools, he mentioned two schools in that part of his speech, 

one that we did build, one we built and one that was moved 

slightly down the list, Pleasant Hill School. Well if that’s our 

biggest indictment, I’m pretty happy with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s look at the operating side really quick, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

increased in Regina here 6.5 per cent. And that’s ahead of 

enrolment and inflation, Mr. Speaker. And for the first time I 

believe, and I’m pretty confident of this, there’s been . . . 

recently the minister announced 6.6 million for interim funding, 

mid-year funding. Of course that never happened under the old 

government when we were losing students. I’ll get to that in a 

second. But that’s a promise. We are going to support growth. 

We did that just recently, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was at the North Central Family Centre recently again, Mr. 

Speaker. The Minister of Education announced a program for 

literacy, $70,000 — $450,000 provincially — for GED [general 

educational development] training, GED prep, computer skills, 

accelerated reading, in partnership with Sacred Heart School, 

and just to encourage a culture of reading and books and 

learning in that community, Mr. Speaker. So that’s money well 

spent and part of that increase that we have given schools over 

the years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I don’t know if . . . The members mentioned 

self-congratulation. I don’t know if I’d call it that. These are 

facts. And one way to compare is to look in fact to other 

provinces maybe, but to what we inherited and what the other 

members did. And I think that’s pretty legitimate. And it’s 

certainly not that pretty, Mr. Speaker. As the member from 

Batoche mentioned, they closed 176 schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I don’t think . . . The real cost there, Mr. Speaker, was 

during their time, 16 years, we had enrolment decline of 30,000 

students, Mr. Speaker — 30,000. That’s the size of a city the 

size of Moose Jaw that we lost. That’s our future. That’s our 

future leaders. That’s part of our future taxpayers, frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, and we lost those. That’s almost a generation gutted 

under those members there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I won’t say that schools will never close under this 

government, but we’ve done what’s called schools of 

opportunity, giving them a three-year sort of window to see if 

their enrolments will increase. And there’s certainly a better 

chance of enrolment increases under this government with the 

increasing population, as compared to those. And nobody knew 

back then, Mr. Speaker, which schools would be closed. It was 

sort of an ad hoc approach, and it was certainly stressful on 

communities around the province. 

 

The other area that we’ve really stepped up in is property tax. 

We finally did something with property taxes in the province, 

Mr. Speaker. After years of sort of half measures, ad hoc 

approaches, half-hearted promises, now we are dealing and we 

have dealt with that problem. 

 

[12:00] 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2439 

Before there was tax revolts. You know, we knew, Mr. Speaker, 

that those members over there raised taxes 17 times. But not 

included in that, Mr. Speaker, was yearly, property owners had 

to pay 5 per cent on average every year increases on their 

property, Mr. Speaker. And so, you know, we’ve changed that, 

you know. The school boards don’t have to go to the property 

owners every time they need more money, Mr. Speaker. And so 

that was sort of a hidden tax — not hidden but it was every year 

5 per cent went up, and that resulted in tax revolts, Mr. Speaker. 

Now I know that was the old government. 

 

I know currently the opposition, they were worked up where 

they had a concern about using capital dollars, that we weren’t 

going to use capital dollars for liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. They 

want liquor stores. Well this side, we want to spend out capital 

dollars building schools and building hospitals. And I think 

that’s the way we want to go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ratepayers now cover 35 per cent of the cost, down from 51 per 

cent under the NDP. You know, Mr. Speaker, when I talk to my 

cousins and friend that did move to Alberta over the years, 

when we discuss things, when it came to property taxes and I 

told them how much we paid — they hadn’t seen my house 

before — they thought I must have lived in a mansion, Mr. 

Speaker. With the amount of tax I paid compared to what they 

paid and the square footage I had . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . No I don’t live in a mansion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think to summarize, Mr. Speaker, we have a growing 

province. We’re proud of that. We’ve increased enrolment 

finally in K to 12 education. Record investments, record 

investments in education as myself and my colleagues have 

mentioned. We’re proud of our record. And certainly there’s 

challenges to growth. The Premier mentioned that earlier in 

question period. There’s challenge in growth, to be sure, but 

we’re going to step up to the plate. And we certainly have — 

500 million in capital dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think, I think even the members opposite would have to 

agree — they would have to agree — that what are we going to 

do with all these students? What are we going to do with them? 

The members opposite and on our side have mentioned before, 

we’re facing pressures. That always has to be better, and I think 

they would admit it. That has to be better than what are we 

going to do with all these empty buildings, Mr. Speaker. What 

are we going to do with these buildings that aren’t being used 

anymore? And that’s a sad thing for a community, to have the 

doors boarded up, to have nothing going on, no learning, people 

leaving the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re proud of our record on this side of the House. We’re 

proud to set aggressive goals in the growth plan, Mr. Speaker, 

aggressive targets in graduation rates for First Nations and all 

students, Mr. Speaker. And of course, we know the NDP never 

did that, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of our record on this side. 

More to do, but we’re proud of what we’ve done. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to enter into this 

debate, and I have to admit that I chuckled when I read the 

resolution that was here. Because what we know on this side of 

the House and I know that reporters know and that the people 

of Saskatchewan know, is when the Premier and the ministers 

and the members opposite start going and attacking 16 years of 

NDP government, that’s a sign they have no answer for what 

the problems are right now. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, every time the Minister of Highways, former 

minister of Health, goes into this rant, we know that he doesn’t 

know what the answer is to a specific problem that’s happening 

now in 2012 and going forward in 2013. And this week was 

very telling, because the present Minister of Health normally 

will give a fairly reasoned response to the questions that are 

raised by our Health critic. But this week, wouldn’t you know 

it, the Minister of Health got into a corner and so where does he 

go? He goes back to 16 years of something. And what we know 

is that that’s a symbol of them not having an answer. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what’s the issue for education today? 

Well frankly it’s financing. I mean you end up looking around. 

The auditor just a couple of days ago raises big questions about 

the amounts of money that aren’t showing up in the 

government’s books because they’re pushing them off onto the 

school boards. This is just a couple of days ago. And I’m 

quoting the auditor on education: 

 

In October 2012, we became aware that the Ministry of 

Education had provided at least $31 million in loan 

guarantees for capital projects to certain school divisions. 

For the year ended March 31, 2012, the Ministry of 

Education’s and the Government’s General Revenue 

Fund’s expenses and liabilities were understated by at 

least $31 million. During the next six months, we will be 

reviewing the substance of school division loans to 

determine if additional promises exist and if additional 

liabilities should be recorded. School division loans were 

$74.5 million as of March 31, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue here is, not only are the books 

misleading, but they’re misleading in an important area like the 

education of the public. And this relates to the issues of the K to 

12 system, let alone the issues that we have in post-secondary, 

where the government has stopped the funding for the Health 

Sciences Building in Saskatoon and forced borrowing. We 

know that right this week, the board of governors at the U of S 

is grappling with the issue of how they finance the next phase 

of that project because the government has reneged on the plans 

that they gave them just a few short months ago. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the issue for the education for the future of 

this province relates once again back to the books of the 

province and the concern that everybody has as it relates to 

those books. And unfortunately some of the members opposite 

learned a bit about how to govern when they were working with 

a government that put this province in very, very dire straits, 

and none of us ever wants to go to that place again. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this week we learned about another issue 

whereby the government is borrowing money to assist in the 

building of a new stadium in Regina. And we’re supportive of 

building a new stadium. I am happy to have season tickets for 

four of us for many years but, Mr. Speaker, when that money 

was borrowed, according to the minister the other night, they 

borrowed that money at government rates. What they’ve been 



2440 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

forcing the school boards to do and the universities to do is go 

and borrow at commercial rates, which are a little bit higher 

than what the government rates are. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

don’t understand the priorities of this government. When you 

see this particular motion and you see the kinds of concerns that 

are here around the financing of our system, then we know that 

we’ve got a problem. And when you have a motion like this, 

there’s no answer to the present problems. 

 

What we have, and the school boards across the province, is 

very tight budgets and they are being told that there’s not much 

flexibility as they move forward into planning for the new year. 

We know that right now the Treasury Board is working in the 

Ministry of Finance to prepare the budgets for next year. And 

frankly we’re concerned that some of these tactics that they’ve 

used to get themselves through the financial jams that they’ve 

been over the last few years, they’re going to expand. And that 

is bad news for teachers. It’s bad news for children. 

 

We know that previous moves by the Finance minister, who is a 

teacher himself, have effectively limited the use of teaching 

assistants within the education system in the province. And that 

has caused all kinds of problems. And we know that that 

Minister of Finance was very definitely saying, oh we’re not 

going to do anything with that, and effectively pushed the 

decision over to the school boards and basically let them deal 

with that. 

 

Now we’re concerned that as the demands on the school system 

change, as it relates to the number of new citizens we have in 

the province — so we have English as an additional language 

training, that’s important — those kinds of cost are over and 

above the ones that exist already. And when we get a motion 

like this, which basically we treat and I think the public treats 

as, we don’t know what to do so we’ll blame what’s gone on 

before, then we all get very concerned. 

 

Now why wouldn’t the Premier tell his Finance minister that 

we’re going to set a priority on where we borrow money at the 

government rate to make sure it’s the cheapest in the system? 

And it seems to me that they might put the elementary school, 

or the high school, or the university ahead of a football stadium. 

But it doesn’t appear that that priority is there. I don’t 

understand it personally. I don’t think the people of 

Saskatchewan understand that. 

 

Now when interest rates are as low as they are, the difference 

isn’t great. But what we know, as interest rates are adjusted — 

and we hope they don’t move very much — but if they do start 

adjusting, then this can be a major concern for our educational 

system. So I suggest that might be one thing they put into their 

discussions in Finance, is let’s set some priorities around how 

we borrow money. Let’s not push money and hide it the way 

the auditor has identified here. Let’s not mislead the public as it 

relates to the books of the people. 

 

So when education of our children is the top priority, it shows 

up in all policies in the government. Unfortunately we’re 

hearing some rhetoric, we’re hearing the excuse line of blame 

back a few years. But we’re not hearing about good, solid 

policy moving forward. And that is one of the questions that 

we’ve raised all fall, all last year, is what’s the plan, Mr. 

Premier? What’s the plan? Especially what’s the plan for our 

children and their education? And, Mr. Speaker, we think that 

there’s a major problem because they’ve got words, but they 

don’t have the financial plans to back it up. And if in fact the 

auditor comes forward and says, hey, what you’re doing in your 

books isn’t accurate, then we have further problems that’ll be 

pushed back, you know, onto our children. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 

Questions? I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re all 

proud of our growing population in Saskatchewan. But this 

government is failing to adequately support our classrooms and 

particularly the diversity of that growing population. Classroom 

size is growing. Resources have been cut. And specifically, 

English as an additional language supports are simply not 

adequate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the member from Greystone, we understand that not 

supporting English as an additional language, as this 

government is not supporting it, has impacts for all students. 

Why does he sit quietly by? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, I have a document entitled Saskatchewan 

Education Enrolment Projections 2001-2002 to 2010-2011. It 

was updated in June 2001. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite anticipated that at this time, 

in fact in around 2011, that there’d be about 140,000 students in 

Saskatchewan. And they planned accordingly, Mr. Speaker, 

allowing for much neglect across our educational system. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, because of the population increase of more 

than 80,000 people over the course of the last five years, it’s not 

141,000 students. It’s actually 165,000 students and growing. 

Those are their own projections, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. Next 

question. I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

government’s provided the largest education property tax relief 

in this province’s history. Contrary under the NDP, 51 per cent 

of the cost of education were dependent upon ratepayers with a 

disproportionate burden levied on agricultural lands. Provincial 

education property tax was increasing by nearly 5 per cent each 

year. The NDP knew this was a problem and they didn’t do 

anything about it. In fact as my colleagues mentioned earlier, 

former NDP Premier Lorne Calvert stated at the 2003 SARM 

convention, “The status quo is not on.” And yet nothing 

changed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Centre, why did the NDP 

ignore the pleas of Saskatchewan ratepayers for 16 years in 

regard to property education tax relief? 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2441 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

appreciate, and I also question how these guys can revise 

history. They know that we commissioned the Ray Boughen 

report, very instructive of how we should approach. They know 

that’s not true. They know. And he should be embarrassed to 

stand up, he should be embarrassed to stand up and ask 

questions like that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about the issues that are facing 

students today — overcrowded classrooms, class size going 

through the roof. English as an additional language needs to be 

addressed, and bullying. And yet he keeps talking 2003. Why 

doesn’t he talk about this year’s issues? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’d just like to reference, as our leader had made mention of, in 

terms of the funding that has been brought forward for the 

proposed stadium project in the city of Regina, there’s $100 

million of that will be forwarded to the city of Regina using the 

Government of Saskatchewan’s preferred interest rate. 

 

My question is to the member from Regina Dewdney: should 

that practice not be extended to school divisions as well as they 

go forward, for capital expenditures? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, we’re happy we’re in a 

growing province, Mr. Speaker. We know there’s school 

pressures. We are building, Mr. Speaker: 500 million in capital 

investments, Mr. Speaker, a 217 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker; 

31 major projects; 860 smaller projects, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

funding our education system in record amounts, Mr. Speaker. 

More to do, Mr. Speaker, but we’re on our way. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

government has increased child care spaces by nearly 4,000 

since November 2007 with the promise to create 1,500 more. In 

the last five years of the NDP government they only created 

nineteen fifty spaces, most of which were developed with 

federal dollars. 

 

Even a former member of the NDP agrees that they had the 

poorest record when it comes to child care. On March the 29th, 

2011 Pat Atkinson stated, and I quote, “Saskatchewan has the 

poorest record when it comes to child care. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

take . . . [full] responsibility for that because I was part of that 

government . . .” Mr. Speaker, this question is for the member 

from Saskatoon Centre: do you agree with the Pat Atkinson 

statement that you had the poorest record of child care? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again, and who’s 

ever writing these questions for these people should really take 

a lesson in spin. And these people up here should do a little bit 

of work about who’s been coming to this House.  

 

We know today the issues that are happening in daycare. She 

gets up really smug, with a smile on her face, because of 

spaces. But what about the people who are working in these 

places? The recruitment to people to work in the daycare 

spaces, what about that? And the embarrassment, the 

embarrassment of subsidies that can be as low as 25 cents a 

month. And they’ve done nothing about that. So I ask the 

member over there, is she not feeling a little foolish asking this 

question when they have subsidies as low as 25 cents a month 

happening today in this province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Obviously a lot of interest, a lot of questions on this side of the 

House. I guess my question to the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone: having served in cabinet, having served through the 

Treasury Board process — they’re going through Treasury 

Board right now, Mr. Speaker — are they getting this motion 

out of the way because Education is in fact going to get 

whacked in the budget to come? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I reject, I reject the premise of 

that member’s questions and commentary, Mr. Speaker. For 

example in post-secondary education, while we know there’s 

more to do, our track record is rock solid — $3.5 billion, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s an all-time record, Mr. Speaker. And it’s going to 

continue to see that kind of attention, Mr. Speaker, because we 

know we’re placing a priority on the students of Saskatchewan. 

Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, when the 

Saskatchewan Party formed government, we inherited a $1.2 

billion — billion — school infrastructure deficit. Since our 

government took over, 65 per cent of schools in Saskatchewan 

have received much needed upgrades and improvements. As a 

government, we have invested over 500 million in school 

capital over the first five years. This is a 217 per cent increase 

over the last five years of the NDP. In fact some of the money 

we allocated went to complete projects announced by the NDP 

in 2003. 

 

To the member from Regina Elphinstone: why did the NDP 

government underfund education capital and allow schools 

where our province’s children are educated to fall in such poor 

state of disrepair? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well I’ll give the member that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, he sure can read a script with some zip. But I guess 



2442 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

my answer to the member’s question is this: in terms of what 

they’re talking about around deficits, it’s always kind of 

interesting what the members talk about around deficits, 

because certainly when the NDP took over in 1991, they had a 

deficit deficit to deal with. 

 

When those members took over in 2007, there was $2 billion 

cash on hand that had been saved up in conjunction with the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So again, if the 

members opposite are so concerned about deficits, maybe they 

should cast their minds back a bit and think about the deficit 

deficit that they left the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, what’s going to be on the topic of 

a few tables, in fact about 300 families this Christmas are going 

to be talking about what they’re going to be doing about their 

housing because of a new policy by this government, this 

minister who’s talking about selling off social housing in 

Saskatchewan and in our communities. And they’re wondering 

where they’re going to be moving to. And we know what’s a 

good predictor in school success is stable communities.  

 

So I’m asking the member from Regina Dewdney: what’s he 

going to do when people phone him over the Christmas 

holidays and ask, what are you going to do about keeping me in 

my home so my kids can do better in school? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell by the member 

from Saskatoon Centre . . . During his speech he clearly didn’t 

read the motion by the member. The member clearly didn’t read 

the motion at all. His speech had nothing to do with it and that 

question had nothing to do with it, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ll give the member from 

Regina Dewdney a few seconds to answer. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re happy with what 

we’ve done in the school system, Mr. Speaker. We’ve funded it 

to record levels. We have increasing enrolment, Mr. Speaker. 

We have more work to do, but we’re very happy with what 

we’ve done on this side of the House. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 604 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Broten that Bill No. 604 — The Public Health 

(Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I’m very honoured to rise today to speak to this motion and 

the proposed recommendation found in Bill 604 which is An 

Act to amend The Public Health Act, 1994 to provide for access 

to information relating to Asbestos in Public Buildings. 

Certainly this is a sober topic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and one 

that might be a bit of a downer after the rather lively exchange 

that we’ve just witnessed here in the House. But certainly it’s 

one that’s important and I think one that merits a thorough 

discussion here in the legislature. And I want to bring a few 

points forward today in relation to this bill and of the motion 

that we brought forward to introduce this legislation. 

 

Now this government has had fair number of weeks now to . . . 

opportunity to do the right thing and introduce a mandatory and 

comprehensive registry through legislation. And indeed we 

introduced a bill to that effect. And it’s a very straightforward 

bill, and it’s one that the government could have and we believe 

should’ve acted upon. This is not a partisan issue, Mr. Speaker. 

This is one that’s of concern to people’s health. 

 

And I think a good reflection of how urgent and concerning this 

is, is a story that came out actually yesterday in Manitoba. And 

what’s happened is that there’s a school on a First Nation in 

Manitoba, and it’s the Berens River First Nation. And they 

actually closed their school on Monday about safety concerns. 

What happened, Mr. Speaker, is that a worker in the school 

found 25 bags of asbestos stored in a crawl space in the school. 

Now your first question . . . mine was, well how did the 

asbestos get there and why was it there? 

 

Well what happened is that two years ago in 2010, there was 

some work that was done in the school, and what happened is 

that there was air quality tests done in 2010. They had hired a 

qualified company to remove and contain the asbestos. And so 

what happened is that when they captured the asbestos in 2010, 

they actually stuck it in the crawl space of the school to be 

temporarily, “temporarily” stored, and it looks like it got 

forgotten about. 

 

Now this is the kind of example I think, Mr. Speaker, where a 

mandatory and compulsory registry would have kept track of 

this asbestos and would have reminded the people and the 

powers that be that it was still there in the school, that the 

remediation was not complete, and that there was still a threat 

to the students and to the children in the school. 

 

And right now the school is closed. It was closed on Tuesday, 

and it was unsafe for the children to be there. And they’ve been 

going to school there for two years with this asbestos stored in 

the crawl space unbeknownst to everyone. So it’s quite scary. 

And indeed the chief of the First Nation, George Kemp, he said 

that it’s scary and people, you know, people are worried about 

this because of the illnesses that have been happening in other 

schools.  

 

There was a number of asbestos-related deaths in Poplar River 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2443 

which is another First Nations community just north of Berens 

River. And certainly, you know, the Frontier School Division is 

one I’m familiar with a little bit because of some work that’s 

being done on the music side of things there through a very 

popular and successful fiddle program which . . . You know, 

these are remote communities with little access to what we 

often take for granted, Mr. Speaker, and if they’re not being 

looked after properly, this is exactly why the call has been 

made for a registry that is mandatory and comprehensive. 

 

I guess before I go into some of the other work that’s been done 

in this area, I would like to take this opportunity, and it is 

indeed an honour to be able to stand here in the legislature and 

just talk a little bit about Howard Willems who was the man 

who really brought this issue to the forefront recently in 

Saskatchewan. And he worked on it since 2004 or sooner but 

officially began his work in this area in 2004. Howard was one 

of my constituents, and I got to know him well through his 

work in social causes. He was certainly a proud member of the 

labour movement, and it was through that movement that a lot 

of the attention to asbestos has been brought to the forefront 

because it deals with workers’ rights and workers’ health. And 

often these issues aren’t brought forward by administrators or 

managers or bureaucrats, Mr. Speaker. It’s the people that are 

living with the threat that have to bring it forward. And we’ve 

seen that time and time again. 

 

Howard was definitely a community man, and he and his wife, 

Brenda, had all kinds of causes that they worked for. They 

would do a bikeathon every spring and ride out to the berry 

farm and raise money for different causes every year. The idea 

was to give back to your community. And both Howard and 

Brenda, his wife Brenda, are wonderful examples of that 

community action at work at the local level. They were both 

very involved in their workplace and looking after their fellow 

workers and workers across Canada as part of a national 

agency. The Public Service Alliance of Canada was the union 

that they were involved in. 

 

And I want to take a moment to sort of honour Howard and his 

memory. He passed away last month. And it was obvious at his 

funeral services that he was a man who was very 

well-respected, not only in the labour movement but through 

his church, and that he was a man who was very involved in his 

church, had a deep and abiding faith and always carried that 

with him right up until the end when he passed away. And it 

motivated him and it sustained him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so the fact that the family is continuing this call upon this 

government to salvage a registry that’s required and mandatory 

and that they are encouraging this government to do that and 

name it in Howard’s memory, Howard Willems will live on 

through his work and through his family. But if this was 

something that he could be honoured with, it would certainly be 

something I think the family would be very appreciative of. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Certainly the work is continuing. I just want to talk for a few 

minutes about the organization that Howard and another fellow 

named Bob Sass started several years ago. It’s called SADAO, 

and that’s the Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease Awareness 

Organization. And Bob Sass and Howard Willems began this 

organization, and currently Howard’s wife, his widow, Brenda 

Baergen, is continuing on with the registry or with the 

organization. 

 

And Bob Sass is one who knows what he’s talking about. He 

was involved in labour studies and industrial relations for 

many, many years. He was working with occupational health 

and safety, and he was even an associate deputy minister of 

Labour back in the Blakeney years, Mr. Speaker, and then he 

worked on asbestos files since the mid-1970s. So obviously 

Bob knows his work and what he’s up to. 

 

He was the one who introduced asbestos regulations in 

Saskatchewan under our Occupational Health and Safety Act 

back in 1977, to make some changes then. And as we know, 

Mr. Speaker, asbestos was seen for many, many decades 

actually as a miracle material. It was thought to be a wonderful 

thing to use for building, and there’s even a town called 

Asbestos in Quebec. And this was an industry that employed 

several hundred if not thousands of people without anyone 

knowing the deadly effect of asbestos fibres in building 

materials and in buildings. 

 

So again we see the foibles, I guess, of human nature where we 

think we’ve stumbled on something that’s wonderful and great 

only to find out decades later that it’s actually quite poisonous 

and dangerous. And the studies show that actually asbestos 

becomes more and more dangerous as it deteriorates, and it 

becomes more likely to cause damage to human health and any 

kind of animal health. 

 

At any rate, Bob Sass has been working on this furthering the 

issue of asbestos and health concerns with that throughout his 

career and his life. And through the Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labour, they worked up a ban asbestos campaign, and then 

this work evolved to the new organization in 2010. So SADAO 

is the driving force behind this. I’m pretty sure the ministry of 

Labour has met with them or the minister of occupational 

health and safety and is aware of the work that they’re doing. 

 

Again, it’s non-partisan work. It’s work that’s intended to help 

workers be healthy. And that’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is 

the health of the workers, the people that do the kind of things 

that expose them to asbestos in the workplace, and of course 

beyond that is to other people that are vulnerable to 

asbestos-related issues. And often the asbestos is found in 

institutions where we have vulnerable people like seniors, like 

children, and schools, and care homes. And we’ve seen 

examples in our own media of where asbestos scares have 

happened and the importance of having a mandatory and 

comprehensive registry with all the information that’s available 

to enhance the safety of workers. 

 

So that’s really the main goal of this bill, and again I say it’s a 

very non-partisan thing. We’ve seen what happens when these 

two sides of the House co-operate. And it’s certainly something 

that could move forward a very important issue and one that is 

very important to not just the Willems family and the memory 

of Howard Willems but to many hundreds of people in 

Saskatchewan who are working in these types of places. 

 

So SADAO was busy doing the work. Howard himself was the 

other co-founder of the organization, and again SADAO is the 



2444 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2012 

Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization. 

Howard worked for the Government of Canada as an inspector, 

so he took his work very seriously, and indeed his wife worked 

in that area as well. And I’ve got to know a few of the people 

from Canadian Food Inspection Agency. These are public 

servants who believe it is an honour to work in the service of 

the public, Mr. Speaker. And I will speak again and again in 

this House about the importance of the public service. And they 

are quietly and steadily looking after people’s rights, workers’ 

rights, health care issues, all the ministries’ employees. All the 

people that are in the employ of ministries are out there making 

sure that our province and our country is a better place for us to 

be in. 

 

And Howard was one of those committed employees with the 

Government of Canada. He was also involved in the health 

issues and worked in local occupational health and safety 

committees. He was a member of a national health and safety 

committee for several years. And, unfortunately, in 2010 he 

was diagnosed with mesothelioma which, as people know, is an 

asbestos-related cancer of the lungs. Howard underwent 

treatment starting right away in November of 2010. But even 

the last time I saw Howard, was in my constituency office in 

October, he was not able to walk anymore and, you know, had 

to have actually one lung removed at one point during his 

treatment. But he still was fighting the fight, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s something that came through loud and clear at his funeral 

services as well. 

 

Howard never gave up. He was always chasing the storm and 

making sure that his voice was heard as long as he could 

possibly make it be heard. And indeed I think his voice is still 

being heard through the work that he did. 

 

So at any rate, I think it’s not something that’s difficult. We 

heard from my colleague from Saskatoon Massey Place that 

this is a very straightforward process. It’s not one that’s 

difficult and certainly would be one that would encourage 

people because we know that mandatory requirements often see 

a better compliance rate than those that aren’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that the government indicated some of the concerns they 

had, and one of them that the minister indicated was that his 

fears that a registry would give people a false sense of security. 

And I’m not sure that that’s a valid fear at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think we could find a number of examples 

where registries were created and people understand that we’re 

not aware of all the asbestos that was used. It’s been in building 

construction for decades and decades. But where the knowledge 

is there, people should be required to disclose. And it’s much 

like when you buy a house, Mr. Speaker. When you buy a 

house from another individual, they are obligated to disclose 

any knowledge they have of environmental issues or structural 

issues with that building. And so knowing that you have to will 

ensure that people are more likely to comply than not being 

required to and that it’s okay to not speak out when they know 

of issues when they’re selling their home. 

 

So I think that, you know, the minister could take another look 

at this and perhaps think about a way to deal with the worry that 

he has. This is not an overwhelming concern I think that should 

prohibit him from stopping and looking at the proposal. As my 

colleague from Saskatoon Massey Place has indicated, what is 

important to Saskatchewan workers and patients and families 

and students and seniors is that they deserve this registry that is 

made mandatory through legislation. That’s indeed what was 

proposed here in this legislature. And the registry in that case 

would be much more comprehensive because making it 

mandatory would ensure that it’s more comprehensive. It’s a 

simple formula. And I think the minister would be very pleased 

to find out that if it did become mandatory, the number of 

buildings on the non-mandatory list that exists now would grow 

and would become much more comprehensive and therefore 

improve the opportunity for safety for people that are working 

in these buildings or living in these buildings. 

 

Even Howard’s stepson has also echoed those comments, and 

he has said to the press that the most important thing is they 

approve what the government has done to date but say it’s not 

enough. And his quote in the press was, “We need to have a 

mandatory program where all health regions and school 

districts have to submit information.” So this is going beyond 

government buildings. I think he called them semi-government. 

Maybe quasi-government might be a better term, Mr. Speaker, 

but this would extend to all of those government-type agencies 

as well or municipal governments. There’s no reason to limit it 

to the information that the government currently has. 

 

I would suggest that the information is out there. People are 

able to determine whether asbestos is located in the building 

that they’re working in or living in or going to school in and 

that it would just encourage people to take this seriously. If it 

becomes mandatory through law, this is something that people 

will take seriously and will comply with. We know that they’re 

likely to comply. 

 

We know that asbestos has been used extensively in 

construction in Saskatchewan, and it wouldn’t take long for us 

to ensure that the knowledge that is available and out there is 

recorded and recorded appropriately. Certainly asbestos has 

been, like I said earlier, an industry that was touted as a great 

thing. And it’s taken a long time for these sicknesses and 

illnesses to help us realize the dangers associated with asbestos. 

 

And some of the things I’d like to raise just today is a couple 

more notes about asbestos and its effect on . . . or what the 

World Health Organization has said about asbestos. And one of 

the things that was pointed out earlier was what’s on the Health 

Canada website, and it talks about how asbestos can innocently 

become part of . . . or you can breathe it in, and some of the 

guidelines for workers and obviously anybody dealing with 

these kinds of materials. It says that: 

 

Construction and maintenance workers should avoid 

creating asbestos dust from scraping, brushing, rubbing or 

cutting damaged insulation. Insulation damage should be 

reported to the appropriate authority, such as the 

Occupational Health and Safety Manager. If you work in 

this area, determine whether asbestos is present before 

beginning work and take appropriate precautionary 

measures. 

 

And then it goes on to say that “Public and commercial building 

owners should keep an inventory of asbestos-containing 

materials to inform users, authorities and contractors.” So this is 

also a voluntary process that’s recommended by Health Canada. 



December 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2445 

And I think from SADEO’s point of view and certainly from 

our point of view, Mr. Speaker, that’s a good start, but it’s not 

enough. We need to move forward into the mandatory 

requirements that are being recommended. 

 

An article from Maclean’s in August, or sorry, in 2012 — I’m 

trying to get the exact date of this article — September 14th, 

2012 is reporting on Canada finally stopped fighting 

international efforts to list asbestos as a dangerous substance. 

So I think it’s kind of alarming that even as late as September 

of this year, our federal government was fighting against the 

listing of asbestos as a dangerous substance. And it’s beyond 

me to understand why that is something that was an issue for 

our federal government because the science is pretty 

overwhelmingly clear on the effects of this material to human 

health. 

 

But I think what the Maclean’s story points out to us, that it 

was industry pressure that has always led governments to resist 

the growing evidence of the health and science of asbestos to 

restrict its development and perhaps even shut down the mining 

of it. But indeed the knowledge is out there, and the asbestos 

industry is now on the verge of extinction. And unfortunately 

that has had an impact on communities, particularly in Quebec 

where most of our asbestos has been mined from. 

 

And so there’s people without jobs and certainly living in 

uncertainty, but the idea is that that being the justification for 

not agreeing and fighting against international efforts to have it 

declared a dangerous substance just doesn’t seem to add up. 

And I think the federal government finally realized that they 

couldn’t resist the complaints anymore and had to go along 

with what was obvious, the obvious appropriate thing to do. 

 

Obviously asbestos profitability is no longer there, but health 

experts and human rights advocates have frequently and 

continuously voiced concerns about this substance. So I guess 

here’s a stat that really evidences the seriousness of asbestos. 

The World Health Organization estimates that 107,000 people 

die globally each year from asbestos-related diseases. So that’s 

kind of like half the people in Saskatoon would die every year, 

or that many people are dying every year from asbestos-related 

diseases. And the sad thing about this is it takes many, many 

years for the disease to show up. 

 

So in Howard’s case, as a federal public servant he was 

working for the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, and his job 

was to inspect plants, various food plants. And he was there 

when they were doing repairs because they were usually in the 

shutdown mode, and that’s when he was exposed to the 

asbestos fibres that eventually took his life. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, the choice is obvious for this 

government. I don’t understand totally the minister’s logic 

when he says, you know, it would cause uncertainty or there’s 

fears that people would become complacent if this registry was 

mandatory. I really fail to understand the logic that he’s 

following there, and I’m not sure it’s sustainable logic. I think 

that again this is not a partisan issue. This is about human 

health and the need to act now and not delay again more years 

because it’s taken so long for us to get the proper awareness 

and attention to this deadly and devastating substance. 

 

[12:45] 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think I would be prepared to 

wind up my comments on this issue. And I certainly have 

appreciated the opportunity to rise today in the legislature and 

provide these comments and certainly to give my own tribute to 

the man who was Howard Willems. He was a prime example I 

think of what we look for in our communities. He was a 

community supporter. He supported his co-workers, and he 

worked very, very, very hard to make the world a better place. 

 

So in honour of Howard, I thank the Assembly for the 

opportunity to provide these words today. And I will move to 

adjourn debate on this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 604, The Public Health (Asbestos 

right-to-know) Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until Monday, March 4th, 2013 at 1:30 p.m. pursuant to rule 

3(1). 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:47.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2421 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2421 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2422 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2422 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2422 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2422 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2423 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2423 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2423 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2423 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2423 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2424 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2424 

 Care & Share Program 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2424 

 Community Shows the Spirit of Giving 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2424 

 Christmas Message 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2425 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Performance of Government 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2425 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2425 

 Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 

 Information Services Corporation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2427 

 Reporting and State of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2427 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2427 

 Health Care for Refugees 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2428 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2428 

 Asbestos in Public Buildings 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2429 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2429 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Mineral Administration Registry Saskatchewan 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2429 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2430 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 An Expression of Thanks 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2430 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2431 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2431 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2431 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Investments in Education 

  Norris ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2432, 2440 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2434, 2441 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2435 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2436, 2441 

  Makowsky...................................................................................................................................................................... 2437, 2441 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2439 



 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2440 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2440 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2441 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2441 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2442 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


