




















































Hansard: March 12, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 13A  MONDAY, MARCH 12, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 441 

 March 12, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, I’d like 

to introduce to you two of my constituents. The constituency of 

Cypress Hills is quite a ways from Regina. We don’t get the 

opportunity to introduce guests too often. So it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce the reeve of the RM [rural municipality] 

of Happyland, Tim Geiger and his wife, Carmen Gill. 

 

Tim’s been here many times before. Carmen says her only 

recognition and remembrance of this place is as a youngster 

when she was asked to try and pick figures out of the marble in 

the columns of the wonderful building that we’re in now. But 

they had an enjoyable visit here today already and they’re 

looking forward to a more complete tour a little later. I’d ask all 

members to help me welcome the Geigers to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, former 

colleagues of mine and ours. The former Speaker, Mr. Myron 

Kowalsky, who is now of Saskatoon but formerly of Prince 

Albert, and he’s seated in your gallery. Accompanying him 

today is Mr. Graham Addley, former member from Saskatoon 

who now is working for the University of Saskatchewan. Both 

of these people served well in the legislature but also in the 

chair that you’re sitting in, Mr. Speaker, and I would like all 

members to welcome them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. Oh sorry, I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — That’s fine. Mr. Speaker, I just want to join 

with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming the former 

Speaker and former member, Graham, to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, and I’m making a bit 

of an assumption here, but I see a rather august group in your 

gallery. Right in the middle of this group is Dr. Michael 

Jackson. And, Mr. Speaker, later this day this Assembly will 

hear the humble address and we will be taking steps, a first step 

to honour the Queen’s Jubilee, and I’m guessing that we have 

guests here to witness that very important occasion. Mr. 

Speaker, may I, through you and through all members of the 

House, welcome them to their Legislative Assembly as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour today to 

introduce to you and through you in your gallery, the youngest 

member of my campaign team, Denyse-Noel — just there — 

Denyse-Noel Stone. She helped put signs together and attended 

as many functions as she could. This future aspiring MLA is a 

grade 3 student in Ms. Sauter’s class at Dundonald School and 

attends Crazy Dayz Dayhome in my constituency. Denyse-Noel 

brings with her today her mom, Adrienne Stone, who is my 

constituency assistant and who will be bringing into the world 

two new constituents this summer, and her grandpa Stu Coward 

who is a great party supporter and worked on many campaigns. 

This is Denyse-Noel’s first of many visits to the Legislative 

Assembly, and I would like to welcome them to this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 

I’d like to join with the member from Fairview and welcome 

Mr. Stu Coward to his Assembly. Mr. Coward is a constituent 

of Regina Rosemont, and it’s nice to see him here with his 

granddaughter and his daughter here today. 

 

And I know I’ve been known to run into Mr. Coward on the 

Devonian pathway for a little bit of exercise, but I’ve also been 

known to run into Mr. Coward on numerous occasions on the 

campaign trail, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately his efforts go 

towards the other side though, Mr. Speaker. But what I do know 

of Mr. Coward is that he’s a straightforward, good person who 

cares about his province and is a passionate campaigner. I am 

hopeful that, as we near and approach the next election, that 

maybe Mr. Coward will have seen the error of his ways and 

have joined the campaign efforts of the other side. But judging 

by the gestures I see up there right now, it looks as though he’s 

going to stick with the camp he’s been supporting. Mr. Speaker, 

I ask all members to join with me in welcoming Mr. Coward 

and his family here to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

want to join with the member from Cypress Hills and welcome 

Tim Geiger and his partner to the legislature, Carmen Gill. 

They have made a significant contribution to the seed industry 

in Saskatchewan dating back a long, long time, started by 

Carmen’s father and perhaps even grandfather, to the industry. 

And Tim has followed along that path. As a seed grower 

myself, we’ve had lots of dealings back and forth over the 

years. And now that they are taking a different path and kind of 

winding down a little bit their operation, some would think that 

that would be good for me but the fact of the matter is, is that 

won’t be good for the industry as a whole. 

 

They have served the industry and agriculture very, very well 

for a long, long period of time in the Leader area. And they will 

be missed by the industry, but we would certainly want to 

welcome them to their legislature this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you it gives me great pleasure to introduce in the East gallery 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

— I’m a bit directionally challenged here; East gallery, I 

believe — my husband Blair and my four-year-old Ophelia. Hi 

guys. Ophelia and Blair have joined me throughout my very 

short legislative career coming down to Regina, but this is the 

first time that we will be away from each other for the whole 

session. So they did happen to come down last night and are 

here today. So thank you. And it was a real treat to get to see 

Ophelia this morning and have lunch with her, and you too, 

Blair. 

 

So with that, I ask all members to join me in welcoming Blair 

and Ophelia to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce in your 

gallery, Mr. Cody Gieni. Mr. Gieni is a member of the 

parliamentary intern program. He is originally from Moose Jaw. 

He’s via the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] in Saskatoon. 

And last week, or two weeks ago, I had the pleasure of having 

him accompanying me around the Melfort constituency, and it 

was a real pleasure to have him with me for the entire week. I 

would like all members to help me welcome Mr. Gieni to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased today to introduce Ms. Laura Hale who’s in your 

gallery today. Give us a wave. Thank you very much, Laura. 

It’s great to have the opportunity to introduce her to you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, because I think 

we’re going to be seeing Laura fairly frequently in our halls 

throughout the next few months. 

 

Laura is the artist coordinator for our new artist-in-residence 

program, which is one of the programs we have put in place to 

celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Legislative Building. 

Laura is from Tisdale originally and is a visual artist herself. 

She has had extensive experience with engaging Saskatchewan 

communities in art. She’s also a kinesiology grad from the U of 

R [University of Regina] who had a great career playing 

volleyball. Go Cougars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a media event this morning, we announced that 

Laura will be in charge of selecting eight artists who will work 

in this building at different times throughout the coming year. I 

am told that having an artist-in-residence program is a first for 

Canadian legislatures, Mr. Speaker, yet another first for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our artists in residence will work on projects related to the 

anniversary, and they are going to engage with visitors and 

students who come to the building. Please join me in 

welcoming Laura to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, it’s my pleasure to also welcome Laura to 

her Legislative Assembly. I am looking forward to seeing what 

she does as the coordinator of the artist-in-residency program. 

She’s done amazing work, I know, in Saskatoon when she was 

the artist in the community for the Meewasin Valley Authority: 

if anyone’s ever been down to the River Landing, the beautiful 

tree grates, and the lovely tile mosaics were programs that 

Laura helped facilitate. So I am quite excited, particularly about 

the youth arts initiative piece that she will be working on here 

too. So with that I’d ask everybody to welcome Laura once 

again to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, somebody that is not likely a stranger anywhere, is 

Peter Voldeng, formerly active in the agricultural business 

sector of our economy, now living in Saskatoon, and a 

small-business person. Mr. Voldeng was at one time president 

of the Saskatchewan Party and is now president of the 

Saskatoon Southeast constituency, so any of my failings in the 

electoral future will certainly be his fault rather than my own. 

I’m pleased to see him and would ask all members to join him. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to join with the 

members opposite in welcoming Graham Addley and Speaker 

Kowalsky. It caused me a little bit of angst earlier today when I 

saw them both come in together. Early on in my career after the 

first election I parked next to Mr. Addley, and it was my wish to 

put a Saskatchewan Party licence plate on the front of his 

vehicle. 

 

I went to see Speaker Kowalsky, worried that I would somehow 

be subject to some disciplinary proceedings if it came to light 

that I was the one responsible. Speaker Kowalsky was quick to 

join with me and encouraged me to do it and said, you bring his 

old licence plate to me, and if he’s got any problems, he’ll deal 

with the Speaker on it. So I did it. And I think Mr. Addley 

drove his Toyota back and forth to Saskatoon and to many NDP 

[New Democratic Party] functions with the Saskatchewan Party 

licence plate on the front. I suspect it increased the value of the 

vehicle by many hundreds of dollars. And in any event, I would 

like to hope that they’re not here plotting revenge and would 

like to thank him for coming today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a young 

lady just joined us in the west gallery, Marley Kotylak from the 

Montmartre area. Marley’s well-noted for her scholastic ability, 

her involvement in community, in fact not only in school and 

sports but also many volunteer efforts. She, through her 

volunteerism in the community, she was recognized with the 

Young Woman of Distinction Award in 2011. 

 

Marley has come a long ways to join us today. She’s politically 

active, and she wanted to come and just see how the session is 

running, but she’s come from Minot State University, has a 

little break. And we want to extend a warm welcome to Marley 

Kotylak. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to ask the members to join with 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

me in welcoming the following guests that are here to join with 

us to listen to the Queen’s message on Commonwealth Day. 

Sitting in my gallery are Mr. Bert Clarke representing the 

Commonwealth nation of Barbados, if you would please stand; 

Dr. Michael Kwesie Bimpeh-Segu and Dr. Michelle Segu 

representing Ghana; Mrs. Renu Kapoor and Mrs. Rani Bilkhu 

representing India; Ms. Mavis Ashbourne Palmer representing 

Jamaica; Mr. Sel Murray representing Trinidad and Tobago; 

and Mr. Mike Luti representing Uganda. 

 

Also we have members from the Saskatchewan branch of the 

Royal Commonwealth Society: Dr. Michael Jackson, branch 

Chair; Mr. Peter Kucherepa, branch vice-president; Reverend 

Derek Nicholls; Reverend Ted Giese; Dr. Lewis Draper, who is 

also a former MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 

Assiniboia, now Wood River; Ms. Isabel Bailey; and Ms. 

Margaret Asquith-Morrey. 

 

As well as has been previously mentioned, we have former 

Speaker Myron Kowalsky, who was the Speaker here in the 

Saskatchewan legislature from March of 2001 to November, 

2007, as well as former Deputy Speaker Graham Addley, who 

served from May of 2001 to October of 2005. I would ask all 

members to welcome them here today on Commonwealth Day. 

 

[13:45] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, Saskatchewan, alone and 

unprotected from intruders. 

 

But we also know that there are positive statistics showing that 

convenience store and gas station robberies are down by 

one-third since 1999, largely due to increased safety practices, 

including two people working together on late-night shifts. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 

of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the management of our finances. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Kindersley and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 

petition today from individuals in the province calling for the 

Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights. It reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and the right to live free 

from poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which will 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security, and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern for our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many trappers and community members in 

northern Saskatchewan. I so present. 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

J.J. Kirkpatrick Award Recipients 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to recognize the PotashCorp employees and the United 

Steelworkers for being named the recipients of the United 

Way’s prestigious J.J. Kirkpatrick Award presented in 

recognition for outstanding leadership in an employee campaign 

resulting in significant growth of the leadership giving program. 

 

PotashCorp’s 2011 campaign doubled leadership numbers to 

104 donors and raised over $700,000 to the local United Way 

program. 

 

The executive director of the United Way of Saskatoon and 

Area, Sheri Benson, said: 

 

The winners of this award have proven that they are 

leaders in every sense of the word during the 2011 

campaign. The employee campaign chairs at the head 

office and mine sites — Patience Lake, Cory and Allan — 

encourage participation and contributions from their 

colleagues while raising awareness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is one example of several projects of the 

labour partnership of the United Way of Saskatoon and Area 

and the Saskatoon & District Labour Council, a partnership that 

is working to build community together. Labour’s commitment 

to the United Way is about supporting and working collectively 

to create and foster positive communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join with me in 

celebrating the surpassing of Saskatoon United Way’s 

fundraising goal with a special thank you to the PotashCorp 

employees and the United Steelworkers for their great 

achievements. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Agricultural Safety Week 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 11 to 17 has 

been proclaimed Agricultural Safety Week in Saskatchewan. 

Every single year an average of 16 people die on provincial 

farms and over 180 are hospitalized due to preventable injuries. 

Fifty per cent of farm fatalities and injuries are machine-related. 

Farming is one of the most hazardous occupations in Canada. 

 

With the help of over 200 rural municipalities, Saskatchewan 

Agriculture provides funds for the agricultural health and safety 

network to deliver safety initiatives and services for farm and 

ranch families. To protect Saskatchewan farmers, our 

government has implemented a farm safety program which 

offers educational seminars, exhibits at trade shows, and 

resource materials such as a farm safety guide available in print 

and online as well as safety DVDs [digital versatile disc] that 

promote safe work practices and injury prevention. 

 

Saskatchewan Agricultural Safety Week was held in 

conjunction with Canadian Agricultural Safety Week which is 

sponsored by the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, the 

Canadian Agricultural Safety Association, Farm Credit Canada, 

and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farming was the bedrock on which this province 

was built, and we must continue to strive to reach the very 

important goal of eliminating injuries and fatalities in the 

agricultural sector. On behalf of all government MLAs, I would 

like to extend well wishes and hope that all producers are safe 

out there this spring and always. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Points Athabasca Northern Spirit Showcase 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to recognize Points Athabasca Northern Spirit Showcase 

of 2012, which is held in Prince Albert. This musical arts and 

personal development program was the fifth annual production 

of the event and included participation of 40 mostly First 

Nations and Métis participants, ages 13 to 18, from all over 

northern Saskatchewan that displayed their outstanding singing 

and musical talents. 

 

The youth were selected from an original pool of 88 

participants who participated in the fifth annual Northern Spirits 

workshop back in November of 2011. Mr. Speaker, the 

organizers of that workshop were then given the difficult task of 

choosing which of the youth would produce and perform at the 

main showcase held on February 18th of 2012. Highlighting the 

show were performances by Shanda Burns, Tristan Randhile, 

Hailey Mercredi, Jordanna Toutsaint, Nicolas Gardiner, Kelsey 

Ethan McIntyre, Dora Corrigal, and Gaylene Ballantyne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of the youth did a great job in showcasing the 

kind of talent we have in northern Saskatchewan. These young 

men and women put the whole show on themselves, from the 

stage and set design to emceeing and lighting as well. Mr. 

Speaker, these youth will take the lessons learned from this live 

performance back to their home and help to become leaders 

within the performing arts and their community as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join me in recognizing 

event sponsor Points Athabasca Contracting and of course all 

the performers, volunteers, and parents in showcasing the 

performing arts talent of Saskatchewan’s northern youth. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Fundraising Event for the Shock Trauma 

Air Rescue Society 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to once 

again recognize the tremendous efforts of the people of the 

Melfort constituency. On Saturday evening, March 10th, the 

first ever STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] benefit 

fundraiser was held in the province of Saskatchewan in Melfort. 

The response was fantastic. It was a sold-out event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must recognize the tireless efforts of the 

volunteers. A local woman, Robin Miazga, spearheaded the 

event with the assistance of RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

Police] Corporal Bonnie McLean, Fire Chief John McDonald, 

EMS [emergency medical services] Wayne Therres, and my 

two CAs [constituency assistant], Peggy Gordon and Laurie 

Hookway. 

 

We were captivated by Tyson Parker of Leduc, Alberta when he 

spoke about his own rescue that he had had just outside Leduc. 

And we were very pleased to have the Minister of Social 

Services with us that evening. I myself had the honour of 

introducing one of our own: the former minister of Finance and 

now executive vice-president of STARS Foundation, Rod 

Gantefoer. Rod made an excellent presentation to the audience 

explaining exactly how STARS operates, its missions, and how 

important fundraising is to this non-profit corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the event showcased the enthusiasm and 

generosity of the people in support of this worthy cause, and 

they reached deep into their pocket and came out with $27,000, 

Mr. Speaker. I wish to congratulate the people of Melfort and 

the districts surrounding them on this most successful event. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Landis School Projects 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, on November 30th, 2011, 

representatives from the Landis School took great pride in 

showcasing their new project-based learning initiative to the 

community. The presentation displayed student-led projects 

focusing on horticulture and student leadership and was 

highlighted by guest speaker Bryan McCrea, one of the 

founders of 3twenty Solutions, who shared his own experiences 

and his successes with project-based learning. 3twenty 

Solutions, a Saskatchewan-based company, builds 

accommodations, workspaces, and specialty storage spaces 

using shipping containers for a variety of customers around the 

world. 

 

Bryan is a graduate of the Edwards School of Business, who in 

partnership with the Sun West School Division are currently 

discussing a possible partnership building on the Landis School 

model. The project-based learning model is based on the belief 

that students learn the best when they are involved in the 

process by researching, asking and answering their own 

questions, and creating something new. Project-based learning 

involves teams of students researching and learning content as 

they work to create something that solves problems in their 

school and community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the showcase was a great way to inform the 

community of a new way of learning in a school that is looking 

forward to an exciting future, highlighting that good projects, 

guided by a teacher, and completed by the active students cover 

just as much curriculum as lectures. Landis School students 

report that it is an awesome and fun way of learning. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

University of Saskatchewan Men’s Hockey Victory 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand today to 

congratulate the University of Saskatchewan Huskies men’s 

hockey team on being crowned the Canadian West champions. 

 

The Huskies beat the University of Calgary Dinos on a goal by 

Brett Ward at 6:33 in triple overtime for a 2-1 win. Ward beat 

netminder Dustin Butler for the win after both Butler and 

Huskie goaltender Ryan Holfeld had played fantastic overtime 

periods. Each goaltender kept their team in the game on 

numerous occasions with sprawling saves and clear breaks to 

the net. This triple overtime epic battle marked the longest in 

conference history. 

 

The work and dedication displayed by these fantastic athletes 

deserve recognition. The long hours of practice, careful 

attention to good health, and the life balance required between 

sport and study are commendable achievements. 

 

The Huskies last won the Canada West Championship in 2007. 

History is not on the side of the Dinos. They have never 

defeated the Huskies in five Canada West final meetings. 

 

The Huskies will now compete at the University Cup as the 

lone Canada West team. The University Cup, hosted by the 

UNB [University of New Brunswick] Varsity Reds, is March 

21st to the 25th in Fredericton, New Brunswick. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in congratulating the U of S 

champions and wish them well at the University Cup. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Canadian Interuniversity Sport 

Women’s Basketball Tournament 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 

opportunity to acknowledge both Saskatchewan university 

women’s basketball teams for qualifying at the Canadian 

Interuniversity Sport Basketball Tournament. 

 

The Huskies qualified as a wild card entry as the number 6 

seed, while the Cougars qualified for the CIS [Canadian 

Interuniversity Sport] tournament in Calgary by beating the 

Brock Badgers at the West Regional Tournament in Saskatoon, 

a game attended by the MLA for Saskatoon Greystone and his 

daughter Jacqueline. 

 

The Cougars team was then rewarded for their hard work with 

the CanWest number one ranking going into the tournament. 

The Cougars team played exceptionally well all season, posting 

23 straight wins before losing the conference championship to 

the UBC [University of British Columbia] Thunderbirds, and 

look forward to taking on their opponents throughout the 

national championship tournament. 

 

As top seeds, the lady Cougars will meet the University of 

Calgary Dinos in the quarter-final match. The Cougars have 

beaten the Dinos three times this season but take nothing for 

granted. The Dinos are an incredibly tough team to beat at 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

home. Both teams deserve congratulations for their hard work, 

dedication to health and athletics, and success balancing a tough 

university sport schedule with intense academic requirements. 

 

I would also like to congratulate my niece, Madi, for her 

accomplishments in her inaugural year with the Cougars. 

 

Would all members please join me in congratulating our 

fantastic Saskatchewan women’s university basketball teams 

and wish them luck at the CIS tournament. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Accommodation in Seniors’ Facility 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week, Mr. 

Speaker, I raised concerns on behalf of residents of St. Mary’s 

Villa in Humboldt. These individuals were concerned about the 

asbestos removal from their facility just after they’d been given 

an eviction notice of just a few days notice and they were still 

packing their belongings and trying to find a place to live. 

 

Following question period, Mr. Speaker, the minister had this to 

say in a scrum, “It’s my understanding that there isn’t asbestos 

in there.” The minister also said, “We haven’t been told that 

there was. The health region says there isn’t.” 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, just moments later, the health region 

confirmed to media that there was indeed asbestos present and 

that it was being removed. My question to the minister: why 

didn’t he know this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I think we all know, the Saskatoon Health Region 

or any of the health regions are responsible for the delivery of 

health care within their regions, Mr. Speaker. That not only 

entails delivering of health care. It also entails working on 

facilities, repairing facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was not aware that there was asbestos in the facility when I 

spoke to the media last Thursday, Mr. Speaker. I found out later 

that there was asbestos. I have asked the health region. The 

health region has responded by saying that all the occupational 

and health safety concerns were taken of, Mr. Speaker. 

Occupational health and safety has said that the Saskatoon 

Health Region covered all their bases when they were removing 

asbestos, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Having said that, we are still looking forward to having the 

Ombudsman take a look into this, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not 

only just the removal of asbestos. It was the whole process 

around the notification, Mr. Speaker, and the communication 

that was conducted, that needs to be looked into. This is one 

more other factor that the Ombudsman will be looking into. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The health region 

delivers care, delivers medical care, Mr. Speaker, but the 

minister is responsible. And when there is an issue of this 

importance, an issue that has had considerable media attention, 

it’s up to the minister to be asking the right questions and to 

ensure he knows what is going on. That clearly has not 

happened in this instance. Even if the minister wasn’t listening 

to his briefings, Mr. Speaker, he at least had the chance to read 

in his media clippings package, I would assume, about the 

issues happening at St. Mary’s Villa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister was not paying attention to this file. 

These are individuals in their 80s and 90s being forced out on 

short notice, trying to find a place to live, then confronted by 

individuals in protective suits taking out asbestos from the 

facility. 

 

The minister went on in his quote to say this in the scrum: 

 

It’s our understanding that there is none. The health 

region, I mean I just have to go with what the health 

region says. It’s their facility. They’re the ones who have 

been dealing with this. They said that they have no 

evidence that there was asbestos in there and that’s how 

they moved accordingly. 

 

The minister is responsible for the delivery of health care in the 

province. It’s up to him to ask the questions that matter, to his 

officials, when there is a matter of great significance. And this, 

Mr. Speaker, has required a lot of attention. My question to the 

minister: why, on this issue at St. Mary’s Villa, did he drop the 

ball over and over and over again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the 

health region is responsible for the day-to-day activities. I can 

tell you that they do a number of activities each and every day. I 

am not kept up to speed on every issue, whether it’s moving a 

person in or moving a person out, what all the issues are around 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the health regions do a very good job, and 

Saskatoon Regional Health Authority has done a great job at 

putting patients first over the last number of years. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think, according to the health region and talking to 

their board Chair, they feel that they have dropped the ball on 

this one and that’s why they’re inviting the Ombudsman in as 

well to look at this particular facility, Mr. Speaker, and the 

situations around it. 

 

I think if you would have read also and listened to what the 

Saskatoon media person said, is they are handling the asbestos 

issue according to occupational health and safety guidelines so 

they felt no need to inform me, the minister. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the first instance when 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

we’ve seen the minister on a different page than the health 

region. I think to his profit-driven clinic approach. There’s been 

instances there — a different health region, Mr. Speaker, but the 

same minister uninformed about what’s going on in the region. 

 

It would be one thing, Mr. Speaker, if it was just the minister, 

but it’s other members of the Assembly also that aren’t paying 

attention to this important issue. The local MLA, Mr. Speaker, 

has also commented on this as reported in The Globe and Mail. 

She wrote a letter to the families, and as it’s reported in the 

paper, it said, “I assure you that no residents will be evicted and 

a reasonable amount of time will be allowed to accommodate 

what will be best for the seniors involved.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that simply did not occur. The residents 

were evicted. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, they were confronted by 

asbestos removal as they were packing their belongings, trying 

to find a place to live. 

 

It’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that members there do not understand 

the importance of putting seniors first and protecting their 

rights. Last week I put forward private member’s legislation 

called the seniors’ bill of rights to help protect seniors and 

ensure there is the dignity there for the individuals. My question 

to the minister: will he support the seniors’ bill of rights? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said last week, each 

and every day in the health care system, there are tens of 

thousands of interactions with seniors across the province, Mr. 

Speaker, through the 12 health regions, through the Cancer 

Agency. And not all are perfect, and we’ll admit that, and we 

will continue to admit that. There is always more work to do. 

But the vast majority receive very good care, and that’s why it 

is so disconcerting when you hear a situation around St. Mary’s 

Villa that there was not appropriate treatment, that we need to 

look into it, Mr. Speaker. But I think it’s very important that we 

let the Ombudsman look into this and do their work, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And talk about being on a different page: the members opposite 

are on a different page. As a matter of fact, the member from 

Regina Elphinstone stated last week to the media, he said, “We 

don’t want to prejudge the work of the Ombudsman.” In other 

words, let him do the work. Let’s look at the recommendations, 

and follow through on them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Grain Marketing 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The current bidding 

war over Viterra is happening because multinationals are 

capitalizing on the opportunity of greater profit, thanks to the 

demise of the Canadian Wheat Board single-desk monopoly on 

wheat, which this government lobbied for hard. Viterra has 

reported that the single desk’s demise will mean a $50 million 

increase in its annual earnings. We all know exactly where that 

increased profit is coming from, from out of farmers’ pockets. 

 

When questioned in December, the minister had no plan for 

dealing with the single desk’s demise. To the minister: has he 

now had a chance to determine how this government will help 

farmers and not large corporations deal with the 

post-single-desk regime? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the member is aware that most producers 

in this province are looking forward to the future without the 

monopoly with the Canadian Wheat Board. I think we see a 

number of changes happening out there. I think, Mr. Speaker, 

the producers have come to the realization that it’s happening. I 

think the Canadian Wheat Board has an opportunity here, Mr. 

Speaker, by being able to market canola and flax and oats and 

other commodities that they didn’t have that right to market 

before, that they may end up being stronger than they ever have 

been in the past. I think the optimistic view of many producers 

out there is that they have themselves though the opportunity to 

market their own grain without being tied and locked in under 

the Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — They’re not locked into the board any more. 

They’re locked into the agenda of corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

This story has no surprises. The destruction of the single desk 

allows Viterra to “fatten earnings,” according to today’s Globe 

and Mail. This government pushed to get rid of the single desk 

without planning for the consequences. Well the consequences 

have now arrived, Mr. Speaker, and that means less profit for 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

In December the minister suggested that the single desk caused 

payment delay problems for farmers. He should be more 

concerned about pay cuts for farmers. Why did this government 

choose to put ideology ahead of the welfare of this province’s 

background — its farmers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking 

forward, and I know many producers in this province are 

looking forward into the future of where the agriculture industry 

can go. I think there’s so many opportunities out there right 

now and by taking the monopoly away on the Canadian Wheat 

Board adds another opportunity for producers, especially, Mr. 

Speaker, young producers that turn on their computers in the 

morning and can check markets right around the world. 

Agriculture, as well as everything else and technology, is 

changing on a daily basis. The Canadian Wheat Board was 

formed in the 1940s, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s time we look into 

the future, let our young farmers go forward and plan their 

businesses accordingly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re going to see an awful lot of 

optimism right across the ag sector as we see how they can 

market their own grain for themselves, and especially when 

they pay for those inputs that go into raising that commodity, 

own the land it’s grown on. And, Mr. Speaker, they should have 

that right. Mr. Speaker, they have that opportunity today. 

 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is not just the 

official opposition speculating on where the interest in Viterra 

is coming from. Bloomberg News reported today that Viterra 

said in January it expected to increase grain volumes and 

earnings after the board’s control of supplies ends. 

 

For decades the Canadian Wheat Board protected farmers and 

ensured that they received the net benefit, a good price for their 

wheat. To the minister: will the government now, at the very 

least, set up a system of price monitoring to protect farmers, 

something it should have done months ago? What is the plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, I might remind her that 

canola has not been under the monopoly of the Canadian Wheat 

Board, and I think as of today it’s around $12.50 a bushel. I 

might remind that same member opposite that flax was not 

under the monopoly of the Canadian Wheat Board, and it’s 

selling for around $13 a bushel. Mr. Speaker, I would also 

remind her that wheat was under the monopoly of the Canadian 

Wheat Board, and it’s selling for somewhere around 4 to $5 a 

bushel. Mr. Speaker, canola, flax, and a number of the other 

commodities, the pulses, that were in the open market system 

have done very, very well on their own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would add again though that the Canadian 

Wheat Board, I think, will be able to function with the new 

added responsibilities of being able to market canola and flax 

and oats and pulses and some of the other crops. I think if it’s a 

very good value for the dollar that they’re paying out there and 

competing, Mr. Speaker, competing with other markets out 

there. I think producers are going to get a better bang for their 

dollar and for their grains. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Possible Takeover of Grain Trading Company 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as pointed out by the 

member from Nutana, this Premier and Sask Party government 

pushed hard to support the dismantling of the Wheat Board here 

in Saskatchewan and across Western Canada even though 

market analysts had warned of the takeover of Viterra as a 

direct result of the dismantling of the Wheat Board. I quote 

business columnist Bruce Johnstone’s article in the Leader-Post 

on March 10th: “Market analysts speculated Viterra itself could 

become a takeover target with the end of the CWB monopoly.” 

 

To the minister: what economic analysis was done to 

understand the economic impact of dismantling the Wheat 

Board and one of its results, the potential takeover of Viterra? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to a degree this is 

a hypothetical situation that I don’t think anyone fully 

understands what’s actually happening to this point. We 

certainly don’t have the information unless the member 

opposite has something that we don’t, Mr. Speaker. But I think 

in the final outcome that we’ll be watching what’s best for the 

people of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, in this case what’s 

best for the agriculture industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But I would add, Mr. Speaker, that if we look back to the years 

— and I think the member opposite might have mentioned this 

from time to time — when the Pool had a bid to take over 

Agricore and I think that same concern that the member 

opposite is voicing here today, what happened in that situation, 

it ended up being a stronger company. Viterra ended up being 

one of the most positive companies right across this country. So 

I think, Mr. Speaker, we’d be well served to wait and find out 

all the details of what is in the works. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, certainly the opposition 

concurs with that minister that that government doesn’t 

understand what’s going on here today, Mr. Speaker. It seems 

that this is but another example of ideology trumping common 

sense. 

 

Viterra, formerly the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, has been an 

incredibly important part of our economic history as a province 

and a proud part of our history. And to this day, the large Prairie 

and Canadian champion has been a powerful and important 

economic presence in our province and in Regina. This includes 

corporate office jobs that add significant value to our local 

economy, not to mention the contributions of these workers to 

our city and province. These well-paying jobs contribute 

mightily to our local economy such as, as an important driver of 

local business — for example, retail sales. 

 

To the minister: with the potential takeover of Viterra and the 

real and valid risk of losing jobs, what analysis has this 

government done to understand this impact? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this day, I 

informed the media of the province of Saskatchewan, and some 

are already reporting, that there is a process in place through 

Investment Canada that we’re well acquainted with here in the 

province of Saskatchewan, a process to evaluate potential 

takeovers of Canadian companies if they meet certain criteria. 

 

This is all based on conjecture at this point, and rumour, 

although the rumour mill is heating up certainly. Mr. Speaker, 

I’ll just say what I said to the media to members of this House: 

this government will use that federal government process of 

analysis, will do so deliberately and will do so aggressively, to 

ensure that there is a net benefit to Canada and to Saskatchewan 

before we would recommend that the federal government 

approve any takeover, including the one speculated with respect 

of Viterra. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re aware of the process. We’ve just been 

through it in 2010, Mr. Speaker. If this takeover comes to be in 

terms of being something more than rumour, we’ll take the 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

same deliberative and appropriate and thorough steps to protect 

the interests of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it appears that any 

thoughtful analysis of the economic impact or the loss of jobs or 

the impact on community has been scant or non-existent by this 

government. And in fact, they pushed an agenda without any 

understanding of the consequences for Saskatchewan people. 

 

As business columnist Bruce Johnstone, as well as financial 

analysts and experts, have pointed out, these impacts and this 

takeover is a direct result of this government and its federal 

cousins. We recognize the challenge this brings to people and 

families and our communities by way of job loss and of course 

our economy. But these jobs and this company also contribute 

to our provincial finances, impacting corporate sales tax, 

property tax, consumption taxes, personal income taxes — all in 

a negative way. 

 

Question to the minister: has his government analyzed the 

negative impact on our provincial finances, our revenues? And 

specifically how much money could this eliminate from our 

budget and the priorities of Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have already given 

up with respect to Viterra and its offices here in the city of 

Regina. Mr. Speaker, that ought not to surprise anybody in the 

province of Saskatchewan because people in this province will 

not forget the fact that on the day the federal government was 

going to rule with respect to the potash decision, the leader of 

the NDP, Dwain Lingenfelter, with support of members over 

there, he was in Ottawa ready to have a press conference with 

Jack Layton to throw in the towel on the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there is a takeover proposal, this side of the 

House, this government, will do all of its homework, will do the 

analysis. And, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t take the advice of the 

member opposite with respect to Viterra, I don’t think anyone 

will be surprised. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have just heard the revisionist 

history about the potash takeover. What we know is this 

Premier dithered. He didn’t know what he was doing. He fought 

for time. And when the true story comes out, he came at the 

right position for the people of Saskatchewan; there’s no 

denying that. But he’s got to be really careful when he tells this 

story because there are many people who will correct it for the 

historians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this issue in Saskatchewan is of a major 

consequence for all of us in this province for many reasons. Has 

the Premier spoken with the Prime Minister or the federal 

Minister of Agriculture? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. We 

haven’t talked to the Prime Minister about a takeover bid that 

hasn’t happened yet. We haven’t talked to him about weather in 

June that hasn’t happened yet. We haven’t talked to him about 

the Riders in the playoffs because that hasn’t happened yet. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake. If there is a takeover bid 

of Viterra by the companies that have been rumoured or anyone 

else, this government will approach it in the same deliberate and 

focused and aggressive way as we did the proposed takeover of 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we will 

assemble a team within government tasked to know the deal 

from every possible angle. Mr. Speaker, we will seek outside 

advice in terms of its fiscal impact and its economic impact if 

we believe that is needed. And, Mr. Speaker, we will come to, 

and then publicly disclose, the position of the province of 

Saskatchewan, not just to the federal government whose 

decision this would be, but also to all of the people of this 

province so that they will know that our interest is their interest. 

The net benefit analysis is what’s prescribed by the federal 

government. That’s what we expect to be used in any potential 

takeover, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Viterra is Canada’s largest grain 

handling company. And Bruce Johnstone points out: 

 

One could argue that Viterra — being the largest 

grainhandling company in the country — is a strategic 

asset that is in the “national interest” to protect from 

foreign ownership. If potash is “strategic,” then what 

about wheat, barley and other grains and oilseeds? 

 

Fifteen months ago, the Prime Minister promised to clarify and 

define “the national interest” in regards to foreign takeovers of 

Canadian companies. Mr. Speaker, can the Premier answer 

whether he has done anything in the last 15 months to follow up 

with the Prime Minister to define and clarify “the national 

interest” in regard to the foreign takeover of Saskatchewan 

companies? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all, Viterra and 

any company that’s in the grain business that’s going to be a 

candidate for takeover doesn’t actually own the wheat. That’s 

something the NDP doesn’t understand. The wheat belongs to 

the farmers who own the land, who provide the inputs, who 

grow the grain and now, Mr. Speaker, and now, Mr. Speaker, 

who will be free to chose how to market the product that they 

have grown and invested to produce under the new system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting now that the opposition is in high 

dudgeon about a deal, a takeover bid that’s not yet been 

announced, because it was their government that presided over 

the transformation of Viterra from the Wheat Pool to the 

company that it is today. And the Agriculture minister of the 

day, Mark Wartman, offered his reservations about their 

involvement in the market in any way to stop this. He said: 

 

Saskatchewan Agriculture Minister Mark Wartman 

offered similar reservations, although Wartman 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

acknowledged that there isn’t anything a provincial 

government could do to stop this acquisition. Nor frankly, 

would the province have much in the way of regulatory 

tools to deal with the new Pool. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our view is different than that. There is a net 

benefit analysis through the Investment Canada process. We 

expect it to be applied rigorously to any takeover involving a 

Saskatchewan company or any other company. Mr. Speaker, I 

think there’s a demonstrated record on this side of the House, of 

this government, standing up for Saskatchewan’s interests. 

That’s exactly what we’ll do again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear that the Premier 

did not answer my question: has he talked to the Prime Minister 

about this important issue for Saskatchewan people in the last 

15 months? Because we know that this definition of national 

interest is extremely important. It affects our economy. It 

affects jobs. It affects many, many, many parts of the province. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier: what is he waiting for? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of triggering 

the process we’ll use to evaluate a potential takeover, we would 

be waiting for the potential takeover. Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 

reasonable. I think that’s the process that’s served the 

government and the province of Saskatchewan very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government has not yet, has not yet 

opened up the Investment Canada process to the review that it 

talked about in the wake of the potash announcement. Mr. 

Speaker, should it do that, this government is ready to provide a 

very detailed brief and policy to that particular review process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think there are strategic resources and 

companies that have control over strategic resources. Our 

analysis would demonstrate the Potash Corporation on one hand 

and Cameco on the other. Cameco is protected by golden shares 

both federally and provincially. And unlike the NDP opposite, 

this side of the House will not give up the golden share on any 

company it currently holds that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems absolutely clear 

that this Premier has not talked to the Prime Minister about this 

issue. We know that it’s a situation where he has had the 

opportunity to work with the information that was received in 

the whole BHP, Potash Corporation situation. So, Mr. Speaker, 

his role as a leader in this province is to make sure that we have 

both the provincial laws and the federal laws in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier again: when will he talk to the 

Prime Minister about this important issue so that we in the 

province of Saskatchewan can have some understanding about 

whether food that’s produced in our province is just as much in 

the national interest as the potash that is used to grow that food? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. We’re 

talking about a company that handles the food that the world 

certainly needs and that we are producing, our producers 

produce in great quantities. Again I’m not sure how many times 

I can say this to the hon. member, but I’ll try one more time. 

Mr. Speaker, when there is a proposed takeover for Viterra or 

any other Saskatchewan company that qualifies to trigger the 

investment review process, that triggers the net benefit test that 

we’ll be seeking to be applied rigorously to any such deal, until 

that happens, Mr. Speaker, we won’t be going, talking to the 

Prime Minister or others about hypothetical deals. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important in terms of market 

integrity and in the interests of the company that these members 

seem to be wanting to speak to it in terms of . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sell out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well or sell out, depending on who’s asking 

the question. I think in fairness to that company, we shouldn’t 

be speculating too much about the particular takeover, save to 

say this, that when it comes forward, if it comes forward, this 

government will seek to defend the interests of this province. 

This government will seek that the net benefit test is applied 

aggressively to the interests of Canada and to the interest of 

Saskatchewan just as we’ve done in the past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY 

QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would ask all 

members to rise for the Commonwealth Day message from Her 

Majesty the Queen, Head of the Commonwealth: 

 

One of the great benefits of today’s technology-based 

world is the range of opportunities it offers to understand 

and appreciate how others live: we can see, hear, and enter 

into the experience of people in communities and 

circumstances far removed from our own. 

 

A remarkable insight we gain from such windows on the 

world is that, however different outward appearances may 

be, we share a great deal in common. Our circumstances 

and surroundings may vary enormously, for example in 

the food we eat and the clothes we wear, but we share one 

humanity, and this draws us all together. The joys of 

celebration and sympathy of sadness may be expressed 

differently but they are felt in the same way the world 

over. 

 

How we express our identities reveals both a rich diversity 

and many common threads. Through the creative genius of 

artists — whether they be writers, actors, film-makers, 

dancers, or musicians — we can see both the range of our 

cultures and the elements of our shared humanity. 

 

“Connecting Cultures,” our Commonwealth theme this 

year, encourages us to consider the special opportunities 

we have as members of this unique gathering of nations, to 

celebrate an extraordinary cultural tapestry that reflects 

our many individual and collective identities. The 

Commonwealth treasures and respects this wealth of 

diversity. 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

Connecting cultures is more, however, than observing 

others and the ways in which they express themselves. 

This year our Commonwealth focus seeks to explore how 

we can share and strengthen the bond of Commonwealth 

citizenship we already enjoy by using our cultural 

connections to help bring us even closer together as family 

and friends across the globe. 

 

To support this theme, a special song has been composed 

for the Commonwealth: “Stronger as One.” There are any 

number of ways in which that single piece of music alone 

can be played or sung anywhere in the Commonwealth. 

And by sharing the same music with our own personal 

interpretations and contributions, the wonderful human 

attribute of imagination is nourished, and we gain insights 

of understanding and appreciation of others. 

 

The Commonwealth offers a pathway for this greater 

understanding and the opportunity to expand upon our 

shared experience in a wider world, a world in which paths 

of mutual respect and common cause may also be explored 

and which can draw us together, stronger and better than 

before. 

 

Elizabeth R. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would request leave of my colleagues in the legislature to move 

a humble address, that one be presented to Her Majesty, the 

Queen. And I have some remarks before moving the motion. I 

would ask for that leave now. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave to present a 

humble address. Is leave granted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Congratulations to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

understand that the Leader of the Opposition may also wish to 

address the motion before we put it to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in her initial address to the Empire, as it was 

known then, Her Majesty declared to all of us “. . . that my 

whole life whether it be long or short shall be devoted to your 

service and the service of our great imperial family to which we 

all belong.” 

 

Over the reign of Her Majesty, we have seen the very shape and 

structure of our society here and across the Commonwealth 

change, to be transformed in ways that could only have been 

dreamed of 60 years ago. However, through this 60-year period, 

Her Majesty has displayed an unwavering devotion to duty and 

to service which today we celebrate and we mark, for which 

today we wish to express our deep appreciation on behalf of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. It is most fitting that 

we would do this on Commonwealth Day, that this House 

would pay tribute to the Queen of Canada through the adoption 

of a humble address as part of our provincial celebrations in this 

Diamond Jubilee year. 

 

Since her first visit to our province in 1951, then as Princess 

Elizabeth, Her Majesty has had a special bond with the people 

of Saskatchewan. Her subsequent visits in 1973, 1978, and 

2005 have only strengthened that relationship. And, Mr. 

Speaker, long before her first visit, there was a connection 

between Her Majesty and this Legislative Building when the 

Duke of Connaught opened the building in 1912, the Duke 

being the great-great uncle of Her Majesty the Queen. 

 

Whether it was a luncheon in Canora in 1987 which showcased 

Ukrainian fare or the oil rig demonstration in Kindersley or the 

2005 visit to the Canadian Light Source Synchrotron and the 

ability for the province to showcase our research excellence, or 

the presentation of a special tablet to the First Nations 

University in recognition of the special relationship between the 

Crown and First Nations or, very poignantly, visiting with our 

veterans at special ceremonies at the War Memorial, Her 

Majesty has seen what makes Saskatchewan great — our 

people. And our people have seen what makes Her Majesty 

great. As a result of our people, Her Majesty has also witnessed 

the steady growth and development of this province as a vital 

component to a strong and united Canada and a key player in 

the Commonwealth family of nations. 

 

It is fitting when we are also celebrating the 100th anniversary 

of this building, a place that she has visited often, that we are 

reminded once again that we should never take for granted our 

system of government or the sacrifices made in defending it. 

For it is this system of government and the freedoms which it 

represents that makes our province and our country one of the 

best places in the world in which to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the great honour, now just over a year ago at 

Buckingham Palace, for a brief audience with Her Majesty. It is 

something I will never forget. Mr. Speaker, I didn’t know what 

to expect, neither did any of us that were going into 

Buckingham Palace that day. 

 

Our daughter was with us, our oldest daughter was with us. 

She’s an anglophile of the highest order and loves all things 

Britannia and loves the history of the monarchy. And she was 

able to attend, at least in the waiting room, while we waited for 

the audience. And I remember, Mr. Speaker, as the hype was 

growing for the royal wedding, us being driven in through the 

front gates and there was a large, large crowd out there, all 

straining to see who was in this nondescript van driving through 

the gates. I said to Megan, I said, if they only knew who it was, 

they’d be so disappointed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that very brief meeting with Her Majesty was 

really quite amazing. I had the chance to present her some gifts, 

heartfelt gifts on behalf of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, which she appreciated. And then we had a 

chance for a brief conversation where, Mr. Speaker, we 

canvassed a number of world issues, where she asked about 

Saskatchewan, asked about our resources and the state of things 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

here, and demonstrated that Her Majesty is very, very much 

aware of what’s going on in this country and specifically in this 

province. And it is a moment for which I’ll be always grateful 

and again, as I say, I will not forget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through this motion and the other celebrations 

which are planned throughout this Diamond Jubilee year, we 

are extending our gratitude to Her Majesty for her unwavering 

devotion to duty over these last 60 years. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

wish her many more years of happiness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move then: 

 

That a Humble Address be presented to Her Majesty the 

Queen in the following words: 

 

TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY: 

 

MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, QUEEN OF 

CANADA: 

 

We, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in Session 

assembled, wish to extend our sincere congratulations to 

Your Majesty, on this year of celebration marking the 

sixtieth anniversary of Your Accession. 

 

The People of Saskatchewan have been honoured to 

welcome Your Majesty and other members of the Royal 

Family to our province during Your reign and have 

witnessed directly Your inspiring example of devotion to 

duty and unselfish labour on behalf of the welfare of the 

people of Canada and in the other nations of the 

Commonwealth. 

 

We trust that Your gracious and peaceful reign may 

continue for many years and that Divine Providence will 

preserve Your Majesty in health, in happiness and in the 

affectionate loyalty of Your People. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier 

 

That a Humble Address be presented to Her Majesty the 

Queen in the following words: 

 

TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY: 

 

MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, QUEEN OF 

CANADA: 

 

We, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in Session 

assembled, wish to extend our sincere congratulations to 

Your Majesty, on this year of celebration marking the 

sixtieth anniversary of Your Accession. 

 

The People of Saskatchewan have been honoured to 

welcome Your Majesty and other members of the Royal 

Family to our province during Your reign and have 

witnessed directly Your inspiring example of devotion to 

duty and unselfish labour on behalf of the welfare of the 

people of Canada and in the other nations of the 

Commonwealth. 

We trust that Your gracious and peaceful reign may 

continue for many years and that Divine Providence will 

preserve Your Majesty in health, in happiness and in the 

affectionate loyalty of your people. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this Diamond 

Jubilee year, I would like to add the thanks to Her Majesty from 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 60 years is a long time. And when 

I think about it, there’s a few of us in this room who have been 

on the Earth exactly that length of time, and it’s a reminder of 

the strength of this woman who we call our Queen. 

 

When I was growing up, and I guess still to this day, I collected 

stamps together with my father. And the stamps that I liked the 

most of the Canadian stamps were the Diamond Jubilee stamps 

for Queen Victoria that were issued in 1897. And they basically 

were a huge range of stamps with lots of different colours, from 

1 cent, or half a cent actually, up to $5. And I remember 

thinking, as you looked through these stamps, about how to 

celebrate 60 years for a monarch of Canada and of the 

Commonwealth was an amazing thing. 

 

Here today we get to celebrate 60 years for Queen Elizabeth. 

And I think it’s a marvellous thing that we all need to think 

about and recognize that the stability of the monarchy 

throughout the Commonwealth has provided us with an extra 

gift as we have dealt with the parliamentary democracy in 

which we’re part of. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Queen Elizabeth personally for 

her service, as well as all of the members of her family. And I 

wish to express on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition 

our thanks and congratulation and best wishes, and we all look 

forward to celebrating her Diamond Jubilee in great style right 

throughout the Commonwealth. God save the Queen. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has moved: 

 

That a Humble Address be presented to Her Majesty the 

Queen in the following words: 

 

TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY: 

 

MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, QUEEN OF 

CANADA: 

 

We, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in Session 

assembled, wish to extend our sincere congratulations to 

Your Majesty, on this year of celebration, marking the 

sixtieth anniversary of your accession. 

 

The People of Saskatchewan have been honoured to 

welcome Your Majesty and other members of the Royal 

Family to our province during Your reign and have 

witnessed directly Your inspiring example of devotion to 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

duty and unselfish labour on behalf of the welfare of the 

people of Canada and in the other nations of the 

Commonwealth. 

 

We trust that Your gracious and peaceful reign may 

continue for many years and that Divine Providence will 

preserve Your Majesty in health, in happiness and in the 

affectionate loyalty of your people. 

 

All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask for 

leave to move a transmittal motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a transmittal motion. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the address to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II be 

engrossed, signed by Mr. Speaker, and forwarded through 

proper channels. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the address to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II be 

engrossed, signed by Mr. Speaker, and forwarded through 

proper channels. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? All those in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Opposed? Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave for a number of 

motions, actually six of them, motions of condolence with 

respect to former members of this Assembly who’ve passed 

away. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to present six 

condolence motions. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Mr. Premier. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Allan Emrys Blakeney 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker. 

This is always an important day in the spring sitting in the life 

of this Assembly, where we can pay respects and tribute to 

those who have gone before us, the members who have served 

in this Assembly, and where we can talk a little bit about that 

service and about their contribution to their constituencies and 

the province and the country. And where we can also, Mr. 

Speaker, through a motion of transmittal let the family members 

of those members know that this Assembly was thinking of 

them this day and also marking all that they’ve done for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we begin today with a motion of condolence for 

Allan E. Blakeney. Mr. Speaker, I have had the opportunity, 

both in this Assembly and then at an excellent memorial service 

at the Conexus Centre of the Arts, I’ve had the chance to pay 

tribute to the former premier, Mr. Speaker. And so I know there 

are other members in this House who would like to offer a few 

thoughts with respect to the passing of the former premier and 

comment on his contribution to the province. And so in respect 

of this particular motion, I’m going to move right to the reading 

of the motion that will be before this Assembly with the 

following comment I don’t think that I’ve yet made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did have the chance, as I did mention in the 

House on the occasion of, shortly after the occasion of the 

former premier’s passing, to read his recent book. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, I think — and this will be certainly the case 

for so many of the members from different parties that we’re 

about to pay tribute to today — the beauty of our parliamentary 

system which we herald through things like the humble address, 

the beauty of the system of government we have is the 

accountability that we saw earlier in question period, and the 

pointed debate that we can have in question period, with the 

knowledge that we’re all here for the same reason: hopefully to 

leave things better than we found them, in the case of this 

Assembly, in the province of Saskatchewan and in our home 

communities. 

 

And so while we may have differences in terms of the positions 

held by those that we’ll honour today in these tributes, Mr. 

Speaker, we acknowledge the fact that they were about the 

business that we’re about today — trying to make 

Saskatchewan a better place. And certainly that was very, very 

true of our former premier, Mr. Blakeney, with whom I would 

take exception, with respect, to some of his deeply held beliefs 

and views as to what was right for the province. But from what 

I know and what I’ve been told of Mr. Blakeney, he always 

appreciated the chance for that kind of debate and certainly the 

province is so much better for his service. 

 

[14:45] 

 

I’ll be moving, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly records with solemn regret the passing 

of a former member of this Assembly and expresses its 

grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

Allan E. Blakeney, who passed away on April 16, 2011, 

was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1960 

until 1988, representing the constituencies of Regina City, 

Regina West, Regina Centre, and Regina Elphinstone for 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and the New 

Democratic Party. He served as a minister of Education, 

provincial treasurer, minister of Public Health, minister of 

Industry and Commerce, and as the 10th premier of the 

province Saskatchewan from June 30, 1971 to May 8th, 

1982. 

 

Mr. Blakeney was born on 7 September, 1925, in 

Bridgewater, Nova Scotia. He attended Bridgewater High 

School, Dalhousie University, and won a prestigious 

Rhodes Scholarship to attend Oxford University. Prior to 

becoming a politician, he was a civil servant providing 

legal advice to the government financial office, and then 

he became the chief officer of the Saskatchewan Securities 

Commission. 

 

Mr. Blakeney is remembered for many contributions to the 

province, including his role in the implementation of 

public health care in Saskatchewan, the creation of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the provincial land 

bank, the establishment of the first Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan, and his leadership during the 

repatriation of the Canadian Constitution. 

 

Upon retirement from public life, Mr. Blakeney taught at 

Osgoode Hall and the University of Saskatchewan. He was 

a prolific writer and helped develop the structures for 

democratic government in Russia and South Africa. He sat 

on several boards and organizations, including Algoma 

Steel, Cameco, and Crown Life. He was a badminton 

champion and was an opera, musical, and film enthusiast. 

 

Mr. Blakeney is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 

52 years, Anne, and their children: Barbara, Hugh, David, 

and Margaret. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Allan Emrys Blakeney, who passed away on April 16th, 

2011, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 

1960 until 1988, representing the constituencies of Regina 

City, Regina West, Regina Centre, and Regina 

Elphinstone for the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation and the New Democratic Party. He served as a 

minister of Education, provincial treasurer, minister of 

Public Health, minister of Industry and Commerce, and as 

the 10th premier of Saskatchewan from June 30th, 1971 to 

May 8th, 1982. 

 

Mr. Blakeney was born on September the 7th, 1925, in 

Bridgewater, Nova Scotia. He attended Bridgewater High 

School, Dalhousie University, and won a prestigious 

Rhodes Scholarship to study at Oxford University. Prior to 

becoming a politician, he was a civil servant providing 

legal advice to the government Finance office and then 

became chief officer of Saskatchewan Securities 

Commission. 

 

Mr. Blakeney is remembered for many contributions to the 

province, including his role in the implementation of 

public health care in Saskatchewan, the creation of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the provincial land 

bank, the establishment of the first Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan, and his leadership during the 

repatriation of the Canadian Constitution. 

 

Upon retirement from public life, Mr. Blakeney taught at 

Osgoode Hall and the University of Saskatchewan. He was 

a prolific writer and helped develop the structures for 

democratic government in Russia and South Africa. He sat 

on several boards and organizations, including Algoma 

Steel, Cameco, and Crown Life. He was a badminton 

champion, was an opera and musical and film enthusiast. 

 

Mr. Blakeney is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 

52 years, Anne, and their children: Barbara, Hugh, David, 

and Margaret. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to pay tribute to Allan Blakeney who was a friend and a 

leader of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Blakeney came to Saskatchewan to work in the civil service 

of Tommy Douglas at a time when there was much interest in 

how the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] could 

build a Saskatchewan that was maybe a little bit different than 

some of the other provinces in Canada. And as the Premier 

indicated, Mr. Blakeney worked as a lawyer in the Finance 

office. He was clearly a very smart man who was a Rhodes 

Scholar and had studied in England. And he came to 

Saskatchewan because of these opportunities. What we know 

from talking to Mr. Blakeney over the years, those of us who 

spent quite a few hours with him, was that the skills that he 

learned in those initial years in the civil service of 

Saskatchewan served him well all through his career. 

 

And any person who is appointed a minister of the Crown or 

who is a premier or who is a member of this legislature would 

be well served to read his books on the role of the minister, on 

the role of the MLA, on the role of the executive versus the role 

of the legislature and the judiciary. Because what he did, in a 

very practical way, is tell the stories that explain how our 

system of government works. And many times that type of 

activity is not known by the public in the same way that some 

of the other very high-profile things that Mr. Blakeney did. But 

one of the strengths that he provided to many members of the 

legislature of all of the various parties involved, but especially 

for us as New Democrats, was to answer questions when there 

were difficult situations that related to a role as a minister or a 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

premier or as a member of the legislature. I also venture to say 

that there would have been quite a number of senior civil 

servants within the provincial civil service who would also have 

sought him out in that role as advisor. 

 

It was quite interesting last week when the announcement was 

made about the new Lieutenant Governor, Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield. Because when one looks at the role of the Solomons 

— especially Mr. George Solomon who is Vaughn’s father — 

in Saskatchewan, one of those key roles was to be a catalyst in 

building IPSCO which is now Evraz steel company. And Mr. 

Blakeney, as the young lawyer, was working on that file as was 

Mr. Solomon, Mr. Turvey, and Mr. Harvey, and a number of 

others in the community, including Tommy Douglas and 

Clarence Fines. 

 

We could go through most of the events in Saskatchewan 

history over the decades since the ’50s and see the fine hand 

and mind of Mr. Blakeney as he worked to provide the advice, 

whether he was on the government side or in opposition or in 

the civil service. 

 

It’s especially heartening for me to remember the clear role and 

the way that Mr. Blakeney was able to describe how he worked 

together with Tommy Douglas and Mr. Lloyd and others as 

they tried to figure out the right balance for the medicare 

program in Saskatchewan which, through the Saskatoon 

agreement, eventually became our Canadian national medicare 

system. He always knew that there were many more parts of 

that to be dealt with, but he also knew that it was formed out of 

a crucible of crisis that ended up meaning that it would stay as a 

key part of our Canadian society. We’re going to be celebrating 

the 50th anniversary of those tumultuous times this year, and I 

think it’s also fitting — and I know it will be true — that we 

will be referring to Mr. Blakeney and his role in that process as 

we look back over the 50 years. 

 

In the ’70s, we ended up with much controversy around 

minerals, especially potash and uranium in the North, and Mr. 

Blakeney ended up taking some very strong positions which 

have defined much of politics in Saskatchewan since that time. 

And I think we need to remember that some of the difficult 

choices that were made in the ’70s have had long-term effects 

in the province but that all the decisions were made in a way 

that in the long-term have benefited our province. We could go 

through many, many different aspects of policy and recognize 

where Mr. Blakeney has contributed. 

 

Mr. Blakeney’s family was supportive of him all through the 

years, and I think it’s important to acknowledge their role as 

they worked with him over the years. I know that his children, 

Barbara, Hugh, David, and Margaret and their spouses . . . And 

especially the grandchildren — Victoria Mohr-Blakeney, 

Stephen Blakeney, Isobel Blakeney, Christopher Blakeney, and 

Benjamin Piechocinski — all had a special relationship with 

their grandfather. 

 

I know one of my good friends was Hans Mohr, who shared a 

grandchild with Allan Blakeney, and he said that sometimes the 

best times in both of their lives is when it was just the two 

grandfathers and Victoria Mohr-Blakeney together with them 

because there was somebody who ended up enjoying these 

very, very smart people as grandfathers, but recognizing that, 

hey, these were people who cared about people and about 

children. 

 

I had the pleasure in our Regina Lakeview area to invite Mr. 

Blakeney to come and talk about his years as premier in what 

we called a fireside chat. This was just a couple of years ago. 

And it was quite interesting how it didn’t take long for the 

premier to get into full question period mode in answering 

questions. And I think we all need to remind ourselves about 

how what happens in this place is part of our lives for a long, 

long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for Allan Blakeney . . . He was a champion for his 

neighbours. He was a champion for the people of this province. 

He was a champion for all Canadians. And I want to say thank 

you to him and to his family for the contribution that he’s made 

to our country. Thank you. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to stand in my place 

today and just make a few comments about former Premier 

Blakeney. In my observations — now if I understand correctly 

— I’m probably the only member on the government side of the 

House who had the pleasure of sitting in the Chamber at the 

time with Mr. Blakeney. I’m not sure if I should have 

mentioned that. It might just say a little bit about my age. But at 

that time, it was an honour to have been elected to this 

Assembly and to observe other members, whether you agreed 

with their, their views or their philosophies, but just observing 

how members participated, interacted in this Chamber. 

 

I will have to say this about Mr. Blakeney. He was a man who 

was very articulate and knowledgeable. Just having sat here it 

was . . . and observed his, his participation in the debate, he was 

an individual that you could just sit back here and you could 

glean a lot from him as you listened to him in debate. 

 

No doubt Mr. Blakeney was very humiliated in 1982 by the 

results of the ’82 election. I don’t know if there’s anyone at any 

time from any political party, when you go through an election 

of that nature, that wouldn’t feel humiliated. But did that keep 

Mr. Blakeney down? I would have to say that he was humble, 

but he also was devoted. He was devoted to his views, devoted 

to the party he represented. And he wasn’t an individual who is 

just going to walk away but he devoted himself to helping 

rebuild the party. And while I wasn’t there from that ’82 to ’86 

period, I know that through that period of time, Mr. Blakeney 

really worked at rebuilding the party. And as a result, in the 

1986 election, when I was elected to this Chamber, the NDP 

party were back with a stronger force, having elected 28 

members at that time period. 

 

But having watched and observed the proceedings in this 

Chamber and as members across this Chamber from both sides 

of the Assembly have all indicated in the past, when you first 

walk on the floor of this Chamber, it’s somewhat . . . just sets 

you back a little bit. You observe the members who’ve been 

here for a good period of time and you’re humbled, but you’re 

also honoured to serve in this Chamber. And I believe Mr. 

Blakeney served with humility. He was a servant of this 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

province. He served in the public sector for a number of years 

and then for many years he served as a member of this 

Legislative Chamber. 

 

He was one who spoke his convictions. While many across the 

province would’ve not always agreed with him — certainly 

members of the government of the day weren’t always on the 

same side — but you respected the man. You respected him for 

his views because he believed in those views and he also shared 

his views with deep conviction. I never, to my knowledge, can 

remember or even picture in my mind a period in time where 

Mr. Blakeney would’ve spoken out of anger or frustration. He 

spoke very diplomatically and spoke with conviction. And I’m 

also told he was not immune from putting his members in their 

place if he was trying to get a point across and someone was 

interfering with the debate, at the time of turning to the member 

and basically asking that member just to be quiet so he could 

share his views with the Chamber. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say that from my observations, Mr. Blakeney 

served this province, served his party, served the people of 

Saskatchewan well, and I want to extend my deepest 

sympathies to his wife, Anne, their children, and their families, 

on his passing. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 

for me to rise in this Chamber today to pay tribute to one of its 

most distinguished members, Allan Emrys Blakeney. When he 

passed away last year, Mr. Speaker, people from across our 

province and across our country came forward to pay tribute to 

a great statesman, a great Canadian whose intelligence, 

integrity, and professional dedication to public service were an 

inspiration to all. That great record of service continues to 

inspire me, Mr. Speaker, as I know it inspires all of us here 

today. And so I am humbled to rise in the Assembly today to 

say a few words in honour of a man who was a proud social 

democrat, an exemplary politician, and a true Canadian 

statesman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Allan Blakeney’s tenure as leader of my party and 

as premier of our province was marked by a fundamental 

commitment to the ideals of social democracy — no economic 

progress without social progress and no social progress without 

economic progress. Throughout his 28 years in this Assembly, 

he believed that there was a role for government in advancing 

economic development and social equality, Mr. Speaker. For as 

he wrote in his memoir, An Honourable Calling, I quote: 

 

. . . A look around the world tells me that where able and 

active governments (and there are many) intervene on 

behalf of people with special needs or lower incomes, 

society works best. 

 

It was for that kind of society, one that works best for everyone, 

that he laboured throughout his political life, Mr. Speaker, and 

his record of achievement here in Saskatchewan remains an 

inspiration — a vital role in public medicare, a children’s dental 

plan, a prescription drug plan, an agency dedicated to the 

concerns of northern Saskatchewan, efforts to ensure 

Saskatchewan people received their fair share of our natural 

resource wealth, defence and expansion of our Crown 

corporations, support for agricultural and livestock producers, 

and enhancement of occupational health and safety and 

workers’ compensation rules that have since spread across our 

country. And he did all of this and much more while 

maintaining balanced budgets throughout his time as premier of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. Fiscal responsibility, economic 

development, and social progress — those were the hallmarks 

of Allan Blakeney’s commitment to the ideals of social 

democracy that our party stands for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that the Blakeney government’s 

defence of workers’ rights in the form of improvements to 

occupational health and safety and workers’ compensation rules 

have since spread across the country. But that is just one 

measure of his national influence. He was of course a key figure 

in the constitutional discussions of the early 1980s that led to 

the patriation of our constitution and the creation of our 

Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, intended, he 

thought, to make sure that the rights of minorities and the less 

powerful were fully respected when they might be 

discriminated against by a powerful majority. 

 

Canadians across the country, Mr. Speaker, recognize the 

thoughtful, balanced views Allan Blakeney brought on behalf of 

our province to those constitutional debates. And we saw a 

measure of that recognition, Mr. Speaker, at a memorial service 

in Regina last spring when prominent national figures of every 

political stripe came to pay tribute to Allan Blakeney at the 

Conexus Arts Centre here in Regina. 

 

We heard praise from Bill Davis of Ontario and Peter Lougheed 

of Alberta, both Progressive Conservatives. We heard praise 

from our own former premier, Roy Romanow, and Ed Schreyer 

of Manitoba, New Democrats both. And we heard praise as 

well, Mr. Speaker, from Bob Rae — both Liberal and NDP, I 

suppose. 

 

We heard as well, Mr. Speaker, from Beth Bilson of the law 

faculty at the University of Saskatchewan who reminded us of 

Allan Blakeney’s life after politics, both in the academy here in 

Canada and of course around the world. He was a valued 

colleague and mentor to the students and professors at Osgoode 

Hall at York University in Toronto and at the University of 

Saskatchewan, turning his knowledge and expertise with 

Canada’s constitution and the federal system to good use in the 

education of our country’s next generation of legal scholars. 

 

And it was not only our country that he turned his attention in 

his life after politics, Mr. Speaker. As we know from his 

memoir, whether it was post-apartheid South Africa or 

Kyrgyzstan in the former Soviet Union, Allan Blakeney lent his 

keen understanding of human nature and a pragmatic, 

professional approach to governance to peoples around the 

world who saw themselves in need of change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was privileged to have some personal exchanges 

and meetings with Mr. Blakeney, who was always gracious 

with his time and advice, and was astute, sharp, and fully 

engaged in public discourse until the latest stages of his life. I 

will always cherish those opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Allan Blakeney mattered to our province, our 

country, and our world. But he also mattered of course to his 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

family. Perhaps the most touching moment of last year’s 

memorial service, Mr. Speaker, came when his son, Hugh, 

speaking on behalf of the family, recited the words of the song, 

“My Happiness.” Mr. Speaker, I know the happiness Allan 

Blakeney must have brought to his wife Anne and their family, 

and I thank them all for sharing him with us during the many 

years he answered the honourable calling of public service. 

 

For that service, Mr. Speaker, I know my party, our province, 

and our country are profoundly grateful. And so I know, Mr. 

Speaker, all members will join with me in paying tribute to the 

memory of our colleague, Allan Emrys Blakeney. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great honour that I rise 

today to speak to the memory of Allan Blakeney. My 

experience with Mr. Blakeney came in my years as a law 

student in the College of Law at the University of 

Saskatchewan. Regrettably I never had him as a professor, but 

his impact on the law resonated throughout the college and 

certainly was a lot of discussion when the 1992 constitutional 

talks were taking place, and I was in the college at that time. 

 

His effect, I think, on our province and beyond is just by the 

few catchwords that we can talk about: the nationalization of 

potash, for example, that impacted this province incredibly; 

uranium development; his devotion to First Nations rights in the 

North; the land bank — my brother was one of the beneficiaries 

of that back in the ’70s. And he established the Provincial 

Court, he established the Ombudsman, and he also established 

the Human Rights Commission. So his impact on the province 

is far-reaching and quite wide. 

 

As the new Agriculture critic for this session, I found some 

words of his about agriculture quite interesting and I’d just like 

to share those with the Assembly right now, just a little bit 

about what he said he thought his accomplishments were in 

agriculture. Allan Blakeney said: 

 

. . . the major industry in Saskatchewan was [and is] 

farming. The chief products of the farms — wheat, barley, 

oil seeds, beef, and pork — were sold largely outside the 

province and often outside Canada . . . [since] these 

products are sold under international market conditions 

over which neither the people of Saskatchewan nor their 

government have any control, and at prices which are 

notoriously volatile. Economic stability for farmers was 

always sought after and rarely achieved. The uncertainty is 

added to by the unreliability of moisture and other weather 

conditions. 

 

A number of possible approaches to these issues were open to 

the government. Most of these were tried and: 

 

They included steps to deal with commodity price 

fluctuations; steps to deal with adverse weather conditions 

for field crops; steps to make farms and small towns more 

satisfying places to live and bring up children; steps to 

help retiring farmers sell their farms for cash so that they 

would have a secure retirement and allow people to enter 

farming who did not have the cash to buy a farm. 

 

Here we see the interweaving of the objectives of improving 

economic security and strengthening the sense of community: 

 

With respect to achieving some price stability, we worked 

with the federal government to get price support and 

supply management programs in place for dairy, poultry, 

and egg producers. 

 

It was good to see that they worked with the federal government 

there. 

 

We provided financial assistance for farmers to get into 

these areas of agricultural production so that 

Saskatchewan’s quotas under national programs would be 

fully used and these relatively stable areas of agriculture 

would provide secure incomes for increased number of 

farmers.  

 

We encouraged farmers to broaden their production base 

from field crops to include livestock production. Livestock 

products are sold primarily in North America, where price 

fluctuations are not as dramatic as they are with grains that 

are sold on worldwide markets. We provided a measure of 

price support for producers of beef and hogs through beef 

and hog price stabilization programs. The price supports 

sheltered farmers from the worst drops in prices, at the 

sacrifice of not being able to take advantage of some of the 

peaks, and provided a significant level of stability for both 

farmers and their bankers. One of the many adverse 

consequences of the boom and bust cycles in agriculture is 

that it can sometimes be very difficult for farmers to 

obtain credit from ordinary financial institutions. Credit is 

a necessity in highly capitalized industries like modern 

agriculture, especially for younger farmers, and price 

support programs greatly improve access to credit . . . 

 

Major steps to improve economic security for farmers 

were the reshaping of a federal-provincial, 

farmer-financed crop insurance program to guarantee 

against loss of yields because of weather conditions. The 

greatly improved crop insurance plan proved to be an 

absolute godsend to farmers in the 1980s. The other major 

effort was a federal program to provide broad general 

support for the western grain economy in times of 

depressed prices through the Western Grain Stabilization 

Program. With these programs, one year of drought or 

even two was not a financial catastrophe for most 

farmers; nor was a year or two of depressed prices a 

disaster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can see here through these words from Mr. 

Blakeney that he was a visionary and that he was deeply 

concerned about the social improvement of our province. And 

he wasn’t scared to try things and come up with new programs 

and innovation to make our province a better place to live. 

 

But my personal contact with Mr. Blakeney, again, was through 

the work he did in repatriating the constitution in 1982, which 

was a hot topic when I entered law school in the early ’90s. And 

I think the most important thing — and it’s difficult to find a lot 

written about it; it’s a fairly technical aspect — but it’s the work 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

he did on section 92(a) of the Constitution Act, which was the 

one where provinces secured the control over their natural 

resources. I think it’s largely unknown to most people that he 

made such an effort. And the exciting times of the 1982 

patriation were not publicly known widely. Much has been 

written about it. But it was something that was really stressed 

when I was in law school as one of the most significant 

achievements for Saskatchewan in the constitutional talks of 

1982. Certainly he was involved in other levels in the 

constitutional talks. 

 

[15:15] 

 

He was very involved in organizing the eight premiers who 

stood down Pierre Trudeau. And in fact one article said that 

during the constitution debate of the early ’90s he, of all the 

premiers, was portrayed as Pierre Trudeau’s intellectual equal 

and the one who steadfastly insisted that the rights of the 

provinces not be ignored. So although he was a federalist and 

strongly believed in a strong federal government, he was also 

one who was keenly interested in protecting the rights of the 

provinces. And I think that’s a heritage that will bode 

Saskatchewan well for many, many more decades, and I think 

for that he should be honoured and recognized. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to close my comments 

on this condolence notice. And I would like to express my 

condolences to the family as well and have them know that Mr. 

Blakeney was one of the very most important Saskatchewan 

politicians that we’ve seen since we became a province. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed an honour to join in this time to reflect on Mr. 

Blakeney’s passing and his contributions to our province. And I 

too want to echo many of the comments that have been made by 

both sides of the House in terms of his contribution to our 

province and to our country and to our communities throughout 

Saskatchewan. He indeed was a man who meant so much to so 

many people in Saskatchewan. 

 

I just want to talk about a couple of things that others haven’t 

touched on. And I think that they’re important to be on the 

record because I think in many ways they were important, 

clearly important to him, clearly important to how he viewed a 

province in what it could do and what it should be doing for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And one of the things clearly that I’ve learned to appreciate in 

the last few years is, in my role as housing critic, how much he 

contributed, how much the government of the ’70s contributed 

to housing here in Saskatchewan. In fact in my own riding, I 

can think of the high-rises downtown that Saskatoon Housing 

Authority administers and what a role Mr. Blakeney and that 

cabinet, that government did in making sure that people were 

appropriately housed. And of course, it all stemmed from a 

piece of legislation that I thought was visionary, and that was 

The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act which I think back 

. . . And I had the privilege to talk to Walter Smishek about that 

cabinet and how important Urban Affairs were in Saskatchewan 

at that time because . . . And Saskatchewan continues, as we’re 

experiencing right now a major transition, a major 

transformation about what our cities are like, what our towns 

are like, as people are moving here. 

 

In many ways the same thing was happening in the ’70s. A 

transition was happening and of course Urban Affairs was a 

huge, huge thing. And it was very amazing when you look back 

and you think about the kind of things these folks were doing at 

that time and how Mr. Blakeney truly was a visionary at that 

time. And so I just want to acknowledge and thank him for his 

contributions there. 

 

But the other one that was interesting was the fact around the 

urban parks, the urban conservation parks. Wascana, Meewasin 

are clearly gems of our two largest cities. But in his book, his 

recent book, he talked about how he was disappointed that we 

were not able to do the same thing in Prince Albert or North 

Battleford or, I believe, Weyburn. I want to make sure I get this 

right. But I had the opportunity to assure him that actually now, 

all of those city parks, the main city urban park in those cities 

now receives core funding from the province and is recognized 

in the same way as Meewasin and Wascana. So Prince Albert, 

North Battleford, Weyburn, Swift Current are part of, and 

Moose Jaw, are part of that network. And it’s a very, very 

important network speaking to conservation. 

 

So clearly there was a lot happening in terms of environmental 

initiatives in the ’70s, but he was part of that, took a lot of pride 

in that. So while he could see to the big picture around medicare 

and the Constitution, he also made sure to take care of the little 

details. And a colleague talked about the labour initiatives 

around labour, particularly around The Trade Union Act. And 

the occupational health and safety legislation were landmarks in 

terms of North America and the work with that. So I just want 

to acknowledge that. 

 

And you know, I just have to say one of the last times I think I 

heard him speak in public he was talking about an anniversary 

of the Sturdy Stone Building in Saskatoon, which is truly a 

beautiful building that has some unique art features to it. And 

that was part of his beliefs, that architecture should be beautiful. 

You know, when governments build buildings, they should not 

be plain and boring, but they should be attractive and really 

contribute to the urban landscape. And he was able to do that. 

And so I was really, I really appreciated that. He was a 

phenomenal man in terms of his thinking and how he could talk 

about any issue, but with authority. And he was always a 

pleasure to hear. 

 

On a personal note, I do want to share this because I thought we 

all have had our, many of us have had, personal connections 

with Mr. Blakeney in different ways. And just a couple of years 

ago, it was interesting. We were down at financial services, and 

quite often we’ll see families go through with a tour guide, 

taking a look at the building. And we were down there — 

actually a member from Moose Jaw was with me — we’re 

handing in our forms, and there was the family. Who was the 

family, but it was the Blakeney family going through because 

some of the Blakeney grandchildren have not been in the 

building for many years. And I thought it was very interesting 

that Allan Blakeney should be taking a tour of this building 

which he knew probably more than any of us, inside out. And 

he could probably tell stories that I would like to take a tour 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

from. But it would be interesting to be the tour guide telling him 

about the history of this incredible building. 

 

The other one, and I think the Premier actually alluded to this a 

bit, about how he truly believed in advocacy and rigorous 

debate. Back in 1975 or ’76 — I was trying to think of the 

actual date of this — there’s a magazine in Saskatchewan called 

the Briarpatch. And it’s on the left side, and it’s quite an 

advocacy for progressive thought. And actually it may . . . I 

don’t know what many members would think, but I actually 

worked for that magazine back when I was 19 or 20 years old, 

back in the early ’70s. 

 

And at that time, the magazine was produced by a mimeograph, 

a Gestetner. And we were a burr in the side of this, of the NDP 

government at the time. And of course at that time, social 

services were going through big changes as well. But we had 

applied for some core funding because how do you produce a 

magazine like that. There weren’t a lot of advertisers who 

wanted to support us. And lo and behold, we got support from 

the Blakeney government, a three-year grant. I couldn’t believe 

it. But here I was, some 19-year-old or a 20-year-old, part of 

this small group — there were three of us — and we got the 

grant. 

 

And then you fast-forward this 20-some, 30-some years, and I 

happen to be in cabinet. And you get to appreciate the inner 

workings of government. And you know, you do have a tough 

time with people who are burrs in your side, and I have to say 

that I appreciated that government having the willingness to 

fund an advocacy group that they knew was going to be tough 

on them. And it’s not easy to do that. 

 

And we always think the government can do anything; it’s 

pretty well straightforward. No, there’s a lot of tough choices, 

and they always weigh the pros and cons of some of their 

decisions. And I just want to put on record that I think Mr. 

Blakeney clearly showed a lot of forethought, or you know, I’m 

not even sure if he was the one responsible. And I understand 

he was a very meticulous guy, so not much would get past him 

if he did know about this. And so that was really important. 

 

I heard this quote last week, and I think this really applies to 

Mr. Blakeney. The quote is, “Politicians plan for the next 

election, but great statesmen plan for the next generation.” And 

I really think that’s Mr. Blakeney. It just speaks to what he 

believed Saskatchewan could be, both in terms of the land and 

the economy, but more the people. And I know many more 

people speak this afternoon about his achievements, so I just 

want to say that in terms of his work, I’m a huge admirer. And 

it is too bad that he’s passed on, and we will miss him. 

 

I just want to do a quote from a poem by William Wordsworth, 

“Character of the Happy Warrior.” And it goes like this, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

This is the happy Warrior; this is He 

That every Man in arms should wish to be. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And it is indeed an honour to participate in this 

condolence motion for the Hon. Allan E. Blakeney, somebody 

who has obviously had an effect on those that knew him and 

those that had come to serve with him in the legislature. 

 

And I just wanted to relate very, very quickly a number of 

instances where I had the opportunity to interact with Mr. 

Blakeney. The first was back in, I think it was 1971. It must 

have been right after he became premier. And I was a child — 

not too much different than the young child we have in the 

gallery today — and had an opportunity to hear him when he 

came, as a new premier, to Blaine Lake, a small town. And it’s 

a big deal when a premier came. And I can remember sitting in 

that hall and listening to his fiery speech and not understanding 

all of it but sensing then, at a very early time, his passion for his 

province and his vision in what was an interesting time in our 

province, to say the least, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next interaction that I had was a little bit later in life and 

when I decided to launch my political career. It was around the 

time of the 1999-2000 period when there was a minority 

government in place and it looked like we may have an 

election. And I chose to run for politics and was seeking to sell 

memberships in the Saskatoon Meewasin constituency because 

that was the constituency that looked like my residence would 

be in as well. Since that time, redistribution and Silver Springs 

was created. 

 

But I can remember going door to door in North Park in 

Saskatoon using a voters list and looking through it, and going 

from door to door and then finding the next door that I was 

going to was Allan and Anne Blakeney. Well, I thought, my 

chances of selling a membership at that house aren’t very good, 

but it might be an interesting conversation. So I knocked on the 

door and the former premier came to the door and we had a nice 

. . . I told him what I was doing and we indeed had a nice chat 

about my political ambitions, and his caution towards me if that 

was really what I wanted to do — in a joking way. But it indeed 

made for an interesting conversation. 

 

I had a chance to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did he buy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — No he didn’t. He didn’t buy the 

membership. Many did. Many did. I think maybe his 

neighbours on each side. Well I can’t even say that. But I did 

sell quite a few that night I’m sure. 

 

Had an opportunity to read his book, and it was a book that 

talked about many things in politics and serving in this 

legislature. And I think that it would hit home with each one of 

us in what he chose to talk about — the interaction, I remember, 

of his family and life in politics and what it meant to his family 

life and how he made up for it in certain times as well. 

 

One of the most interesting discussions I had with a person, a 

young nurse who had the opportunity to serve Mr. Blakeney 

when he was in the hospital in the very, very last days of his 

life. And she relayed a story to me where she was working in 

the hospital, her very first job, recently graduated, and had the 

opportunity to have a discussion with her patient who she didn’t 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

know who he was. And she asked him what he did and he said, 

well I dabbled in politics a little bit. It wasn’t long after that he 

did pass away and she came to know who her patient was. And 

she relayed that story to me, and it just shows to me and to all 

of us what a humble individual indeed he was and how he had 

an opportunity to use humour. And she told me that he later told 

her what he had done and some of his accomplishments in the 

province. But certainly it was again an opportunity to 

understand what kind of an individual Allan Blakeney was. 

 

I had an opportunity to attend the memorial service, and as 

many here I know have as well. And I remember driving back 

to Saskatoon after that and, you know, to relate to the stories 

that were told by members of all political parties from 

provinces across the country and from the federal government 

as well, and thinking back in my drive back to Saskatoon that 

that’s what’s good about politics. That’s why we choose to do 

what we do and to follow in the footsteps of people that have 

built this province before us. And I’m proud to say that I 

consider Allan Blakeney as one of those people. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

pleased to stand today to pay tribute to our former premier. 

There’s no question in my mind that many of the kind 

comments and many of the tributes that are being expressed 

today will certainly be appreciated by not only his family but 

many of his followers and, I would dare say, fans that watched 

Mr. Blakeney over the years. Our former premier certainly 

served his province well and served the people well, I might 

add. 

 

Mr. Speaker, coming from northern Saskatchewan, as a young 

child, we didn’t really follow too much of politics. We certainly 

remembered people like Lawrence Yew, you know, one of the 

people that I often make my hero. I often tell people that some 

of the few folks that I looked up to during my time as a young 

lad was Lawrence Yew. And I knew Lawrence worked very 

closely with some very gifted people and some great people, 

people like Allan Blakeney. And over time you’d begin to hear 

that name, as a young person, and you don’t know who he is, 

but you certainly know that he’s an important guy. 

 

And after you look back at it as a person that’s been here for a 

while, I look at the history of what Mr. Blakeney had done for 

northern Saskatchewan, and certainly he had a co-operative 

federal government in terms of trying to establish a partnership 

and to recognize the challenges of the North. And to this day, I 

can see new houses being built, Mr. Speaker. To this day, I can 

see water and sewer projects being put in many of the northern 

communities that prior to that had no water and sewer. To this 

day, I can see roads being built. And certainly I can see the 

mining sector beginning to evolve and begin to form in our part 

of the country. 

 

I think Cluff Lake was certainly one of the few, first few mines 

that ever popped up in northern Saskatchewan, and you can see 

all the activity as a result of some of the work being done at that 

time by an entity called the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan, DNS. And in those days DNS was active in 

many, many things, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, there’s water 

and sewer projects. There’s training programs. There’s road 

programs. There’s housing construction programs. And I think 

the era that Blakeney served as our premier was very exciting 

for northern Saskatchewan. It was a great opportunity. 

 

So I say that, certainly from my experience and certainly from 

where I’m standing today, to the family of Allan E. Blakeney, 

our former premier and our former leader, I sincerely thank you. 

No words can express to you in any way imaginable how we 

can eloquently say the things and the service that he’s done for 

the people of northern Saskatchewan with them. I think the only 

way I can say it as eloquently as I can with great meaning and 

with great gratitude is use the word thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, DNS [Department of Northern Saskatchewan] was 

certainly a fairly large organization and it impacted northern 

Saskatchewan in many ways. And today you see the benefits of 

some of that work — whether it’s water and sewer in the 

communities or whether it’s a road that has gone somewhere, 

whether it’s paving or somebody living in a house — there’s no 

question that Blakeney’s policies and his thoughtfulness, and 

certainly the philosophy that he shared that northern 

Saskatchewan is not just a wasteland, a place that you can 

extract all the resources from and leave the people to their own 

battles. He felt that it was important that we create a brand new 

northern Saskatchewan, a northern Saskatchewan that beholds 

great promise for the young and for the old alike. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think if you look at some of the points, like 

why would he do that? What was important for him when it 

came to northern Saskatchewan when there were so many other 

challenges in the province? And I think it goes to his intuition. 

It goes to his intelligence, his perseverance, but more so his 

thoughtfulness and respect for other human beings. I think 

that’s really, really important. And I think it also made great 

sense for him to do some of the things that he thought were fair 

and just to do. And in that resolve, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

something that he assumed would happen over time but was 

certainly an important aspect for many people in northern 

Saskatchewan, and that was to reduce the amount of 

dependency the people of the North had on their governments. 

 

I think it was important that people had the respect of a job, of a 

decent home, of kids going to new schools, of travelling on 

highways and having the basic fundamental life skills of having 

a nice home, a strong family, having safe water and sewer. 

These are some of the things that many people in Saskatchewan 

took for granted but the northern people fought for for many 

years. And today now you can see some of the benefits. And 

many of the older people, Mr. Speaker, they pay tribute to 

people like Allan Blakeney, and they spoke of his great love for 

the North and the fact that he visited northern Saskatchewan on 

many, many occasions. 

 

So there’s no question that northern Saskatchewan was not 

some distant place from our former premier, that certainly from 

our perspective that we knew that Premier Blakeney certainly 

had northern Saskatchewan’s interests at heart and showed it in 

many, many ways. And as I mentioned at the outset, having 

new homes and having a job and having safe communities, safe 

roads — the list goes on as to what DNS has done for northern 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things I think is important for us is not the new water 

and sewer systems or not the jobs or the homes. Those are 

important, but the thing that really, really struck me, Mr. 

Speaker, was during the time of Blakeney’s government from 

1971 to 1982 the annual wage of northerners increased over 154 

per cent and welfare dependency dropped from 47 per cent of 

the population to 14 per cent of the population — which is a 

significant accomplishment, Mr. Speaker, when you go into an 

area of northern Saskatchewan and providing opportunity in 

their own backyards and their homes. So again, Mr. Speaker, 

I’ll point out that welfare dependency dropped from 47 per cent 

of the population to 14 per cent of the population, which is an 

incredible, incredible achievement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you look at the economy, the history, the 

economic history of Saskatchewan. You’ll see on every 

occasion in Blakeney’s term and time was no different, that the 

economy’s going great; things are happening, and certainly it 

was under the NDP rule, Mr. Speaker. I think history will judge 

fairly some of the great leaders that we’ve had in our party and 

certainly one of the greatest leaders we’ve had of course is Mr. 

Allan E. Blakeney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the few comments that I want to point out in my 

involvement with Mr. Blakeney, of course, when he retired 

from politics was 1988 — that was the same year I became the 

mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse — and you know as he left, you know, 

I joined into the political life so to speak. And after, it wasn’t 

until a number of years later that I had an opportunity to speak 

with him. It was actually in the city here. And one of the 

questions that he asked me, which I thought it was really 

profound and really had a lot of impact on certainly how I 

perceived things from my perspective in terms of what northern 

and Aboriginal people need and want. So the question he posed 

to me, and it’s always a tough question, he said to me, what is it 

truly that the Aboriginal people want? What’s the number one 

thing that the Aboriginal people want? 

 

And I gave that question that he posed to me some great 

thought, and a lot of folks would say, yes, we need decent 

roads. We need decent housing. We need jobs for our young 

people. And we need access to the resource opportunity. 

 

And I couldn’t answer him at the time, because obviously he 

was a very thoughtful man. He was very intelligent, and people 

knew that of him and I knew that of him. And one of the things 

that I didn’t want to do is to give him an answer that I hadn’t 

thought out thoroughly enough. So as a result of that question 

that he posed to me, I didn’t have an answer immediately. And 

I’d been pondering that answer for a number of months. And I 

do have some concept of what I think is the number one thing 

that the Aboriginal people need and want, and I’m not going to 

disclose it today. But he was the first one that certainly posed 

that tough question to me and gave me a lot of time to think 

about it. 

 

The second point that Mr. Blakeney raised to us after we lost 

the election in 2007 . . . I don’t think anybody was taking a 

defeatist attitude. We obviously lost the election. We needed to 

look at that and certainly talk about what happened. And at the 

end of the day, Mr. Speaker, it was Allan Blakeney that gave 

the address at the convention in a very optimistic way, in a very 

strong leadership manner, in which he said, now you take the 

time to reflect what kind of ideals and certainly what kind of 

policies that you need to reinvent yourselves as a party — not 

forgetting your roots, your history, and the basis of why you’re 

here, but to reach out to people to reinvent your policies, to 

bring forward innovative and exciting ideas, and to really begin 

the process of rebuilding and not to quit. 

 

It’s an excellent opportunity, is how he described what he 

thought was the future for the NDP. And it really lifted a lot of 

folks’ spirit. But I always knew that he was very strong when it 

came to leadership and to vision, and that just reaffirmed what I 

always believed in some of the work that he’d done in the past 

and certainly how he saw some of the losses that we would go 

through. 

 

There’s no question that some of the involvement that we see in 

northern Saskatchewan, the impact that he’s had on our lives is 

something that is greatly appreciated. It’s long-lasting. You 

look at the uranium development as one particular opportunity, 

and it really affected and benefited northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some people thought the DNS was way too big, way too 

expensive. But many, many others, the vast majority of people 

in the North said, yes, DNS was big, but it served a lot of 

purpose. It created a lot of opportunity, it created a lot of . . . It 

addressed a lot of social problems that existed in northern 

Saskatchewan. And the first premier to come to the North and 

recognize that and come on a constant basis — and not just 

come to visit, but come to make a real difference — was the 

then Premier Allan Blakeney. And I certainly remember him as 

a young child, coming to our community. Never spoke with him 

before because as a young person, you know, you’d let our 

leaders do the talking and you’d just simply watch from a 

distance. And certainly Mr. Blakeney came to Ile-a-la-Crosse 

and came to a number of other northern communities. And 

those visits were always sincerely appreciated. 

 

The final few points I will make, Mr. Speaker, is that we spoke 

about potash, we spoke about uranium development, you know, 

we speak about a number of resources. And I had the 

opportunity of listening to CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] Radio today and I listened to some of the 

comments made. And the big question is that you have to look 

at the future. And when you look at that kind of challenge we 

have in the future, after all the resources are extracted, after all 

the uranium mines have shut down, and if potash takes a 

tumble, you know, if all of a sudden the oil and gas starts drying 

up, what then? That’s the big question that was on CBC Radio 

today. The big question was, what then? 

 

And I think it’s important when I listened to my colleague from 

Saskatoon talk about, is building for the future generations was 

one of the thrusts of the comments that he attributed to Mr. 

Blakeney. And that’s something that also piqued my interest 

today. And that’s why it’s important we take care of the 

problems today, that we address the long-term future of 

Saskatchewan today, and that we begin looking at the legacy, 

the future. The legacy fund was one concept we had. But the 

future, to make sure that our resources are extracted fairly, that 

we extract as many benefits off the resources as we can, that we 

be inclusive, not exclusive, inclusive of all people of 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

Saskatchewan so that we’re able to see the benefits spread fairly 

throughout the regions, and certainly northern Saskatchewan 

being a big part of that, and I think Mr. Blakeney would have 

liked that. He would have liked that particular statement 

because that’s what he epitomized, and certainly that’s what he 

believed in and that’s what he practised. So I think it’s 

important that the fairness perspective and certainly the legacy. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And the final point I would make, Mr. Speaker, is that a lot of 

folks had mentioned this to me as I entered politics, is that 

Blakeney built a fine bureaucratic system in our province. And 

it’s an amazing system. And if you look back at some of the 

intelligent choices that he brought forward, some of the 

concepts and some of the protection he afforded the 

bureaucracy, and he actually built a system that was the envy of 

Canada in terms of civil servants, not only the skill level and the 

commitment, but the intellectual capability of many of the 

people that were involved with government services and people 

that delivered programs on behalf of the government. 

 

So Blakeney was known to be a very sharp, true politician, a 

taskmaster to his cabinet and his MLAs, but more so he was, he 

was peers with the bureaucracy. They considered him one of 

their own, which is an incredible accomplishment, and he also 

treated them with respect. And I think that’s really, really 

important. And today, over the last number of years, thank 

goodness for people like Allan Blakeney. They came and made 

Saskatchewan their home, built a solid system based on trust 

and faith and confidence, and involved all the people — but 

more so, brought in some very, very capable, intelligent 

bureaucrats, if you will, to come and help build that brave new 

province that he envisioned. 

 

So all these points I would make. I want to make sure that 

people understand that I had a great amount of admiration, 

respect for him. And as I mentioned at the outset, I want to 

thank his family for his service to northern Saskatchewan, to 

my people. I recognize some of his great, great achievements 

within our province and to say that, as we say at many, many 

funerals, to Allan E. Blakeney, that may he rest in peace. His 

work on earth has indeed been well done. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real privilege 

and an honour to be part of this saying thank you and being part 

of this condolence motion for Mr. Allan Blakeney. I didn’t 

know him well but on the few occasions that I did get to meet 

him, they were always memorable. 

 

I can tell you the first time I met him was about eight years ago 

and I was dragging my oldest daughter around. I was 

responsible for getting Mr. Blakeney’s signature on a picture 

for an NDP fundraiser. It was a picture I had all of the four 

Saskatchewan premiers and Mr. Layton. So I was running 

around . . . So what had happened that day . . . So I’m on the 

university campus. I had called Mr. Blakeney up because I 

needed his autograph on this paper. It was the strangest thing 

because I knew he kept regular hours at the law office but you 

don’t really believe that the former premier of Saskatchewan, 

that you’re going to call him and he’s going to answer the 

phone and then you’re going to be there within a few hours 

chatting with him. So I had to drag my . . . I had great 

admiration for Mr. Blakeney, and here I am with my daughter, 

dragging her from one side of the university to the other 

because I had parked very far away from the law library. This is 

my hero, Mr. Blakeney. He is, as a social democrat, this is a 

man who has inspired the need to put forward good public 

policy, sound public policy that’s meticulously considered, and 

so this was an opportunity to meet a bit of my hero. So I was a 

bit stressed and anxious and hot and sweaty from running 

across the university campus in the middle of winter and 

dragging my poor daughter there, trying to help her understand 

the importance of this meeting. 

 

And so I get there and I knock on the door. And he’s there and I 

get his signature. And he was very kind and I felt he was the 

epitome of calm and cool and collected, and although I’m sure 

he had moments where he wasn’t, but here I was in a total flap, 

but he was just the most lovely and gracious man. And I got my 

signature and raised lots of money with this particular picture. 

 

But on the second occasion I had the opportunity . . . I had just 

been elected an MLA, and in Saskatoon Riversdale we have an 

annual fundraiser at Chinese New Year. And the organizer of 

the event had sat Mr. Blakeney and his wife, Anne, at the same 

table as me. And again, here I am very excited about the 

prospect of sitting with Mr. Blakeney, but feeling a bit stressed 

about . . . This is a Rhodes Scholar. This man is amazing, the 

things that he . . . his contributions to Saskatchewan. I know my 

colleagues have talked to them, talked to his many 

contributions, but he’s a man who looms large for those of us, 

particularly I think for many of us, but those of us who have 

grown up as social democrats and know — or those who have 

studied history — his contributions to Saskatchewan. 

 

So here I am sitting at this table with Mr. Blakeney. And we 

had great conversations. It was, like I said, a bit daunting at first 

but I loved it. We talked about badminton, of all things actually. 

I’m a former badminton player and I learned at that point in 

time that Mr. Blakeney, when he was back in Nova Scotia, 

badminton played a large part in his life. And we realized we 

had a bit of a connection. My brother-in-law, his roots are from 

Nova Scotia, and my brother-in-law was a former badminton 

champion as well, but so was his mother and his grandmother. 

So we made some connections there. And so here I am talking 

with the former premier of Saskatchewan about badminton. It 

was lots of fun. 

 

We talked about something that is near and dear to my heart — 

women in politics. And that’s something I believe I know quite 

well. I know the research. I know how we’ve done as a 

province. And so this was my area of comfort. But still talking 

to Mr. Blakeney about women in politics was a bit, it was a 

daunting task but he was incredibly thoughtful, and I think he 

. . . I may have sensed a bit of lamentations that the government 

couldn’t have done a better job or they could’ve done a better 

job than they had done. He talked about having a lack of pool of 

women at that point in time, or women . . . It was a very 

different time when he served as a premier, and things had 

started to change about the time he was around. But I did sense 

a sense of lamentation that he thinks things could’ve been 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

better. And I think today that knowing all the research that’s out 

there around having more balanced legislatures, I think he’d be 

on the side of making sure that we do our best to ensure we’re 

electing more women to our legislature and to the House of 

Commons as well. 

 

One of the reasons that Mr. Blakeney, for me, was such a large 

figure in my life is I’ve always aspired to public service. I 

wasn’t sure in my life that I’d end up here, but I knew that I 

wanted to serve. And I saw my role very much perhaps it’d be a 

bureaucrat in the public service. And it was Mr. Blakeney’s 

time prior to being a politician that I looked to, and I think the 

time of Tommy Douglas and where you are thinking about not 

just the next election but the next generation. And for me that’s 

what Mr. Blakeney inspired, both in his time as a civil servant 

and as a premier. So he really, really was someone for whom I 

had great admiration and someone, as I said, myself who 

dreamed of either being a civil servant or a politician — and 

here I am today as an elected representative. So I wasn’t sure 

where I’d fall, but Mr. Blakeney loomed large for me. 

 

Also as a student of public policy, when I was doing my 

master’s degree, and one of the required books was the 

Borins-Blakeney book. And that for me, that’s a book that all of 

us in this Legislative Chamber should read. It was like a 

handbook about being a minister, being an MLA. So I think that 

it would be a good tribute for all of us to get a copy of that book 

and read that. It’s, I think, would be advisable for all of us to 

know some of his thoughts and ideas. 

 

A few weeks ago, again at a Saskatoon Riversdale event, that 

same Chinese New Year, I had the opportunity to sit with Anne 

Blakeney again. And Mrs. Blakeney had pointed out, just a 

week before his death he was still, or just a few days before his 

death he was still presenting to students, talking, educating. As I 

said, he had kept regular hours at the College of Law. It was 

still his goal to make sure that he was sharing some of his 

insights about the world with the rest of us. And even not long 

before his death he was still doing that. So again it’s very 

humbling for me to have the opportunity to speak about Mr. 

Blakeney. But I just want to say thank you to him and to his 

family for their contributions to our province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for me 

to have an opportunity to say a few remarks today on the 

condolence motion for Mr. Blakeney. There’s no question in 

my mind that Allan Blakeney is the standard by which 

politicians should be measured, and I think he set that standard 

very high. As elected representatives and as human beings in 

general, we all have a different set of skills and abilities and 

character traits. And I believe it’s Mr. Blakeney’s combination 

of his skills and traits that made him to be such a formidable 

politician, a strong leader for our party, and a good human 

being, from a family perspective and from simply caring about 

his neighbours. 

 

Mr. Blakeney was both a visionary and pragmatic. He had this 

incredible combination of intellect and compassion, wisdom 

and humility, courage and humour, determination, and a deep 

sense of integrity. And I think as we’ve listened to speeches this 

afternoon and heard about different occasions when people have 

had interaction with Mr. Blakeney, or occasions when through 

his political career he offered leadership and offered an 

approach that was well grounded and proved to be very 

successful, we know that this is true. 

 

He was also very generous with his time and genuinely took a 

real interest in people. And we’ve heard . . . Everyone has a 

story. At least I think many people in the broader context of our 

province who had interactions with Mr. Blakeney can 

remember special moments of interaction. And for those of us 

that are involved in the New Democratic Party, we all have our 

own stories about times when we were, we benefited from Mr. 

Blakeney being generous with his time and offering his insight 

to us. 

 

But it’s also important to remember that that spirit of generosity 

and that genuine interest in people was combined with a very 

strong intellect. And it was his laser-like focus on making life 

better for people in this present day that truly many people 

remember. And that is his policy contribution to building a 

stronger and a more fair Saskatchewan and a better world. And 

the legacy of programs and the legacy of policies that have 

benefited all Saskatchewan people speaks to that laser-like 

focus that Mr. Blakeney had. 

 

I recall a good friend of mine, Marcus Davies making a 

comment around the time of Mr. Blakeney’s passing. And the 

comment that he stated was, “Allan Blakeney didn’t think in 

sound bites. He thought in generations.” And I know that’s a 

reminder for every elected official through the ages, on both 

sides of the House, that the activity that we’re involved in here 

is about generations. It’s about the long-term effort to building a 

better, a more fair, and a more generous province. And I think 

no one has done a better job of that task than Allan Blakeney. 

 

I had the pleasure of getting to know Premier Blakeney once I 

was elected after the 2007 election. He and Anne lived in the 

neighbouring constituency, and there’d be a number of 

occasions when we had the opportunity to get together and visit. 

And I remember one time we were sitting at the restaurant just 

down the road from my constituency office, sitting in a booth, 

and it was one of the first times where we had a longer sit-down 

meeting and had a chance to talk about some of the issues going 

on in the province. And I remember he ordered a chef’s salad 

— for some reason that sticks out in my mind — and we were 

sitting and talking, and again his generosity in telling stories 

and sharing wisdom was very clear on that occasion. 

 

And my grandpa served in the legislature at the same time as 

Mr. Blakeney, and so there’d be . . . He was kind enough to 

pass on some stories about discussions around the caucus table 

and some humorous things that occurred that I didn’t know 

about or hadn’t heard about as a grandson. And I appreciated 

him taking the time to pass on those stories and to share some 

of that information. 

 

But personal stories aside, during our conversation, as it always 

was, he was completely 100 per cent up to speed on the issues 

that mattered. He had questions and he asked questions that cut 

straight to an issue at hand. And he was very willing to offer his 

insight but not in a pushy or a dogmatic way, but simply in a 

very rational and calm manner in describing what a possible 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

approach could do, how it could benefit the situation. And I’m 

most grateful for those occasions when we had the opportunity 

to sit down and visit and to hear from him as an elder statesman 

in our party and within our movement. 

 

While there are public accomplishments and there’s a strong 

public record that has been written about in many books, and 

many members in the Assembly here have commented about 

earlier on today and at the time of the remembrance service that 

occurred for Mr. Blakeney, the accomplishments that he 

performed for this province are well documented and will be a 

lasting legacy. But as importantly they are also the 

accomplishments and the record of how he lived his life as an 

individual: what it meant for him as a parent, as a partner, as a 

husband, and what it meant relationally to the other people that 

he dealt with. 

 

[16:00] 

 

I think of other incidents when Mr. Blakeney’s generosity in 

spending time with people was very clear. In our constituency 

we have an annual barbecue — sometimes in the spring, 

sometimes in the fall — and we would always invite Allan and 

Anne to come to the barbecue, and no real expectation that they 

would come, but they always showed up when they were able 

to. And I remember on one of the first barbecues, we had some 

cold beverages and I think we had a coffee urn going as well 

and people were having some hot drinks. He was interested in 

tea though, so we got the kettle from the kitchen and plugged in 

the kettle and found some tea bags and were able to make him a 

cup of tea. Probably not entirely to his satisfaction as a quality 

cup of tea is determined, but of course there was simply a thank 

you and appreciation for doing that. And in the subsequent 

barbecues, we always had a kettle and tea on hand as we 

awaited the arrival of Allan and Anne, hoping that they would 

come. 

 

And I know it meant a tremendous amount to my constituents, 

especially to some of the people who have been around a little 

bit longer and have strong memories. They very much 

appreciated the opportunity to sit in the backyard and talk about 

anything really and ask questions. And it was also important for 

younger generation of individuals who maybe don’t have the 

first-hand familiarity with the distinguished track record under 

Allan Blakeney and had a chance to learn and a chance to hear. 

 

So I want to thank him for all those occasions of making the 

time to come to an event when it wasn’t needed, it wasn’t 

required. And I would like to thank Anne for the tremendous 

role that she has played over the years in the events of this 

province, both big and small, from large events of huge 

significance in a historical view to the small little things that 

some would say don’t always matter but mean so much to 

individuals. I’d like to thank Anne for her generosity and her 

work as well over all of these years. 

 

I will always be grateful for his encouragement and guidance 

and for reminding all of us of what we can accomplish together. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

with a pretty massive sense of humility that I rise to participate 

in this debate of the condolence motion for Allan Emrys 

Blakeney. 

 

As the member from Moosomin had said at the start about 

serving in the House with him, I guess something that I think 

we all maybe have experienced as new members of the 

legislature is that thrill that comes with getting sworn in and the 

signing of the roll. And certainly for different people on sides of 

this House, perhaps the member from Thunder Creek was 

thrilled to look through the roll and see the signature of Ross 

Thatcher, or you know, or Tommy Douglas or pick your person. 

But for me, I was thrilled beyond measure to flip through that 

roll and see the signature of Allan Blakeney because of course, 

Mr. Speaker, the Blakeneys, the Blakeneys, when they were 

active in politics from ’71 on, they represented my home 

constituency. I was born in 1972, Mr. Speaker, and Allan 

Blakeney was not just the premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan, but he was the MLA for Regina Elphinstone. 

 

And I guess certainly I got my political start when I was old 

enough to reach the mailbox, as sometimes happens in political 

families. When I was 10, along with my younger brother and 

my older sister, we got enlisted into going out to do leaflet 

drops in the ’82 campaign. Now I don’t think you can blame the 

’82 campaign results for the NDP on the McCall kids, but 

certainly we did our best to hold up our end in the Elphinstone 

campaign. And I still have, hanging on my wall with great 

pride, Mr. Speaker, a letter from Allan to the McCall kids 

thanking us for our contribution in the campaign, saying that 

obviously we’d hoped for a different result and worked for a 

different result, but that the fight would go on. 

 

And as also was remarked on by the member from Moosomin, I 

guess I’ve not been party to being taken from government down 

to eight seats, but I have some idea of what it’s like to go down 

to nine seats and be part of a caucus that’s in that circumstance. 

And I guess when they’d gone from, you know, having won the 

’71 election, the ’75, ’78, and then you know, the constitutional 

battles and all the things that were going on in and around the 

’82 campaign, and the way that the then leader of the 

Progressive Conservatives, Grant Devine, captured the public’s 

imagination — and that election, of course, was referred to as 

the Monday Night Massacre — you know, the next morning 

Allan Blakeney got up early and came to work and set about 

marshalling that road back for the NDP. And you think about 

the kind of determination and devotion that’s involved in an 

effort like that, and I guess it’s pretty inspiring. And you know, 

every now and then, Mr. Speaker, you come across patches in 

this political life where you could use some inspiration, and I 

think that has certainly stood out for us. 

 

Also, something that was interesting about that campaign has 

been remarked on in other speeches. You go through a lot of 

soul-searching as to what happened and what went wrong and 

this, that, and the other. But on election night, the then press 

secretary for Allan Blakeney, Dick Proctor, had come up with a 

line about, you know, well when you lose . . . We don’t know 

quite why we lost. But when you lose this big, you know it had 

to have been a team effort. And I guess, for me, that always sort 

of stood out for the kind of guy he was. 

 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

Here was this brilliant man, a Rhodes scholar, had come to 

Saskatchewan and played a pivotal role in a civil service that, I 

would argue, helped to build the modern machinery of 

government in Canada in many ways. And certainly two of 

Blakeney’s contemporaries at the time, Mel Johnson and 

Tommy Shoyama — our public policy school is now named for 

those two individuals — and certainly Allan Blakeney was a 

contemporary of theirs and operated on that level. 

 

But he had felt that call for public service, and he felt that call 

to get involved. So it was not just as an admirable, able public 

servant that he made a contribution to the province of 

Saskatchewan. But of course in 1960, he sought nomination and 

was elected in the city of Regina. And of course not long after, 

went into cabinet and was there for the — served under Tommy 

Douglas in cabinet and then Woodrow Lloyd — and was there 

for one of the most pivotal moments in the history of this 

province in terms of the medicare fight and dispute. 

 

And again, some of the fights that you go through in politics, 

you think about, you know, maybe you have your ups and 

downs. But I think it’s pretty fair to say that a dispute like that 

and the kind of stakes involved and the kind of pressure that 

was brought to bear on these individuals would have tested any 

number of people. But the kind of fortitude and the kind of 

determination that was brought to bear by the Douglas and then 

the Woodrow Lloyd government and the way that they 

persevered and stayed the course and brought in medicare, 

which has come to be recognized as a touchstone of the 

Canadian identity, it had a lot to do with the perseverance and 

the determination and the intellectual power of someone like 

Allan Blakeney. 

 

I guess one of the things I want to remark on, others have talked 

about the way that he played a role in the federation, in the 

debates around natural resources in the ’70s, the Constitution 

and the patriation thereof, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

He was integrally involved in many of those things, but some of 

the things I think need to be enumerated as well is in 1976 he 

was one of the people that played a key role in getting the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies going in 

partnership with the then FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] chief, David Ahenakew, and working with the 

then federal Liberal government to see that accomplished, not 

just the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies but the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College as well. 

 

The role that he played around the foundation of something like 

the Gabriel Dumont Institute, the role that he played around 

making sure that there was a place for First Nations and Métis 

people and working in partnership and respect with First 

Nations and Métis people, I think that was a hallmark of Allan 

Blakeney’s approach to public policy. 

 

The way that he had played a pivotal role in the founding of the 

University of Regina, Mr. Speaker, of course becoming it’s own 

campus in the early ’70s, or becoming its own university in the 

early ’70s, breaking away from its status as the Regina campus 

of the University of Saskatchewan but becoming a university in 

its own right, the University of Regina. The way that in so 

many different aspects of life in Regina you can see the 

handiwork of Blakeney transcending the time that he was an 

active public servant: the work that was done around 

downtown, the work that was done around the founding of 

IPSCO, the work that was done around bringing together of the 

Wascana Centre Authority. There are a lot of these things that 

Blakeney played a role in and we are, I would argue, the better 

for it. 

 

I guess others have talked about the role he played as a brilliant 

public administrator and the fact that for a time and certainly in 

the Calvert cabinet, working ministers would be issued a copy 

of Political Management in Canada, which contains the speech 

on public administration. The way that Allan Blakeney 

continued to be engaged in public life and in political life was 

remarkable. And that was an engagement that carried on up 

until he passed on. But after retiring from public life in ’87-88, 

the way that he went to teach law school at Osgoode but also to 

be involved in the work in the federation being established in 

Russia, the work that was done around South Africa, and the 

work that he had done in other sort of circumstances, continuing 

to make that contribution to public life. 

 

I guess where I got to know Blakeney I think best was through 

Dennis Gruending’s tremendous biography of Allan Blakeney, 

Promises to Keep, but also through following the different 

things that he would say around public policy. And I guess 

sometimes in political life when I guess not believing in a 

Senate or believing in the abolition of the actual Senate, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that we’ve benefited from in the 

CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 

Democratic Party] is turning to those party elders to provide us 

with that wisdom and that sober second thought and that sort of 

guidance around when we’re on the rails or not.  

 

And Blakeney was like that up until his death. And if you think 

about it, Mr. Speaker, for someone who was in his late 80s 

when he passed on, to carry on that kind of contribution — 

coming out to conventions to provide thoughtful, well-informed 

remarks that pointed to what is beyond the horizon and what a 

modern, social democratic party should be doing; the way that 

he also contributed through his work with the transition for the 

Nova Scotia government, Mr. Speaker; and as a son of 

Bridgewater, Nova Scotia, the delight that he took with the 

election of the Darrell Dexter-led NDP to government there and 

the fact that he played a key role in helping them to get 

established. Or you look in Bob Rae’s biography, From Protest 

to Power, about the work that was done in trying to get the 

Ontario NDP ready to govern in 1990 when they’d won an 

election and the fact that Rae says that Blakeney gave him some 

very good advice that he’d wished he’d followed. Or the work 

that he continued to do in conjunction with . . . Right up until 

the prorogation crisis that we had in this country, he was 

providing advice to the then Jack Layton-led federal NDP. 

 

[16:15] 

 

He was a ferocious intellect, Mr. Speaker, and continued to be 

engaged, like I say, right up until his death. And quite frankly, 

he’s also one of those mainstays, one of those pillars of our 

political movement that you have a hard time imaging things 

going forward without him. But certainly in his writings, in his 

record, there’s a legacy that will sustain there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of his last pieces of engaging with the public mind was 

through his biography, An Honourable Calling. And I’ve had 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

certainly different opportunities to interact with Mr. Blakeney 

over the years and to talk with him and to spend time with him, 

but I was given the honour . . . He was on a bit of a book tour 

for his Honourable Calling, and I was detailed to help Mr. 

Blakeney as he did the book signing, after he’d given a lecture 

on the book, in conjunction with Greg Marchildon. And one of 

my sort of implicit marching orders was that I should prompt 

Mr. Blakeney if he was forgetting somebody’s name or if he 

needed a little bit of help. And true to form, Mr. Speaker, he 

remembered everybody and then some, and he was prompting 

me on certain people coming through the line. And again it was, 

I think, just a tremendous example of a guy who loved people, 

and he had tremendous connection with a lot of different 

people. 

 

Things that I’ll miss seeing about him is the way that he would 

rub his hands together with glee — when there was something 

particularly politically advantageous to the New Democratic 

Party, he had a way of rubbing his hands together — and the 

way he would say “particular,” making a particular point about 

this or that. And I guess I’ll miss the, I’ll miss the way that his 

. . . Well the legacy of the Blakeneys continues to live on in my 

home neighbourhood of North Central. 

 

And here I’d like to say a little bit about Anne Blakeney, Mr. 

Speaker. The Blakeneys were very much part of the community 

in North Central And it was sort of, it was a paradox because 

Blakeney was at one and the same time this premier and this 

person that was known on the national stage, but they were also 

very much part of the community. And as a kid I could ride my 

bike past the Blakeney place on 800 block King, the kids went 

to Wascana School and Scott Collegiate, and took music 

lessons from Ms. McCulloch over on 10 block Rae. They went 

to St. John’s United Church and were very active there, and 

played a hugely important role in the North Central Community 

Association. And that, I think, is where it gave me a really good 

insight into, you know, it wasn’t just Allan Blakeney, but it was 

very much Anne and Allan Blakeney.  

 

And what a tremendous marriage they had and partnership they 

had, but also a political partnership. And Anne certainly, you 

know, knew where the kids were at in terms of age when she’d 

be out knocking on doors, was very active in the comings and 

goings and dealings of North Central Regina. They were pillars 

of the community really and truly. 

 

And I guess she was also a pretty canny political operator and 

campaigner, Mr. Speaker. And certainly there is one, I think it 

was the 2003 election where I had a particularly good sign 

location, that I had run into the Blakeneys not long after the 

campaign had begun and she had seen this and she was very 

happy about it. And she was like, you know, you get your signs 

up early, and then your opponent has a very hard time 

recovering psychologically from it. It will get inside their head. 

And you know, here’s Anne, who is like in her mid-80s, giving 

some very, very saged and kind of hard-nosed political advice 

to a young rooky like me. And I will always think of them as 

very much a partnership. 

 

And I guess to the kids as well, we extend our regrets and our 

regards and our thanks for the contribution that Allan Blakeney 

made to this province. 

 

And I guess the last thing I’d say about the Blakeneys, again the 

way that they connected with the community. And it wasn’t just 

about the big issues. But in a place like North Central Regina, 

the attention that they paid to the quality of life in inner-city 

Regina was large in the politics of their agenda, the way that 

that played out into housing, as my colleague from Saskatoon 

Centre has talked about, or community schools or the in-school 

dental program or the different sort of public health initiatives 

that were there to make sure that it wasn’t just a good life for 

some but that the good things of life were shared for everyone. 

And I know that Blakeney . . . There was a journalist who had 

come to Saskatchewan in the late ’70s and came away saying 

that in Saskatchewan, better than anywhere else in North 

America, were the good things of life shared fairly. And he was, 

you know, not just as a brilliant administrator, not just as 

somebody that’s paid attention to running a good shop and had 

a name for managerial excellence, he was in politics to get some 

things done. He was in politics because he had promises to 

keep. And I know that he took a great deal of pride in that 

observation about where things were at in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think about the people in North Central and the people that 

worked with Mr. Blakeney, alongside Anne and Allan 

Blakeney, like Peter and Cath Barry — they’ve both passed on 

now — or Elaine Torrie or Gloria Blanchard or Flo Wilkie, 

who’s also passed on, Mr. Speaker, and the belief that they had 

in the Blakeneys and the great way that the Blakeneys brought 

people together. 

 

I guess the last thing I would say is this: from North Central in 

particular, we will miss him greatly. And we’re thankful for the 

legacy of the Blakeneys. The last interview that Allan Blakeney 

gave in his life was with the North Central Community 

Connection. He was doing a piece about different people that 

made a contribution to North Central. And I think that’s 

somehow quite fitting, Mr. Speaker, because we’re certainly . . . 

But to speak on behalf of the people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre and on behalf of my home neighbourhood, 

we’re exceedingly proud of our connection with the Blakeneys 

and with Allan Blakeney. 

 

So I’ll close off by saying this, Mr. Speaker, his memoirs were 

entitled An Honourable Calling. And sometimes in political life 

we wonder about the honour of this calling, but when it came to 

what Allan Blakeney brought to public life in terms of passion, 

in terms of intellect, in terms of commitments, there can be no 

doubt that he indeed not just responded to that honourable 

calling but gave it honour himself. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? Will 

the Assembly take the question as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

John (Jack) Chapman 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Having 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

asked for leave for all of the motions, I’ll get right to this 

particular motion, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll read in a moment some of the biographical 

information of John (Jack) Chapman who passed away on 

March 6th, 2011. He was a member of this Assembly from 

1980 until 1982 for the constituency of Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did not know Mr. Chapman personally, and I 

can’t speak then from personal experience as to his time here in 

the Assembly, except I could say this: I think, Mr. Speaker, the 

constituency of Estevan would have been at that time, given the 

political history of the province and given what was about to 

happen just two years later, a formidable constituency for a 

New Democrat to win, I would expect, as was born out just a 

couple of years later in a political change that occurred in the 

province. And so that must speak to Mr. Chapman’s standing in 

the community. And in a moment I’ll read that that was a 

long-standing commitment he had to that area and to the city of 

Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes in our political system I think we 

underestimate the impact of individual candidates. There is 

always a lot of talk in the pre-writ period at election time, and 

even afterwards, in terms of the leader of a particular party or 

the party brand itself or even the platform. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that often we underestimate the importance of the women 

and men who are running for that particular party in a 

constituency. And I think it’s safe to say, given the political 

history of our province, given the times, given the race that 

included a future premier at that time in 1980, that Mr. 

Chapman was obviously held in high esteem — 

notwithstanding any other issues perhaps for some — was held 

in high esteem by the people of Estevan constituency. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the motion reads: 

 

That we are going to express our appreciation and 

acknowledge the contribution of John (Jack) Chapman 

who passed away on the 6th of March, 2011, who was a 

member of the Legislative Assembly from 1980 until 1982 

representing the constituency of Estevan for the New 

Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Chapman was born on 19 August, 1931 in Estevan, 

Saskatchewan. John was a first class power engineer and 

plant supervisor who worked for SaskPower for 35 years. 

 

Mr. Chapman was a very active member of the Lutheran 

community in Saskatchewan and Canada. He served on 

church councils and as a board member of Luther College. 

 

John is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 60 years, 

Olive, his daughter Judy, son-in-law Joseph, and 

granddaughters Leslie and Amy. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the pleasure of 

knowing Jack for many years, and I was at his funeral last year. 

And as we came into the church, the Lumsden community band 

was there to play at the funeral. And they had his chair sitting 

with his baritone tuba — just the tuba was sitting there — and 

then they played as part of the service that was held. 

 

Jack was a large man physically, but also in his sense of 

community. He was born in the Estevan area and started 

working for SaskPower and worked for SaskPower for 35 

years. Many of the last years in his job were as the regional 

manager for that area. He was somebody that was held in high 

respect by people of all different political parties. 

 

In the by-election that was held down in Estevan in 1980, it was 

a by-election that came as a result of the selection of Mr. Grant 

Devine as the leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, and 

so the plan was to open up a safe seat for Mr. Devine so that he 

could come to the legislature as the leader of the party. And 

Jack was a bit of a wrench in that political plan and ended up 

being elected as somebody who represented the community and 

had spent many years gaining the respect. It was clear though 

that in 1982, Premier Devine won the seat and then held it for 

many, many years. 

 

[16:30] 

 

I knew Jack through the Lutheran Church, and we served on a 

number of different boards within the national and local 

Lutheran church structure. And he always brought his common 

sense perspective into that role and, I think, made sure that there 

was a very good contribution to how the Lutherans organized 

their affairs in Saskatchewan. 

 

I also knew Jack through the Scandinavian Club of Regina. Jack 

wasn’t of Norwegian background but his wife was, and he 

became more Norwegian than she did, and ended up welcoming 

all of the relatives that would come, the friends that would 

come. And we spent many, many occasions over the years 

celebrating Saskatchewan Norwegianness. And so I, when I 

think about Jack, I often think of some of those activities where 

he would very enthusiastically celebrate the 17th of May or the 

Christmas parties or different things like that. 

 

It was clear though that the focus of Jack’s life was his family. 

And he and Olive were married for 60 years. They have one 

daughter, Judy, married to Joseph, and then two 

granddaughters, Leslie and Amy. And there’s a very strong 

connection between the granddaughters and their grandfather. 

And in many ways his second or maybe third career . . . If you 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

had SaskPower and politics, and then his third career really was 

to spend hours and days and months with his granddaughters 

and being involved in their activities. 

 

And I know that Jack lived his life to the fullest, was always 

there with a good story or a welcoming statement, and that we 

all miss him. But also, we also recognize that his life was 

well-lived, that he’d served the people very well in his role here 

in the legislature for a couple of years, but that it was another 

part of a grand life where he contributed wherever he went. So 

with those words, I want to extend my condolences to the 

family and basically say, well done, Jack. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m not 

going to take a lot of time here, but I just do want to be on 

record acknowledging the contributions that Jack Chapman has 

made to the Estevan constituency, the city and community of 

Estevan, as well as the province of Saskatchewan. And I did not 

know Jack personally, but I do remember that by-election in 

November of 1980 after which Jack became the MLA for 

Estevan, and that that was the position he held until the general 

election of April 1982 and, as the Leader of the Opposition has 

said, that he was defeated by then Premier Grant Devine. 

 

I also remember Jack being very involved in his community and 

especially in his church. He was a very active member of the 

Trinity Lutheran Church in Estevan and his whole family was 

involved with the choir and things like that. 

 

But I just don’t have much more to add to that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, other than to say that, as the Premier and the Leader of 

the Opposition have mentioned, that Jack is survived by his 

wife, Olive, his daughter Judy, son-in-law Joseph, and two 

granddaughters. And on behalf of the people of the Estevan 

constituency, I would like to extend my condolences to the 

family of the late Jack Chapman. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to attach some 

comments here today as it relates to the motion of condolence 

for John Jack Chapman, I’m pleased to join in and just add 

some additional comments. I recognize that Mr. Chapman’s life 

was one of service on so many levels — service to community. 

And his career was built within SaskPower, certainly a Crown 

corporation for which we have great pride, and I know Mr. 

Chapman had great pride and had a hand in making sure proper 

stewardship of that corporation. And I know that Mr. Chapman 

continued to care about these aspects — service to community, 

the well-being of Crown corporations — well into his late 

years. 

 

I certainly had the privilege of meeting and visiting with Mr. 

Chapman in his late years once he had resided in Lumsden. 

What was evident, both by looking at biographical information, 

chatting with others who knew Mr. Chapman and chatting with 

Mr. Chapman himself, is that his service that he offered to 

community was incredibly important. And whether that be as 

alderperson or alderman, whether that was on housing boards or 

hospital boards, whether that be by way of being a member of 

this honourable Assembly, Mr. Chapman saw importance to 

offering something back to community. I know that his 

leadership in his church, the Lutheran Church both in Estevan 

and in Lumsden and in Regina, was something also important to 

Mr. Chapman and something that . . . a way he saw of serving 

community as a whole. 

 

So it’s a privilege to offer a few comments as it relates to Jack 

Chapman, recognize his care and commitment to his 

community and our province, something that was certainly 

evident even in the late stages of life, and something that should 

be honoured and celebrated by this Assembly. 

 

Certainly I’d like to express condolence to his family, his wife, 

Olive, and I’d like to thank both his wife, Olive, and their entire 

family for sharing Jack Chapman not only with this Assembly, 

but with the province and the community in his many roles that 

he provided great service to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier’s moved the motion of 

condolence with respect to John Jack Chapman. Will the 

Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Serge LeClerc 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

On 16 April 2011, Serge LeClerc succumbed to his battle with 

cancer. He passed away in Ontario. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. LeClerc finished his career in this 

Assembly as an independent member, but began it as a 

Saskatchewan Party member. Mr. Speaker, I certainly, as 

leader, was involved in recruiting him to be a candidate for our 

party as we recruit people across the province to run in 

contested nominations and in non-contested nominations. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I took the opportunity to read the 

autobiography of Mr. LeClerc called Untwisted. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, notwithstanding any of the events that resulted in 

change in Mr. LeClerc’s party designation from Saskatchewan 

Party to independent, his is a compelling story of one’s ability 

to overcome circumstance. Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of us 

heard Mr. LeClerc tell that story if we didn’t read it in the book. 

 

I remember hearing it for the first time in person at a Lieutenant 

Governor’s prayer breakfast where Mr. LeClerc highlighted the 

fact that he was born of a Cree woman from central Canada 

who gave birth to him at a very, very young age, and was the 

best mother she could possibly be for Mr. LeClerc. But then as 

his book highlights and as he went on to tell us that day at that 

prayer breakfast, he got involved in many unsavoury activities 

dating from an early age, especially as a result of, I think 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

anyway, the experience he had in the — and I’ll use this term 

loosely — in the corrections system in Ontario. And who knows 

what Mr. LeClerc battled throughout his entire life right up until 

the end based on the experience that he suffered in some of 

those facilities at the hands of those men, of men who you 

would as a young person want to be able to look up to and want 

to be able to trust. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I got to know Serge and of his interest 

in a number of important issues in our province and in the city 

of Saskatoon that he was then calling home, I thought it would 

be good for this Assembly and good for a government, good for 

a province to have that force of nature working towards some of 

the objectives that Mr. LeClerc held for this province in terms 

of addictions, in terms of programming for young people, 

programming for those young people on the street and others, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and was glad that he sought an 

uncontested nomination and was happy later that he won his 

seat and eventually took a place on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can tell this Assembly — and many 

members on this side won’t be surprised to hear it because they 

experienced it — of his passionate expression of those interests 

that brought him to politics in the first place and what he 

wanted to achieve through his political life, especially on the 

addictions front but mainly in his desire to help young people. 

 

Even as a member of the Assembly, he continued to speak 

around the province. He took engagements around the province 

to speak, sometimes formally a part of our own fact-finding and 

information gathering we wanted to do as we developed our 

own policy around addictions, but often as a part of his own, 

what he would determine, what he would call his passion and in 

some cases a ministry, around the province to tell his story and 

maybe affect others in its telling. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am not going to comment much about 

how his career in this Assembly came to an end, but I will say 

this. Tami and I, we have three great kids and sometimes when 

I reflect back on the life of Serge I think of their impressions of 

him and the impact that he had on them. And all I can say is 

this. Megan and Colter, our two oldest, and to some extent 

Faith, who’s now in grade 8 but a little younger, both said to me 

unsolicitedly after hearing Serge’s story — once at the high 

school in Swift Current where he was brought in by the school 

and another time at our church; on I can’t remember which of 

those occasions — but I do remember that they both, in an 

unsolicited way, wanted to talk about the presentation that they 

had heard Mr. LeClerc give. They wanted to talk about what 

they had learned from that presentation and how it had made an 

impact on them — in the case of our oldest daughter, I think a 

profound impact on her — how it brought home for them what 

they heard in other forums and at their school about the dangers 

of the kind of lifestyle that Mr. LeClerc pursued early on in his 

life and, maybe even most importantly, about the power of an 

individual and grace to overcome some of that circumstance 

should people fall into that way of life. 

 

For my wife, Tami, and I, we were just grateful that someone 

got through to our kids. Because we like to think that we do that 

pretty effectively as parents. But I think we all understand the 

concept of parental immunity in this Assembly where 

sometimes our pontifications don’t always get through to our 

own kids. And it takes a story of someone else, a very real story 

of someone else’s life experience and challenges and how they 

have overcome those challenges — imperfectly, I think, in this 

case and in the case for us all — but how that particular effort 

can get through to young people when other instruction and 

other parenting simply can’t. 

 

I will forever be indebted to Serge LeClerc for doing that in the 

case of our kids. And it wasn’t on a . . . I mean there was a 

personal relationship there. Megan, I think, got to be good 

friends with Serge. And Colter’s a little shyer and was a little 

younger at the time. But it wasn’t through that. It was through 

these forums where they would just hear in a very unvarnished 

way the story as only Serge could tell it. 

 

And so sometimes it’s difficult for us to square all the circles as 

we look back either at our own lives or at the life of someone, 

as we are today, someone who’s passed. But I think it’s very 

important, especially on a day like today as we reflect on the 

life of these members who have passed, that we consider, that 

we consider things in their totality, in their sum. We consider 

the fact that each of these people — and Serge is right at the top 

of the list — impacted people for the better, made a difference 

in the lives of individuals and in the lives of groups. And isn’t 

that the reason that we run for office in the first place? 

 

Some, by the way, get that job done through this kind of an 

office, but others do it as Serge did through groups like Teen 

Challenge and their own other, their other interests and other 

groups of which they’re a part. But either way, we owe them a 

debt of gratitude. Either way we owe them our thanks, and we 

owe them remembrance in terms of that sum, that totality of 

what they gave and what they contributed. And that’s how I’m 

remembering Serge LeClerc today. That’s how I thought about 

him upon learning of his death in Ontario. 

 

[16:45] 

 

You know, I’ll just offer this particular scripture that’s always 

. . . It’s sort of perhaps a little bit easily . . . It’s perhaps too 

liberally thrown around, but if you think about it, I think there’s 

an application to the life of Serge. It’s from the eighth chapter 

of Romans, verse 28, and it goes something like “all things 

work together for good for those who love the Lord and are 

called according to His purpose.” And if you take a look at that 

scripture and kind of analyze it, you think really, all things, all 

things work together for good? Even the worst of the challenges 

we face in our individual lives either as individuals or as a 

group — all things? 

 

But when you consider Serge’s life in its full spectrum from 

being a lawbreaker to becoming a lawmaker to sitting as an 

independent and dealing with the challenges towards the end, 

when you consider all of that in the context of the people that he 

helped and the lives that he changed . . . And I talked to one 

again just last week who was very much addicted to drugs and 

because of Serge’s efforts at Teen Challenge, he and his wife, 

like many others, are living as contributing members to society 

and helping build this province. When you consider his life in 

the context of the people that he saved from addictions, or at 

least facilitated that salvation, then it’s a little easier to 

understand that all things can work together for good. 

 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Serge LeClerc, who passed away on 16 April 2011, was a 

member of this Legislative Assembly from 2007 to 2010 

representing the constituency of Saskatoon Northwest for 

the Saskatchewan Party and then as an independent 

member. He served as the legislative secretary to the 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, Chair 

of the Standing Committee on Private Bills, and was a 

member of two standing committees — Human Services 

and Privileges. 

 

Mr. LeClerc received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 

sociology with a minor in social work from the University 

of Waterloo and later he became an author and 

motivational speaker, detailing his struggles with 

addiction, gang life, and criminal behaviour. He was an 

executive director of Teen Challenge Saskatchewan, a 

non-profit charity with a mandate to provide long-term 

residential care to youth recovering from addiction. 

 

Mr. LeClerc is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 

Janine, and her son and daughter. He was predeceased by 

his first wife, Noreen, and is missed by his stepson. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier’s moved: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Serge LeClerc, who passed away on April 16th, 2011, 

was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 2007 to 

2010, representing the constituency of Saskatoon 

Northwest for the Saskatchewan Party and as an 

independent member. He served as the legislative 

secretary to the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing, Chair of the Standing Committee on Private Bills 

and was the member of two standing committees, Human 

Services and Privileges. 

 

Mr. LeClerc received a Bachelor of Arts degree in 

sociology with a minor in social work from the University 

of Waterloo, and later he became an author and 

motivational speaker, detailing his struggles with 

addictions, gang life, and criminal behaviour. He was an 

executive director of Teen Challenge Saskatchewan, a 

non-profit charity with a mandate to provide long-term 

residential care for youth recovering from addictions. 

 

Mr. LeClerc is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 

Janine, and her son and daughter. He was predeceased by 

his first wife, Noreen, and missed by his stepson. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to the 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to rise 

and say a few words about Serge LeClerc. Serge was bigger 

than life, I think we could say. When he came into this 

Assembly, we all knew he was there. And sometimes it was 

very sort of loud interventions, other times it was quieter ones, 

but we always knew that Serge was there. And I personally 

always had and have a great deal of respect for Serge LeClerc 

because no matter how we have come as individuals to this 

place, he came from some extremely difficult situations that 

gave him a whole other education in life that I think assisted us 

in the work that we did here. 

 

When I was in university in the States, I took two of my 

university courses at McNeil Island Federal Penitentiary where 

basically it was all the people who had sentences of 10 years or 

more. And I ended up spending lots of hours under lockdown in 

the prison because that’s where we had these classes. And I was 

reminded, when Serge showed up in the legislature, of some of 

those people who I had studied with in 1972 — and I guess it 

would be 1972 — because they would, when you first would 

meet them, there would be this protection, this shell. But as you 

got into the study of something of a common purpose or you 

had a chance to ask some questions, they would be just like 

other people that you knew and respected. 

 

And I think that I, in my private career before I got into politics, 

spent I think probably, well probably about 12 years on as 

eventually the president of the church council on justice and 

corrections, representing Lutherans as we looked at the 

correctional system of Canada. And in that role I was always 

reminded of all of these valuable people that were locked up, 

and what could they do. And so coming into the legislature and 

having Serge show up here and bringing his experience to the 

different things that we did was a reminder to me, and to all of 

us, that the Lord finds interesting ways to identify strong people 

and puts them in the right places to do things. And so for Serge, 

I say we all need to thank the Lord. Thanks. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

privilege and an honour to rise in this Assembly today to speak 

about the passing of an individual who at times seemed bigger 

than life, as was alluded to by the Leader of the Opposition — a 

humanitarian, motivational speaker, author, the former MLA 

for Saskatoon Northwest, but to me firstly a friend, Mr. Serge 

LeClerc. 

 

His life of hardship, and at times survival through crime, is well 

documented in his autobiography, Untwisted. Born of a 

14-year-old First Nations girl who was a product of rape, he 

stood little chance for a productive life. Statistically he would 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

say he should have been aborted. But his mother raised him 

well, I would say, to the age of eight, where for being truant and 

hanging around with older boys, being caught shoplifting, he 

was taken away from her. At that point he would quite often say 

he realized he was not built for speed. 

 

Years of physical and emotional abuse in a violent reform 

school led to a risky lifestyle, intermittent incarceration. His 

escapades should have and many times almost did leave him 

dead, but he always had a heart for the little guy and those in 

need. 

 

He eventually encountered a Christian pastor who presented 

Serge with some difficult decision choices while in prison, 

some difficult questions. He could choose to believe either he 

was nothing more than an animal that walked on two legs and 

when he died it’s over; there was nothing more. Or he could 

believe you are a creation of God. He has a plan for you. You 

are valuable, you have a purpose, and can have eternal life with 

God. The pastor also asked him the question: if there is a God 

and life after death, Serge, heaven and hell, where are you going 

to end up? 

 

Serge was renewed through faith in Jesus Christ, turned his 

back to his old life, and strived to offset the wrongs of his past. 

In fact, as was spoken by the Premier, while in prison he 

forwarded his education from a grade 4 equivalent to many 

university degrees and distinctions. He used his story to educate 

young people of the pitfalls and repercussions of drugs and 

crime and was very careful not to glorify it. In fact he would 

quite often say, my testimony is a powerful one but is not a 

good one. 

 

Serge was instrumental in bringing a highly successful Teen 

Challenge program to Saskatchewan before retiring from that 

organization and being elected to this Assembly in 2007. 

 

I got to know Serge some time before he decided to seek public 

office. I had the opportunity to see him speak many times to 

groups of a variety of demographics as well as accompany him 

to some speaking engagements around the province after we 

were elected. Our seating arrangements and duties meant we 

were often together. We became very good friends. 

 

And no matter the audience, he had a message that impacted 

them whether vulnerable youth, mixed secular groups, 

faith-based groups. One of my favourite quotes of his, 

particularly when speaking to youth, was this: 

 

You can be anything you want in life. The only person that 

can make you a loser is you. If you really want to improve 

your situation, work on the one thing you control — 

yourself. You are created to be excellent. You are the best; 

be the best. 

 

I once went with him to a ratepayers meeting in rural 

Saskatchewan. On this occasion, I asked him what he was going 

to talk about — a Métis, ex-con politician in front of a room full 

of what would be called rednecks at a secular event. He said it 

would come to him. He walked around the room and visited 

with people and later delivered a message that captivated them 

and, they admitted to me, they needed to hear. His message 

included his path, his faith for which he never made any 

apologies, and the pressures of peers and society. 

 

I can honestly say when he was in his element there were few, 

if any, that were better; probably none better. Only one 

gentleman in that one talk at that secular ratepayers meeting got 

up to the washroom in the whole hour talk. One lady 

commented to me afterwards in tears: he never had a chance to 

be a little boy; he had no chance to be a child. 

 

The impact his messages had was undeniable. I continually hear 

from people to this day that he had impacted. He had a very 

unique way of sharing the gospel with people. He often referred 

to himself as a red-letter Christian, and if anybody’s familiar 

with the Gideon Bible, all the words of Jesus Christ are in red. 

 

And he drew a very interesting gang metaphor from that that 

really impacted me, but I know it really impacted specifically 

vulnerable youth that were getting drawn into that gang 

lifestyle. And I’ll do my best to interpret his rendition of that, 

Mr. Speaker. But what it was, was Serge came from a gang 

background. He was a gang leader. He had a core group of guys 

— his gang — around him that he trusted and followed him, 

and he had a whole group of people that followed him outside 

of that. He drew very eloquently that comparison to Jesus Christ 

being a gang leader, his apostles being his gang members, and 

the disciples being those that would follow all of them. And he 

had an interesting take on that to verify that the gospel was true. 

 

You see, he said in his life he was living a lie, a lie of crime, a 

life of crime and wrongdoing. And when the leader would get 

grabbed by the authorities, the gang would split up and run and 

hide for cover and they would never come out because they 

were living a lie. The difference was, in Serge’s point of view, 

that the apostles came out of hiding. They all died terrible and 

vicious deaths for professing to what they had seen — the truth. 

And he said, you don’t come out of hiding for the truth. And 

that I know really impacted a lot of people. But I heard him. I 

give that message to you. I know it impacted me. That really 

spoke to the truth of the Bible and the words of Jesus. 

 

Many, especially here, I don’t believe, got to know the real 

Serge. Grant that he was somewhat guarded — perhaps the 

survival instinct that he developed from his past, being in 

school in a boys prison and the boys reform school. The, at 

times, harder outer shell that protected the real man was all 

most saw. He never let many see who he really was — truly a 

soft-hearted individual who had to grow up quickly to survive 

and, as that lady said, never got to be a child. 

 

He was always looking out for those in need or being wronged. 

His love, care, compassion, and interaction with his 

predeceased wife, Noreen, was something to truly witness. I 

never saw a more loving and caring individual when witnessing 

him looking after her in her final days. 

 

His sensitivity of people in need or having difficult situations 

was quite something. In fact, one personal story I can reflect on 

is it happened to be the anniversary of my son’s passing. And I 

was having a pretty good day, but Serge walked into my office 

and he knew something was instantly wrong. And when I did 

share with him what that day truly was, he broke down in tears 

and hugged me and really consoled me. And that’s just the type 

of person that I got to know, my friend that I truly loved. 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

Whether it be in prayer meetings or committee meetings in the 

legislature, there was always an interesting event. As the Chair 

of Human Services Committee and taking part in other 

committee meetings, I was worried not so much of what the 

opposition was going to bring up or how they were going to 

conduct themselves. I’m more worried about Serge and what he 

would be up to, so he truly kept me on my toes. 

 

[17:00] 

 

He became ill in the spring of 2010. He was diagnosed with 

cancer some time after and passed away Saturday, April 16th, 

2011 in Trenton, Ontario. A celebration of his life was held 

there on May 7th, 2011. My family and I attended, and I was 

honoured when asked by his current wife, Janine, to contribute 

by remembering my friend. 

 

Serge was not perfect, Mr. Speaker. None of us are. To some he 

seemed stubborn, abrasive, blunt, and many times he may have 

been, but always with the best of intentions from a caring and 

passionate heart. And the harshness, I came to realize, was the 

person he created to protect the boy inside. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, we should measure a man not only by where he is and 

what he’s accomplished, but by how far he has come. And I can 

honestly say I’ve never met anyone that has gone such a 

distance or touched so many in a positive way as Serge LeClerc 

has. 

 

Many times, oddly enough, Serge would tell me of a song that 

he wanted played at his funeral or, as it was, the celebration of 

his life, and that song was “I Can Only Imagine.” And I just 

choose to share those words right now, and it goes: 

 

I can only imagine 

What it would be like 

When I walk by your side 

 

I can only imagine 

What my eyes will see 

When your face 

Is before me 

 

Surrounded by your glory, what will my heart feel 

Will I dance for you Jesus or in awe of you be still 

Will I stand in your presence or to my knees will I fall 

Will I sing hallelujah, will I be able to speak at all 

I can only imagine 

 

I can only imagine 

When that day comes 

And I find myself 

Standing in the sun 

 

I can only imagine 

When all I will do is forever, forever worship you 

I can only imagine 

 

Mr. Speaker, my friend Serge need not imagine any more. 

 

While my family was visiting with him and his wife and family 

the last time, I encouraged him to leave his bitterness that he 

must have felt because of allegations and assumptions behind, 

focus on his health and his family. He said, as difficult as it 

was, he was going to just do that, and in true Serge fashion said 

that it was easier with friends and family around him and a 

community who truly knew him. 

 

The hard protection he had developed in his younger years and 

kept largely through his life, that I think I saw through, was 

really softened in his last days; possibly it was gone. He was 

surrounded by loved ones and there was no longer a need for 

that outer shell. At the end of one of our last conversations, he 

said, “Tell Brad I’m praying for him. I’m praying for all you 

guys. And I’ll say hi and give your son Brayden a hug for you.” 

 

Serge’s second wife, Janine, and her children and parents were 

a true blessing for Serge in his final months. He had a wife, two 

kids, and finally parents, albeit in-law. He never really 

remembered what it was like to have parents but now he had 

everything at once. I’m sure the Father welcomed him with 

these words: “Well done, good and faithful servant.” His ashes 

will be interred this coming April 16th in Trenton. 

 

May God bless his stepson, Mark, and his wife, Lana, and his 

wife, Janine, and her children, Samuel and Nicole, with peace 

and comfort. God bless and Godspeed, Serge, my friend. Well 

done. Rest in peace. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to add a few words on behalf of the 

folks I represent, Saskatoon Centre. And this is always a tough 

time when we think back and reflect on a person’s career, and I 

want to say how much I appreciate the Premier’s remarks about 

trying to square a circle and my own leader’s remark about 

somebody who’s larger than life. But as I think about some of 

the things about Serge and while it was perhaps a short time 

here — four years — but some of the things we got to work on, 

I just want to talk about one example of his commitment to 

those people who live on the margins of society. 

 

He talked a lot about addictions and that kind of thing, but it 

was brought to my attention, in Saskatoon it was easier to vote 

for the mayor than to borrow a library card. A community 

group had told me about this. So we needed to do something 

about ID [identification]. And I know the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland will know, talking about a community 

project, about project ID and how can we do this. And Serge 

was quite helpful in that. And Serge saw . . . I think what I want 

to say is, Serge was a man of common sense. He could not 

stand the barriers that we create for people, especially those 

who are living on the margins, who are dealing with issues that 

just make life a little harder than it should be. And clearly Serge 

had that commitment to common sense that we should always 

fight against that. 

 

So I just want to say that I appreciated his time in the House 

here. Often we didn’t agree and often it was tough to get 

through some of the gruffness and things like that, but I always 

knew that it was a common sense thing. He would see that too. 

And I think that what we all try to do in this House is if we can 

reach across to each other and make this world a little better 

than we found it, then we’ve come a long way. And I think that 

was what Serge really thought about in terms of just a simple 

thing about having identification. So thank you very much, Mr. 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I count it a 

privilege to just be able to say a few words on behalf of Serge 

LeClerc, a gentleman I call a, not only a colleague but a friend. 

As is already mentioned, Serge had a very challenging 

upbringing in life. He was born of an unwed mother, grew up 

on the wrong side of the law, spent a lot of years in prison, 

gained a lot of knowledge that most of us never ever and 

probably never will achieve. But you know, it’s interesting, he 

also made a choice. He made some bad choices because of 

some of the challenges he faced as a child, as a teenager. But as 

some of my colleagues have already shared, when he was 

challenged in prison by a gentleman who introduced him to a 

person named Jesus Christ, he made a choice, and that choice 

changed his life. 

 

And as a result of that change, he wanted to see other lives 

changed and got involved in Teen Challenge and then was 

invited to the province of Saskatchewan to begin the Teen 

Challenge program. And we’ve also heard, from around the 

room, of the many people who have been changed — young 

people whose lives have been changed, young people who’ve 

been consumed in drugs and alcohol — and as a result of the 

Teen Challenge program and other programs in this province, 

have been able to change their lives. 

 

I first met Serge at a Full Gospel banquet and was really 

inspired by his message. I was actually a bit shocked when I 

heard that he was interested in seeking political life. The reason 

I say that is because, as you met the man and got to know him a 

little bit, you kind of thought, a little rough around the edges. 

But probably we’ve all been there. In fact I’m still there, pretty 

rough around the edges at times. And he was rough around the 

edges, but he had a heart. He had a heart of gold. 

 

And I can remember when he walked into this Chamber, and 

speaking with him shortly afterwards, it still amazed him that 

with his background and the life he had lived and where he was, 

that he actually could be elected to sit on the floor of the 

Legislative Chamber in the province of Saskatchewan. He was 

humbled. He was awed. But I will say this, he found it a little 

frustrating. 

 

In some ways, many people commented, he was like a bull in a 

china shop. This place just operated too slowly for him. But he 

still let you know where he stood. And he could be a little crude 

at times, but you knew where he stood. You knew where his 

heart was. He wanted to see young people have a change in life. 

He wanted to see this province grow and change and move 

forward. He had that desire. 

 

I can also remember when his wife, Noreen, was very ill and 

that devastated him. When she passed away, he went through a 

real low ebb in his life and for a period of time really struggled. 

Then I remember one day he walked in with a young lady and 

her two children, and you could see the gleam back in his eye 

and the joy as he introduced me to his soon-to-be new wife, 

Janine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are very few, if any of us and those in the 

past, who’ve sat on the floor of this Chamber who when we 

walk out the doors for the last time will be remembered very 

long or fondly other than by a few family and friends or 

someone who may walk down the halls of this Chamber and see 

our picture on the wall. I can tell you this: Serge LeClerc will 

be remembered by hundreds, if not thousands, of young men 

and women whose lives were changed because our Heavenly 

Father allowed him to walk, walk this Earth and walk amongst 

us. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? Can 

we take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Robert (Bob) Long 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and express 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

Robert (Bob) Long, who passed away on June 4th, 2011, 

at the age of 74, was a Member of the Legislative 

Assembly from 1978 to 1982, representing the 

constituency of Cutknife-Lloydminster for the New 

Democratic Party. He served as the minister of Highways 

and Transportation from 1980 to 1982. 

 

Mr. Long became the president of the NDP in 1988 and 

served until 1992. In 1993 Premier Romanow appointed 

Mr. Long as the chairman of the Highway Traffic Board. 

He served on the board for 10 years. 

 

Mr. Long is survived and sadly missed by his children 

Murray and Marlyss, their spouses and children, as well as 

his fiancée, Rosemarie Grant. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses it most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time at which Mr. Long served in this 

Assembly was a time that I was getting very much interested in 

politics and significantly in provincial politics. And I’m happy 

to tell you that — I think this is true — I’m almost positive that 

at the time and in years since, I would have been able to tell 

you, maybe not exactly the years, but I would have been able to 

tell you that he was the minister of Highways for a time. I had a 

habit of . . . well maybe a number of strange habits when it 

becomes an interest in politics, including board games and other 

things, but even in memorizing those who are honoured enough 

to have their picture on a highways map, which was accorded to 

Highways ministers at the time. I’m not sure that’s the case, if 

that’s the case for the member for Rosetown or not any more. 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2012 

I’m not sure if it is. If it’s been stopped for some reason, I don’t 

think we’ll start it up again frankly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s interesting just in this bio to note that even after the 

sweep in 1982, Mr. Long continued his political activism. He 

continued his service at the party level, and we all understand 

that that is the absolute bull work for what happens here. We’re 

notwithstanding the parties we’re talking about. You need that 

party leadership, that party infrastructure. It does keep this 

process going. It’s an important part of renewal. It’s an 

important part of policy development. It’s an important part of 

candidate recruitment. I do not know how the inner workings of 

the New Democratic party were conducted in the early, in the 

1980s for example, but I would imagine that the leaders of the 

party would be relying on the president — in the case of Mr. 

Long, up until 1992, from ’88 to ’92 — to help recruit 

candidates and to build for what was a seminally important 

change, I’d argue, for the party, for that party and the province 

in the early 1990s. 

 

And so we are grateful today for Mr. Long’s service in this 

Assembly, both as an MLA for Cutknife-Lloyd but then also as 

the Highways minister. And we’re also grateful that he 

continued his involvement, first at the political level and then 

providing leadership at the Highway Traffic Board. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, perhaps it’s a small thing we do here 

for a day when we take the chance to acknowledge that kind of 

contribution. But it’s so very, very important that we do, in the 

memory of in this case Mr. Long, but also to his credit with his 

family and friends who mourn his loss. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

know there are other members that wish to speak about Mr. 

Long. It’s my honour to move this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

[17:15] 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bob Long truly lived 

out his name. He was long. He was tall. So when I got to know 

him in his role in the party, it’s like in any place, as other tall 

people know, you go into the room and you say hi to five or six 

people that you see in a crowd of 3 or 400. And he was always 

one that I acknowledged when I came somewhere. 

 

Also he had a very strong voice, and so you knew that he would 

be bringing some good advice whenever you met him. And I 

think that was his strength in the years that he was a member of 

the legislature for Lloydminster Cutknife and in his years as a 

leader in the party and then as he worked with the Highway 

Traffic Board. He had people who would listen to him because 

he was very reasoned in the kinds of things that he would say. 

 

When a premier is in a situation where he has to put together a 

cabinet — and I guess that is a topic we might be hearing about 

a little later this spring — it’s always interesting who gets 

which jobs and how they do those jobs. But I think all of us 

need to remind ourselves that it was Bob Long, as minister of 

Highways, who completed the twinning of the highway from 

Swift Current over to the Alberta border, that many of us really 

appreciate that particular role. And not a lot of people recognize 

and understand that Saskatchewan did have the twinned 

Trans-Canada Highway first in the country, and it was because 

of good work over many decades of many Highways ministers. 

So I just say to people that Bob was a real asset for the 

province, and that as you zip over to Calgary, just tip your hat 

to Bob Long and say thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to speak about Mr. Long as well. He is someone that I 

believe I only met once. It was after I was elected, and Mr. 

Long was very gracious and we had a very good talk about 

politics. But as a young man, I remember Bob at fowl suppers 

and very involved in our community. 

 

But I don’t think I truly appreciated him until . . . It was before I 

was elected, and I was door knocking in Lloydminster. And I 

can remember it was a nice fall day, and I on a doorstep, and 

this lady came to the door, and I got a true education about 

politics, about the history, and about Bob Long. And she told 

me Bob . . . I can’t remember exactly how she put it. The last 

time we had a really good Highways minister was Bob Long, or 

the best Highways minister we ever had was Bob Long. And I 

was kind of looking forward, because that for some reason 

stuck in my mind, of knocking on her door in this last election 

to see if things had changed. I don’t think they would have. I 

think that her opinion would still be that Bob Long was the best 

Highways minister in Saskatchewan history. 

 

I think that what he’s done in our constituency is set a very high 

bar. People expect a lot from MLAs since, and I certainly try 

and live up to that. And I know that he’s remembered very 

fondly by a lot of constituents, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what I 

just wanted to share with the Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will not 

be long in my remarks but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh 

yes, this is terrible, okay. But I think Bob would have actually 

liked that joke. He was a really great guy. 

 

I had the chance to sit and talk with Bob quite a few times over 

the years. And I guess the main thing I want to say about Bob 

Long is this: there are those that approach the CCF-NDP with a 

sense of it being a movement, and it’s bigger than just a 

political party or a political machine or things like that. But you 

know, it being a political party, there are those that are perhaps 

overly pragmatic and, you know, concerned about technique, 

and they’re more on the operator side of things. 

 

The Bob Long I knew was . . . If the NDP, CCF-NDP was ever 

a movement that had some ideas that it fought for, it was 

because of people like Bob Long. But if we ever took power to 

put those ideas into . . . make those things happen in power, it 

was because of people like Bob Long. He was a guy with a 

great laugh, good mind, and deep roots in the West, West 



March 12, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

Central there. And as has been noted, you know, sometimes 

people get defeated and you don’t see them much after that. But 

his involvement continued, to become party president in 1988. 

It was a fiercely fought affair at the then provincial convention, 

and one of the people that he went toe to toe with to win that 

presidency, Mr. Speaker, was Roy Atkinson — you know, no 

shrinking violet himself. So you know, right out of the gates, 

you knew the guy was a fierce competitor. 

 

But as has been noted in different quarters, in 1991 the NDP 

had something like 45,000 paid up members — which, when 

you consider what the size of the electorate is, is almost sort of 

hard to believe in the modern context. And you know, it was 

almost too successful because ever after the bar was set so high 

that, you know, good luck replicating that. 

 

But the fact that, as has been said, the kind of bull work that’s 

involved in getting out and getting the money together and 

getting people willing to be card-carrying members of a 

political party, that was the challenge that Bob went at with 

relish. And if we had such great success on election night in 

1991, it was for the efforts of somebody like Bob Long. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, he made a great contribution to public 

life, but certainly he was one of those happy warrior kind of 

partisans and I think he made a great contribution to the kind of 

cause that we, on this side of the House, want to see advanced. 

 

I want to say, as well, a special word of condolence to the 

family and particularly to his son Murray, who is long in stature 

as well and got a sharp mind and a ready laugh just like his dad. 

So Bob Long will be missed, but his legacy will live on. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Can I take the question as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is the House in favour of the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 

1:30 tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:23.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 441 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 441 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 441 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................... 441 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 441 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 441 

  Chartier ............................................................................................................................................................................. 441, 442 

  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 442 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 442 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 442 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 442 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 442 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 443 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 443 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 443 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 443 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 J.J. Kirkpatrick Award Recipients 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 444 

 Agricultural Safety Week 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 444 

 Points Athabasca Northern Spirit Showcase 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 444 

 Fundraising Event for the Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society 

  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 444 

 Landis School Projects 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 445 

 University of Saskatchewan Men’s Hockey Victory 

  Tochor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 445 

 Canadian Interuniversity Sport Women’s Basketball Tournament 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 445 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Accommodation in Seniors’ Facility 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 446 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 446 

 Grain Marketing 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 447 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 447 

 Possible Takeover of Grain Trading Company 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 448 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 448 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 448 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 449 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 450 

MOTIONS 

 Congratulations to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 451 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 452 

  Harrison (Transmittal Motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 453 

CONDOLENCES 

 Allan Emrys Blakeney 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 453 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 454 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 455 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 456 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 457 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 458 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 459 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 460 



 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 462 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 463 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 464 

 John (Jack) Chapman 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 466 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 467 

  Eagles ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 468 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 468 

 Serge LeClerc 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 468 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 470 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 470 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 472 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 473 

 Robert (Bob) Long 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 473 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 474 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 474 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 474 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 




