




















































Hansard: November 26, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 18B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2191 

 November 26, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Brkich): — Time being 7 o’clock, 

the House is now in session. Debate will resume on Bill No. 69. 

I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again to 

get back on the record of I guess Bill 69, just to have some 

more discussion here on it, The Information Services 

Corporation Act, Bill 69, just want to give a follow-up to finish 

on it. I wasn’t quite done. 

 

And I guess we look at the priorities. And when you have a 

government looking at a corporation like service information 

that is provided on behalf of the people of the province who 

want their information protected and felt pretty confident the 

way the system had worked, service information that was 

operated under a Crown corporation 100 per cent, a public 

Crown, owned by the people to make sure . . . And I guess they 

had safeguard and people were really comfortable with the way 

ISC [Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

operated, the way it protected all Saskatchewan residents’ 

information, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think people are very 

clear they would like it to stay that way. Maybe the government 

will reconsider before it passes this bill to take our Crowns and 

continue to protect them and not to let them be sold off, any sort 

— whether it’s 10 per cent, 60 per cent — and try to say they’re 

going to save or keep, retain 40 per cent. 

 

I think it’s something that people are not buying and it’s not 

going over well. And I guess if people are talking, it just starts 

that process I said earlier, the concern people had. Here we have 

employees. We have an information place where it was all 

gathered. And there are six components that ISC protected, and 

people were very confident and comfortable with that. And you 

know, you give the staff and the organization a lot of 

compliments on the way they conducted business and the way 

they protected the information. 

 

And I think we should be talking to the Privacy Commissioner 

and looking at his comments, where this is going and what his 

concerns are. And I think we’ll get a chance over the next 

while, months, to visit with him, find out exactly what are his 

concerns, and are there concerns and is he hearing those 

concerns. And I think that’s important to see. Here’s an 

independent body that represents, I guess, and tries to keep 

things in place the way they need to be and protect the people of 

the, you know, of the province and privacy. 

 

And you know, the job he does sometimes is not easy. But 

again I just will have an opportunity to ask him and to see what 

his response. And he may have responded a few times and 

made some comments initially, but we want to follow up with 

him. And I know we’re going to do that and I know my 

colleagues are going to be doing that and we have to do that to 

make sure. 

 

But having said that, again I listed off a number of things that, if 

the government was to reconsider and not sell off our Crowns, 

to keep and retain the profits every year, they could do a lot of 

the projects that I had said earlier in my opening comments 

about a second bridge for Prince Albert. There’s a number of 

areas where we see that: addictions, you know, so there is no 

one turned away. The waiting list is there, and people are not 

asked to, you know, come back later when they’re . . . 

 

So there’s many issues when you look at how the money that 

would be retained, the government would retain, would be 

great. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at this bill again, 

69, and the way they’re proposing and some of the money that, 

you know, we will be losing, the people of this province who 

truly own the Crown corporation, so when we talk about that 

kind of thing and we see the way the sell-off is going, it’s very 

concerning. And this is a start. 

 

And we’ve seen some of the other things that, like I said earlier, 

that this government was willing to start selling off. But I know 

there’s some of the concerns that people have is truly is going 

to sell off our Crown corporation and to the private sector 

versus the public sector. And I think people have made a pretty 

strong argument. And let’s just hope they continue to raise the 

issue with us. 

 

And again, you know, I want to go back on this because I think 

from what I’ve heard from the constituents that I’ve talked to, 

from Saskatchewan people and I think people in general that are 

talking about this, they want to make it clear. And you know, 

the government should take note of this. The public does not 

want our Crowns privatized, clear and simple. 

 

There was a commitment by this — and I mean, I’ve read into 

the record — the minister in 2008. The ISC annual report 

clearly, you know, I read some of his information, his 

comments about the commitment of his government. They 

would be keeping with their commitment and not selling off the 

Crown corporations. Well you know, not very long later, here 

we are. We’re selling them off. And it’s a start. And that’s what 

people are scared of, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re concerned 

that people are going to watch more and more. Where does this 

go? 

 

And so much stuff done sometimes in secrecy, the way the 

government does some of the things, the sell-off of certain 

things. We look at LeRoy regional park, quietly done the way 

the minister and all that handling . . . Tourism Saskatchewan 

was not handled the way it should have been handled. We go 

back into all these surprises. 

 

And I commented about some of this stuff, but I know there are 

some people that are probably tuning in right now and trying to 

say, well where are we going with this? And you know, they 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

didn’t hear my comments that I made earlier about the profits 

that we could be using from our Crown corporation that 

actually gave our Saskatchewan residents, I guess, the cheaper 

version, we’ll say, of something. And you know, Information 

Services Corporation did exactly that. Sure, there was fees to 

people, but you know, truly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think people 

were comfortable because they felt protected. Their information 

would be protected. 

 

And the Crown corporations have done, you know, an excellent 

job all around if you look at them. Is it perfect? No, but people 

have come to expect that service being provided to them and 

feel safe with the information, that the information is not going 

to be leaving and out of the province, that somebody else 

doesn’t have it. So let’s be clear on that. 

 

And I know government can say, oh yes, but we’re only going 

to do this much, and we’re only going to do that much. I don’t 

buy it, and I don’t think a lot of people are buying it. This is a 

start, so they can of course, like I said, balance their budget, 

balance the books to make it look like . . . So they’re looking, 

you know, and they’re hunting for every dollar they can 

possibly find to offset their terrible budget and the way they’ve 

handled it. 

 

So the people have asked them to look after that. So when I see 

the Crown corporations and Bill 69 when it talks about the 

Information Services Corporation, that branch in itself is very 

concerning at the way we’re going. 

 

And I mean I know there’s a lot of comments and different 

reports. And you know, the media has taken hold of this, and 

they’re weighing in on it. There’s other people weighing in on 

it. I think we’re going to see that over time before this bill 

comes before this House and is law. I think we’re going to see a 

lot of people weighing in on this and really concerned and 

watching it closely, I think closer than people think. 

 

I really think some people think that, well if we do this quietly, 

and we do it this way, it’s not going to affect them. I remind all 

members of this House, I think it is going to affect them, and I 

think people will be deciding something. Okay, you say it one 

way, but yet you do the opposite. To me that’s a trust thing. It’s 

like telling somebody on their doorstep, this is what our plan 

. . . here’s our plan. We’re going to do this. We’re going to be 

taking over, you know, Saskatchewan tourism — nothing said 

about. 

 

I’d given some points, Crown corporations where that is 

happening and has happened under the previous government. 

So the Sask Party government has not always done exactly what 

it said. So they will have to answer to that. I guess I can be a 

judge to a point on that, but I think the public and the voters and 

the residents, citizens of our great province, will come to judge 

the, I guess, doings of the government. And maybe they’ll hope 

the government would be willing to reconsider and, you know, 

rescind this legislation and saying, you know, we’re not going 

to go ahead with it. We’re going to cancel. This is bad 

legislation. This is the wrong message we’re sending to 

Saskatchewan people. We gave a commitment we would not 

sell off our Crowns. And here we are. We’re looking for every 

dollar we possibly can find to offset. And we watch at the way 

they’ve gone after it. 

So when I say that, again, keep the dollars in our province. 

Keep the money, yearly the profits that we’d have, and make 

sure we do some of the services that people are needing. We see 

our schools. We see the education cuts that have gone on to, 

you know, support staff, you know, tutors. So we see those kind 

of areas where cuts have happened. We see some of the projects 

that have been announced and not completed because the 

government doesn’t apparently have the money. So the 

universities are in the same boat. Commitments were made to 

them, promises, and all of a sudden the money’s not there. So I 

think my colleagues have expressed that concern, and we have 

expressed that from here. 

 

So when we see this Bill 69 clearly getting rid of an asset that 

could be so good for all our Saskatchewan residents, to share 

that and to spread that wealth around, to making sure that we’re 

doing what’s best with our resources . . . You know, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re always limited to the amount of resources a 

province can have. 

 

And we’ll see tomorrow, you know. We’ll see the minister is 

going to present his report, his financial report, and we’ll see 

the second quarter. We’ll see where it’s at. It’s going to be 

interesting, and we’ll see where it goes. And I guess some 

people were concerned with the last quarter when we’ve seen 

some of the cuts that were coming, the lean process. 

 

So there’s all these things happening in a time where our Crown 

corporations could be doing us a good service, and they do do 

us a good service, but the assets and the retained earnings that 

we get could come back to take care of Saskatchewan residents, 

our seniors, our youth. There’s many programs, you know, that 

because of the financial problems that this government has got 

themselves in, they are now trying to find all the money they 

can to offset their balanced budget because they need more 

billboards. So we talk about that PR [public relations] and the 

spin, and the government at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, can do whatever it wants. 

 

I think the public’s going to get a hold of it, and when the 

public makes its mind up, I think people will see that this type 

of legislation, Bill 69, is not the right way. It’s the wrong way 

for a government to be introducing privatizing our Crown 

corporations the way they’re doing it. They should have told the 

public in the election in their platform. They should have told 

them on the doorstep, we’re going to be getting rid of . . . 

Instead they deny, oh no, no, no. Crowns, we wouldn’t do that. 

Now here we go. That’s why this is the start of it. 

 

And we see some of the parks and we see tourism, and we 

continue to see some of the things that this government’s 

introducing. The film tax credit, how it’s impacted. We’ve seen 

how they handled the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

CEO [chief executive officer]. We see how those challenges are 

coming in and how this government handles anyone that 

opposes it. It’s pretty, pretty sad. 

 

So why don’t they take those dollars and cover some of the 

programs that they’ve cut, some of the good programs that 

they’ve cut, some of the good initiatives that they’ve cut, some 

of the tax credits that helped the film industry? Those are the 

many things they could do if they would retain these dollars 

instead of selling it off. They could do a lot to help 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I think that’s why Saskatchewan people want a 

government to respond to them. And clearly there are a lot of 

areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and community members that are 

feeling the rough times, whether it’s expensive rent. We see the 

cost of living. A lot of them here . . . And the government can 

spin all the different ways it wants to say, you know, with the 

economy. We do; we encourage business. I know my 

colleagues . . . Yes, we agree it’s good. The economy is doing 

good, and if everyone’s benefiting from it, that’s wonderful. 

But when it’s not everyone benefiting, that there’s a large group 

behind suffering because of the cost of living and the cost of 

doing business and just the cost of surviving to try to provide 

for their families, you know, working three jobs, part-time jobs. 

So there are many things going on that people are trying to do 

just to take care of their families, to make sure their kids are 

clothed, to make sure there’s decent food. And some of the 

challenges: you look at nutrition and the cost of food. Some 

people are just barely making it by. 

 

And then you look at our seniors with their rents. You look at 

the cost of food, of medicine, and that got passed on to them 

because they wanted to have a balanced budget. You know, $5 

for every prescription for some seniors. Well maybe for some 

seniors they’re saying, we can handle it; we’ll budget it. But 

there’s some of them that, you know what, will . . . And I’ve 

been told this. They take their medication and — you know 

what? — the dosage is cut in half because they can’t afford to 

pay for it every month so they’re cutting it in half. And you 

know, no senior, no elder, no community member of this 

province who have served this province and have lived in this 

province, have done their part, should have to suffer that way, 

should have to cut their dose down in half because they can’t 

afford it. 

 

And you know, some people say oh, oh, get real. That is a 

reality. Some people are suffering out there. It’s not all a bed of 

roses. So maybe we could retain this asset, our Crown 

corporation, keep the money, and assist our seniors making sure 

that, you know, they’re covered, that they get the medication 

that they require, that the doctor says they need to be healthy, to 

survive. 

 

So there are so many different issues. And I know I’ve got a list 

of things we could continue to talk about and I know my 

colleagues will want to talk about. But again my last thing, I 

hope the government does have a good look at this and say, is 

this the right way? Is this the way we should be going, to be 

selling off and privatizing our Crown corporations? I really 

hope they take a stop and just, you know, pause and think about 

it long and hard and maybe talk to some of the people out there 

and find out exactly, is this the right way to go? 

 

So at that, I guess on that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 

prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No. 69. 

 

[19:15] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Brkich): — The member from 

Cumberland has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 69, The 

Information Services Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Brkich): — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 70 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Marchuk that Bill No. 70 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Brkich): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Committee 

Chairman. It’s always good to be up in the House saying my 

piece, and it’s with particular interest that I rise to join the 

debate tonight on Bill No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, 

2012 (No. 2), part two. 

 

I say with particular interest and particular pleasure, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because it’s with great interest that I follow the deeds 

and the words in this place of the Minister of Education, the 

member from Regina Douglas Park. Certainly this is somebody 

that I’ve known for a long time, and when it comes to 

education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m reminded of what a friend 

of ours in common once said, the then director of education of 

the Regina Public School Board, Bob Brown, who had served 

admirably in the Regina public school system. 

 

You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Education and I 

went to school together once upon a time. And we’re in 

obviously a little different station. I was in grade 9 and the 

member was the vice-principal at Scott Collegiate at the time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I certainly learned an awful lot. And 

it’s, as I say, with great interest I follow the deeds of that 

member in this Chamber and with particular interest, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that saw that individual appointed to cabinet as 

the Minister Responsible for Education. And this will probably 

sound out of sorts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I have a lot of 

hopes for that member in this role in particular in terms of what 

he might add to the public affairs in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s with interest that I’d seen this 

particular bill being brought forward, Bill No. 70. And certainly 

I know that the minister has done his homework in terms of 

consulting broadly with the different institutions listed off at the 

start of his second reading speech: certainly the School Boards 

Association; the STF, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; 

LEADS, the League of Educational Administrators, Directors 

and Superintendents; SASBO, the Saskatchewan Association of 

School Business Officials. I’m interested to see that 

consultation also was undertaken with the Ministry of Finance, 

Ministry of Government Relations. And it’d be interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, to know what sort of ways that the in-the-classroom 

experience and the community experience of students has 

influenced this particular legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I’d say off the top that there are a number of proposals in 

this legislation that on the face of them look to be fairly 

reasonable. And I guess again, having paid attention to the 

minister’s second reading speech and in terms of reviewing his 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

remarks, reviewing the legislation, reviewing the explanatory 

notes, I think it’s worth noting there are a number of measures 

in the legislation of course, and I’d like to discuss something of 

them tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Certainly there’s a fair amount of work that goes on in terms of 

the consultation that our education critic undertakes, Mr. 

Speaker, also an educator. And that’s certainly where we take a 

lot of our lead from in terms of how this legislation plays out in 

the community, how different sort of undertakings that are 

made, undertakings like the second reading speeches by various 

ministers, how that bears up. Maybe there’s a bit of, sometimes 

a bit of variance in terms of what is assured as being consulted 

upon, but we’ll take it on faith, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we’ll 

also do that work of due diligence as well. 

 

But for myself of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, you 

look at these things through the lens of your immediate 

constituency. You look at it through the lens of different critic 

areas, and you look at it through the sort of broader networks 

that we all bring to this legislature as citizens in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So for myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I tend to look at the 

different sort of measures being brought forward here, coming 

out of the inner city of Regina, coming out of a constituency 

with schools like Thomson Community School where there are 

a great number of English as an additional language students, a 

very diverse school and a school in which certain of the 

undertakings around who is guaranteed education as the 

immigration population continues to increase in this province 

and as that is differentiated under the different streams available 

to folks coming to Saskatchewan. 

 

I look at it through the lens of places like my own elementary 

school that I went to, Kitchener Community School, which was 

one of the first schools in the province of Saskatchewan to 

implement a pre-kindergarten program in the late ’70s, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And good to see certain of the ways that that 

has now been enshrined in the legislation and the kind of 

provisions that you need to make in the governing legislation, 

the kind of allowances being made for pre-kindergarten 

programming, not just in places like Kitchener, but increasingly 

across the province. 

 

And I look at it in terms of the capital needs of Regina Public 

School Board in which I am entitled to cast a vote. Certainly in 

the recent trustee elections, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our incumbent 

trustee Carla Beck was acclaimed — apparently scared off all 

the competition or was doing such a good job, nobody wanted 

to get in the way of that — but certainly the way that capital 

needs are being accounted for by the Regina Public School 

Board, and again that’s something I know is very near and dear 

to the heart of the Minister of Education. 

 

In terms of the provisions around the boundaries, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I also think about my cousins out in Montmartre 

region and certainly some of the interesting conflicts that they 

were party to in terms of which kids got to go to which school 

and how different sort of boundary disputes have been regulated 

in the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again one of the 

provisions in this piece of legislation is that 5-kilometre buffer. 

And certainly the analysis of the 22 conflicts or disputes that 

have been brought forward in terms of who gets to go to what 

school and in what division and how that gets mediated, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m interested to see that, that provision in this piece 

of legislation. 

 

I’m also interested in things like what happens with the addition 

of the additional trustee in the Northern Lights. Certainly my 

colleague, the member from Cumberland, is well familiar with 

that, the functioning of that school division, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and served, gave a lot of himself and his time and 

efforts and passion to the functionings of that school division. 

And the provision in this piece of legislation for the additional 

trustee in that division, we’ll see how that again works out. 

 

It begs a broader question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of is 

there a better way that we can organize our educational system 

in this province of Saskatchewan to better serve that gap that is 

there between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal educational 

outcomes, that gap that exists which is recognized by 

everybody from the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

to individual First Nations to organizations like the Treaty 4 

Student Success Program — again which the minister is very 

familiar with, but is not recognized, apparently, by the federal 

Aboriginal Affairs minister — when it comes to that disparity 

which exists between on-reserve funding for First Nations 

education and off-reserve funding and the tremendous harm that 

I think that that does to our educational system, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where you’ve got students that are funded to the tune 

of about 60 per cent of what off-reserve students are being 

funded in the provincial system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And surely, surely to goodness there’s a way that we can better 

organize this educational system to serve those students and to 

serve not just our present, Mr. Speaker, but our future, and 

realizing human potential in terms of making sure that there’s 

that level playing field, that there’s that fair chance when it 

comes to something as vital as education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also appreciate the recognition made in this piece of 

legislation around the Fransaskois school divisions, or the 

écoles scolaires. Again, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s got a 

very interesting history when it comes to the way that official 

languages are represented in our educational system, and I’ll be 

getting into those particular measures as I progress into a fuller 

discussion of the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I’ve got a lot of ways that I’m interested in this legislation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And there are things in this legislation that 

I’m glad to see there and there are some things that need to be 

done in the educational system that are not referenced in this 

legislation but that have been delayed to a future date. 

 

And certainly when the government says that the interim report 

coming at the end of the year for addressing the gap in terms of 

the task force that is chaired by Gary Merasty and also 

populated by Don Hoium, again a former director of education 

out of the Regina Public School Board; and Rita Bouvier, a 

tremendous writer-researcher out of the Métis community; and 

again chaired by Gary Merasty of Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation 

and coming out of Pelican Narrows, also the vice-president with 

Cameco; there’s a tremendous amount of hope that I have for 

the work of that community, that task force, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, on the employment front and on the education front in 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2195 

terms of putting forward some solid measures that get us a lot 

further down the road than this particular piece of legislation in 

front of us here tonight. 

 

So again there are things in this legislation that I’m going to 

discuss tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but there are other things 

that have been delayed to another day that are urgent pieces of 

work in terms of what we owe each other as citizens in this 

province of Saskatchewan, what we owe each other as treaty 

people in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what we owe 

not just to each other but to our future, to realize that potential 

that is going very poorly served right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

in terms of the inaction and the neglect, particularly as relates to 

the underfunding preferred by the federal government for 

on-reserve education. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I know our population is growing, and 

I know we’ve got a huge land mass, but the million-plus people 

that exist in the province of Saskatchewan, when you get down 

to it, it’s not, these things aren’t some sort of abstract, faraway 

concept. A lot of these things, from my home on 12 block 

Cameron in the middle of North Central Regina, what happens 

to students on Piapot, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or in other inner 

cities in the province or other schools throughout the province, 

we are very interconnected in this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And if you’ve got part of the educational system being 

so poorly served by those that have a fiduciary responsibility to 

stand up for it and by it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then we wind up 

paying the price for that in a lot of different ways. And again, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look forward to the day when we can 

stand in this Chamber debating and assessing the measures 

being brought forward that deal squarely and directly with that 

circumstance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I guess so, in terms of the work of the minister, this is a 

fine bit of legislation. I’ve got some particular things to say 

about it, but I just want him to know and I want the government 

to know that there is some work outstanding. And we look 

forward to that work coming and are anxious to see it on the 

floor of this Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the piece of legislation itself in terms of Bill 

No. 70, the first particular measure brought forward under the 

legislation is the amendment of the compulsory school age from 

seven years of age to six years of age. Again the minister 

marshals the fact that the current compulsory school age of 

seven has been in place since 1940. And again, you know, on 

the face of it, it would seem to bear some, bear some logic that 

you should update some things that have been in place since 

1940, and that that compulsory age should be in fact moved to 

age six. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And again, you know, the work that, the abundant research that 

is out there in terms of the importance of that good start, in 

terms of not just kindergarten but pre-kindergarten and the early 

childhood development that is critical in terms of kids showing 

up ready to learn, we’ve had a pretty harsh report brought 

forward by the Saskatoon Health District, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

which again underlines the fact that, you know, in the change of 

the compulsory age that’s part of the equation but there’s a 

broader piece of work to be done around early childhood 

development and pre-kindergarten. 

 

And I think of programs like KidsFirst, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and not just working with kids that are three to five but working 

prenatally to make sure that you’ve got the healthiest pregnancy 

possible and you’ve got the healthiest birth possible. And to the 

way that a lot of us take for granted the fact, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the idea that these things should be taken for granted. 

But the kind of preventative work that you can do, working 

with mothers to have that healthy pregnancy and working with 

to ensure that there’s the best possible kind of birth, Mr. 

Speaker, and that those first months of a child’s life to ensure 

that they are what they need to be so that the developmental 

track for that child is progressing as it should. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, if you’re not paying attention to those kind 

of things, you’re setting kids back so that when they get to the 

kind of things like the compulsory age anticipated in this 

legislation, if you’ve not gotten kids off to a good start, there 

are a lot of things where you’re just going to be playing 

catch-up for those kids. You’re going to be playing catch-up as 

a society. And we see the way that the price of that is paid in 

many regards, Mr. Deputy Speaker, be it in, you know, 

unrealized earning potential in terms of labour force 

participation. 

 

But you also see it in some very, very, very harsh outcomes as 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as relates to people getting wrapped 

up into the corrections system and the kind of situation that we 

see in the province today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of 

overcrowding in our jails and the fact that you’ve got a system 

where it’s not so much about the corrections and getting that 

second chance. But in terms of the way that the correctional 

aspects of the system themselves are being overburdened to the 

point of dubious sort of impact, Mr. Speaker, in terms of if 

you’ve got your classrooms and your rehabilitational options in 

the system being overtaken by straight overcrowding in the 

system, Mr. Speaker, again it’s a lost opportunity. 

 

You also see it in ways that, you know, in the Throne Speech 

the government referenced the need to eliminate the adult basic 

education waiting list, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again in terms 

of the educational system itself, you know, you’ll get no 

argument out of me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the 

importance of adult basic education. And I know the 

tremendous difference that it made in the McCall family in 

terms of having that chance to go back and to get that grade 12. 

I know that directly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the lives 

of my grandmother and my father. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

guess the thing about it is in terms of the work that I’ve been 

able to do in the constituency, some of the most inspiring, 

encouraging things you’ll ever go to are the grads for the 

different adult basic education programs that are out there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and the way that people have made important 

decisions in their lives to get back into education because it’s 

oftentimes not just about them realizing their own potential, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but working for their family and to ensure that 

there’s that better life for their kids. 

 

And those are things I find very inspiring and worthy of 

support, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I’m always reminded of a 

chamber of commerce meeting that I was at where the point 

was made that adult basic education is fine as a corrective, as a 



2196 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

second sort of line of defence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but one of 

the critical things is that the education system needs to go 

better, to work better, to have better outcomes in the first place. 

 

And again this is a challenge that I know that that Minister of 

Education and I know that people like yourself, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, take very seriously. And my hope is that, you know, 

that work progresses on those two tracks or on that broad front, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, where you’re working for improvements 

in the situation around adult basic education. Of course there 

shouldn’t be a wait-list for people being able to access adult 

basic education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But it’s always, to my 

mind, you’ve got to address both the symptom and you’ve got 

to address root causes as you’re trying to make change in 

society and in the economy and in something like the 

educational system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, addressing that adult basic education system is one 

thing, but the work that you do in the educational system to 

begin with and the way that that is heavily influenced by people 

that are living in poverty, are living in dysfunction, and the kind 

of tools that you can give those people to try and make a better 

chance, a better outcome, Mr. Speaker, those are all the tracks 

that we need to be moving on. 

 

So again in terms of age six being the new compulsory age as 

proposed under this legislation, fair enough. But it’s not the 

whole story, Mr. Speaker, nor is it being claimed as such. But 

again I’d like to be debating a lot more than just the change of 

the age from seven to six in this legislation. 

 

And I guess in fairness to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the change 

of definitions to schools to reflect that pre-kindergarten 

program’s also being provided at school sites, where the 

minister refers to in his second reading speech that “The change 

will also reflect the different approaches for delivering the 

province’s education programs through virtual schools as well 

as custody and care facility schools.” Again, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that’s on the face of it quite a reasonable change to 

enshrine those different schools, Mr. Speaker, in legislation, 

and to ensure that the definition captures the practice on the 

ground. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think about what happens out 

at Dojack. I think about what happens in places like the 

different sort of Ranch Ehrlo campuses throughout the city of 

Regina, but also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in ways that directly 

impact families and kids that I know in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. I think of course that should be brought 

into the legislation. And you know, again it looks to be a fairly 

reasonable change. 

 

The third particular change in the legislation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the change of the school day definition intended to 

reflect the regulatory amendments being enacted on January 1st, 

2013 as regards to the new school year, this of course refers to 

the Labour Day provision that was brought forward in the first 

rendition of this legislation and which is being further changed 

to allow that proposal to take place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

wherein the new definition recognizes that a school day could 

be comprised of instructional time and non-instructional time, 

and with the proposed revision to the definition of school day 

being identified as necessary to work out the new regulations 

for the new year. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t say much more on that 

particular aspect other than two things, one of which is of 

course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s how it plays out in 

classrooms and in our schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But it also 

sort of signals just how unawares that that particular measure 

was brought forward in the campaign, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

the kind of catching up that the sector and educators and I think 

even departmental officials needed to do to catch up to what 

had been proposed in the campaign, Mr. Speaker. And again 

we’ll see how that particular change plays out over the long 

haul. 

 

The fourth particular change, Mr. Speaker, wherein an 

amendment will grant the Ministry of Education the authority to 

develop policies and regulations for pre-kindergarten programs, 

which will continue to contribute to more consistency and 

accountability among the province’s pre-kindergarten 

programs, you know, again a very good change, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it would seem. 

 

And again pointing to what I’ve . . . I’m on record here tonight 

and certainly at other junctures in this place, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in terms of the importance of early childhood 

development and again some of the good work that we see this 

government undertaking around pre-kindergarten. And certainly 

we should give credit where credit is due, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and some of the moves that have been made on 

pre-kindergarten, we’re glad to see this government taking. And 

certainly I am, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And again coming out of Kitchener Community School, one of 

the first schools with an actual pre-kindergarten program, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — you’re probably going to think that I’m too 

much of a homer or too much parochial, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

but certainly I’m very proud to be a graduate, a product of 

Kitchener Community School, one of the first community 

schools in the province and, as I say, one of the first schools 

with a pre-kindergarten program. 

 

And again the kind of opportunity and the kind of early 

childhood development work that that afforded many of my 

friends and my classmates growing up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

many of my neighbours and the kind of positive impact that 

has, I’m glad to see that there’s a more systematic, a more 

thoroughgoing approach being anticipated in this legislation. 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll await how that plays out 

on the ground and how this work is followed through upon and 

not just anticipated in legislation. 

 

The next change is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wherein, as referenced 

by the minister in the second reading speech where “. . . 

presently sections in the Act for non-compliance of various 

provisions of the Act related to school attendance, school 

safety, administration, just to name a few,” to quote the 

minister. 

 

The minister goes on to state: 

 

Through our consultations with stakeholders, we found 

that the fines in their present state are out of date or are 

set at too low a rate to serve as any kind of a deterrent. As 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2197 

a result, Mr. Speaker, fines are rarely applied. Our 

stakeholders want to retain the fines but have told us that 

increasing the fine amounts would serve as a more 

effective deterrent for offences. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I guess this is something that may await 

the committee work around this legislation, but I’d be interested 

to know the detail on those contentions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And certainly school attendance and school safety, you know, it 

doesn’t get much more fundamental than that in terms of a 

well-functioning, productive, nurturing, learning education 

system. 

 

And if you haven’t got the attendance, of course, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I think about it in terms of different research that 

I’ve studied over the years in terms of the importance of 

stability. If a family is going to advance socio-economically, if 

a family is going to be able to avail themselves of the different 

sort of supports that are there in community, Mr. Speaker, and 

to, you know, just simple things like being able to build on one 

day’s lesson to the next as regards education, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that stability, that school attendance is so critical to 

that. So we’ll be interested to see what kind of impact this 

particular measure has on dynamics like that in the system, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But of course there’s a broader piece of work that again I know 

this government and I know that minister are aware of in terms 

of how you address these things in the round, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, how you work in terms of things like housing or with 

the social determinants of health and how all of those things can 

conspire against a child’s success or how they can be allies in 

ensuring that child’s success or making for greater odds of that 

child’s success. 

 

So again this particular measure in and of itself, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we’ll be looking to see how it impacts/ But again 

there’s a broader, broader front of work that needs to take place 

and how that interrelates with different things — like I think of 

the regional intersectoral committee in Regina, which again I 

know that minister is well aware of, the RICs [regional 

intersectoral committee] as they do their work throughout the 

rest of the province. 

 

How you can take something like school attendance and yes, 

you know, by all means increase the fines if they’re not having 

the desired deterrent effect, Mr. Speaker. But if you’re going to 

address something like school attendance, again you need that 

particular measure, but you need that broader understanding of 

what the problem is and how you’re really going to get to the 

root of it and not just addressing the symptom, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but addressing the root causes of it to have that better 

chance of success. 

 

[19:45] 

 

As it relates to the fines, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister in 

his second reading speech had gone on to talk about the 

increased amounts. 

 

Fines are presently from $500 or less for an offence. I ask 

that fines be increased to a minimum amount of $5,000 

for a first offence, and I also ask that fines increase to 

$10,000 for subsequent offences. Increasing the fine 

amount to these levels will send a clear message that 

non-compliance is taken seriously, which will in turn give 

school divisions the backing they need to impose fines if 

necessary. 

 

I’m glad to see that the minister conferred, consulted with the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Mr. Speaker, and the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association. They indicate their 

support, and we look to hear more from them in terms of their 

particular thoughts on this particular measure. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, the application of fines to these things, it doesn’t, I 

think, take away from that need for this broad a reference where 

again addressing a particular action is one thing, but if you’re 

going to get to the root causes, it begs a broader plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next measure in the legislation, quoting from 

the minister’s second reading speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to make it easier for newcomers to 

enrol in schools by clarifying who is considered a 

provincial resident. The present wording in the Act does 

not sufficiently describe who is a resident for the purposes 

of participating in our education system without cost. The 

regulations prescribe that tuition fees be charged to those 

who do not meet the criteria. Most provinces and school 

divisions accept children of temporary residents, refugee 

children, and reciprocal exchange students. However the 

Act presently does not clarify these considerations. 

 

Close that quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again I think about 

a place like Thomson Community School and the way that in 

one school you’ve got students from quite literally around the 

world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and giving proof to that promise in 

our provincial motto “from many peoples, strength”, Mr. 

Speaker. And again it’s a neat school. And if you want to see 

what the future of Saskatchewan can be and is, it’s a great place 

to catch a glimpse of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And again my hope is that, in terms of this particular change to 

the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my hope is that that 

strengthens the hands of those kids and of those families as they 

seek to gain something of this Canadian dream, something of 

the prosperity of this province, something of the opportunity of 

this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Going on in the minister’s second reading speech, to continue 

the quote: 

 

This change will also support those who come to 

Saskatchewan from other countries on temporary work 

permits with children. At the present time we provide 

publicly funded education to those who come to 

Saskatchewan with young families from other countries 

on temporary permits for post-secondary education. This 

change would clarify that this right is equally applicable 

to those who are here on temporary work permits. Their 

children are entitled to be educated in the province 

without charge, and the Act will now explicitly state this. 

The change would further support our government’s 

promotion of permanent immigration to the province. Mr. 

Speaker, given the province’s commitment to tracking 

residents [carrying on in the quote], it is important The 



2198 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

Education Act be updated to ensure families who have 

chosen to call Saskatchewan home are not charged tuition 

fees for their children to go to school. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again it’ll be interesting to see how 

this plays out in actual fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it will be 

interesting to see how, you know, what sort of numbers back up 

these trends as identified in the rationale for these new changes 

to the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I guess the one thing in particular I’m interested in is what is 

that differentiation between the folks in the other categories and 

the new allowances being made for those under temporary work 

permits. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how those particular 

statuses are impacted and affected by the federal government as 

they seek to make changes both to immigration legislation but 

also to the ways that different powers have been afforded to the 

province of Saskatchewan, particularly as regards the changes 

under the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, but also, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, individuals that are seeking to perhaps 

move beyond the temporary work permit status but progressing 

into a more secure relationship to an eventual track of 

citizenship in this province of ours, Mr. Speaker, and in 

Canada, of course. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, you know, this is a province of 

immigrants, together with First Nations and obviously the Métis 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. But certainly I think about the 

dreams in the McCall family and the Wilsons when they came 

out from Scotland, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 1880s, and the 

way that the system worked for them and worked for 

subsequent generations of their family, to the point, you know, 

where here we are today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I think about — and again it’s not to be too narrow-minded 

or too sort of self-referential in these things, Mr. Speaker — but 

for myself I know the difference that the Canadian 

circumstance, that opportunity, that chance, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the way that made a difference in our family. And if 

these changes facilitate the way that it can make a difference for 

families from Afghanistan or the Karen people I think of from 

Burma or Myanmar, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or people from Latin 

America or from Eastern Europe, again I think of how this 

works out through the lens of a place like Thomson Community 

School. 

 

If this change can improve their lives, then so much the better, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we again, we await further proof of 

how this plays out on the ground and whether or not it is 

making that difference. And again of course, Mr. Speaker, not 

taking away from the broader front of efforts that need to take 

place if people are going to not just come to Saskatchewan but 

sink down roots and fully realize that Saskatchewan dream. 

 

The next particular change in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

concerns families. To quote again from the minister’s second 

reading speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, families residing along the borders of school 

division boundaries are often faced with a situation in 

which the nearest school is in a neighbouring school 

division. These families undergo a long process so their 

children can attend the neighbouring school in a school 

division in which they do not reside. They must submit a 

request for boundary changes to school divisions and the 

Ministry of Education. The Ministry of Education then 

processes a minister’s order for the submission to amend 

the boundaries. Last year, Mr. Speaker, there were 22 

requests for boundary changes. Of those, 90 per cent 

involved a student who lives within just . . . [15] 

kilometres of the school division boundary. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think about family of mine out in 

Montmartre country, and family that were involved very 

directly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in disputes over which schools 

were better for their kids to go to. And I know certainly a 

dispute that involved a lot of heartache, a lot of turmoil, and a 

lot of taking away from the kind of natural energies that should 

go towards kids just getting to school and getting that 

education. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the minister’s 

account, again to reference his speech, the “. . . 22 requests for 

boundary changes. Of those, 90 per cent involved a student who 

lives within just 5 kilometres of the school division boundary.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, if the creation of these buffer zones can 

ease that circumstance and make for a better outcome and those 

22 requests dwindle to two, Mr. Speaker, I think that would be 

work well done. But we’ll see how this plays out. 

 

Again, referencing the minister’s second reading speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I propose an amendment to create buffer 

zones that would allow students within 5 kilometres 

beyond the school’s division boundaries to attend school 

in that division. We want to ensure that the neighbouring 

school division has the capacity to accept the student, 

therefore there are considerations to be made before the 

division accepts the student. 

 

For example, the division will accept the student if they 

have capacity in the school and on the bus the student will 

take to attend the school. Additionally the receiving 

school division has to determine that they have the 

program that meets the student’s needs. If these 

considerations are met to the satisfaction of the school 

division, the student would be able to attend the school 

without the family, division, and ministry having to 

undertake the boundary revision process. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we look to see how this plays out. The 

rationale seems to be fairly sound on the face of it, but we’ll 

await for the reports to see how this particular measure plays 

out. 

 

Next measure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, concerns: 

 

. . . the reference to making capital grants with boards of 

education and the conseil scolaire be updated. Capital 

agreements will retain ministry authority to issue capital 

grants and will allow terms and conditions to be attached. 

Formal capital agreements will also be used for shared 

partnership agreements under the authority of The 

Government Organization Act. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll be looking to see how this 

plays out into things like P3s [public-private partnership]. P3s, 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2199 

particularly as relates to infrastructure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can 

have the pretty harsh effective of kicking the bill forward to 

future generations in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There 

were a lot of things done in the ’80s that we paid for in the ’90s 

and in the last decade, and in some ways, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

still paying for. That you would institutionalize an approach 

like that, bears fairly close scrutiny, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

we’ll be watching how this plays out with great attention, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The next change, Mr. Speaker, clarifying “. . . the submission of 

returns to the Ministry of Government Relations, who will 

include this provision in that ministry’s statute. As a result there 

is no need to duplicate this provision in the Ministry of 

Education statutes,” therefore repealing the statute in The 

Education Act. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem to be a fair enough 

proposal. And we’ll be looking for the attendant or subsequent 

legislation coming forward for this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next and second-to-last change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . redefinition in The Education Act that will allow for 

regulations to be made prescribing property classes and 

tiers similar to municipal legislation. The change would 

be retroactive on January 1, 2013 and applied to the 

upcoming tax year. The change will allow more flexibility 

whenever changes are required around definitions of 

property class. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a subsequent change related to the 

way that education funding has been changed in this province 

and continues to be modified even as of this morning, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So we’ll be interested to see how that plays 

out and whether or not the legislative change is equal to the 

experience on the ground and whether or not further reform is 

required. 

 

The final proposal again, Mr. Speaker, as I’d referenced earlier 

on: 

 

. . . based on a report in 2009 that recommended adding 

an additional board representative from La Ronge on the 

Northern Lights School Division. Presently there is only 

one member at large allowed for each of the two 

subdivisions of La Ronge. Since La Ronge is the only 

town in the Northern Lights School Division, the mayor 

of La Ronge and the school division have expressed the 

need to increase the number of members at large. The Act 

presently allows only one member at large for each 

subdivision. The new authority will allow the minister to 

grant such requests, providing that the general principle of 

representation by population is met and is subject to 

regulations. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the face of it, a fairly reasonable 

request. And we’ll be interested to see how it plays out on the 

ground. 

 

In summation, Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed under this 

piece of legislation, Bill 70, I think, you know, there are 

different arguments that can be marshalled for any one of them 

as necessary and timely changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the 

proof, as always, is in the pudding and if you can’t, if we can’t 

as a province come to some kind of better terms around one of 

the, what I think is one of the most significant challenges we 

face as to whether or not we succeed together or fail together, 

Mr. Speaker, is the whole question of how First Nations in 

particular and Métis people are served by education in this 

province, and particularly as regards on-reserve education, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And again there’s been a fair amount of hope vested in the work 

of the task force, and certainly an interim report was referenced 

in the Throne Speech. We are hopeful, Mr. Speaker, but we are 

at once skeptical given the way that that particular task force 

has, having been launched to great fanfare, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the way that it missed deadlines in terms of being 

appointed and seemed to indicate a lack of urgency or a lack of 

seriousness on the part of the provincial government as they 

worked to put that task force forward — let alone the way that 

that intersects with other issues that we’ve seen take place in 

this province and take place in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of things like the Aboriginal employment development 

program and the way that that program was summarily torn up, 

you know, to the tune of 100-plus agreements across the 

province, by facts on budget day in 2010. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, despite that history, despite those indications 

otherwise, I remain hopeful, Mr. Speaker. And I remain hopeful 

that the seriousness of this issue is seized upon by members 

opposite and by this Minister of Education and by this 

government and by the province of Saskatchewan in terms of 

just how critical it is to, again, how we either succeed together 

as people in Saskatchewan or how this failure is allowed to 

carry on and how we need to do better as a province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my remarks in the 

debate on Bill No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, in the 

interests of allowing other of my colleagues to take the floor at 

this time. I move to adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, 2012 

(No. 2). 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to all my 

colleagues. To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, it is with 

great pleasure that I introduce behind the bar tonight Senator Ed 

Charbonneau from Indiana. 

 

The senator was elected in 2008 and again in 2012. By 

profession he is an attorney. He spent 36 years with U.S. 

[United States] Steel and then he said he was going to retire and 

ride off into the sunset, but instead he became president and 

CEO of a large hospital in Indiana. He’s now the chairman of 

the environmental committee. He’s a ranking member of the 

health and provider services committee. He’s on an 

appropriations committee, the Senate rules committee, and he’s 

the Co-Chair of the Midwest relations committee. I ask all 

members to welcome our guest at the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Governmental 

Relations on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Governmental 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce to 

you, behind the bar on the members’ side, Mr. Speaker, 

Representative Deborah Berry. She was first elected state 

representative for Iowa in the 2003 elections and has 

subsequently been elected in two-year terms ever since, 

including most recently just a few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, she was born and raised in Waterloo, Iowa and has a 

Bachelor of Science degree in public administration. I 

understand, I believe this is her first visit to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We’d like to welcome her and certainly hopes she enjoys her 

stay, and I would ask all members to please give her a warm 

welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member for Wood River on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Wood River has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to introduce Senator John Nelson from Nebraska who is 

sitting at the back behind the bar. Mr. Speaker, Senator Nelson 

represents district 6 in Omaha, Nebraska and he’s in the second 

of his four-year, second four-year term. He sits as Vice-Chair of 

the executive committee. He’s a member of the . . . Executive 

Council, sorry. He’s a member of the appropriations committee 

and he has been for six years. 

 

We do have something in common. Senator Nelson grew up in 

rural Nebraska so he has a bit of a background like some of us 

that grew up in rural Saskatchewan. But also after, in his early 

part of his life he spent three years of active duty in the navy 

and then joined the reserves and retired as a commander, a navy 

commander in the reserves. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that Senator Nelson’s wife, 

Judy, is joining us this evening in the crowd. So I’d ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Senator Nelson and his wife, 

Judy, to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to take the 

opportunity to introduce some other guests that we also have 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery. Along with Mrs. Nelson we 

have Ilene Grossman from Chicago, who is part of the CSG 

[Council of State Governments] Midwest MLC [Midwestern 

Legislative Conference] staff. And Ms. Grossman has been to 

Saskatchewan I believe about eight times, and we see her at 

every MLC convention. 

 

As well we have, from the Canadian consular service, Brian 

Herman who is a career member of the Canadian foreign 

service, deals largely with issues that are multilateral and 

international security issues and particularly the Canada-US 

partnership addressing global challenges. And something of 

interest to the people of Saskatchewan: Brian is originally from 

Regina, so he is actually here visiting his parents as well as 

participating in this exchange. 

 

Also seated in the Speaker’s gallery is Brian Shipley. He is the 

consul and head of the foreign policy and diplomacy service at 

Minneapolis. So I’d ask members to welcome our guests in the 

galleries. 

 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with all 

of my colleagues and the Speaker in welcoming our guests from 

United States. It’s very important that you come and participate 

and understand how our system works. And you’ve started off 

very easily with a gentle evening session, but maybe tomorrow 

it’ll be a little more lively. 

 

But the important part is that we all in our jurisdictions have our 

own ways of making decisions that affect our local citizens. 

And in Saskatchewan, you’ll see some of the traditions of over 

100 years that have been developed in this room, and at the 

same point I think over the next couple of days we’ll get to hear 

from you how you make decisions. And there may some ideas 

that we should take that will assist us in what we do. 

 

But very important to have you here, and we wish all of you the 

best. 

 

Thank you. 

 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2201 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 71 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 

boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into this debate. And of course this is a 

time-honoured tradition of second-round speeches where we get 

to talk about questions we have about the legislation in front of 

us. And quite often we have a lot of questions. And this one is 

of particular interest. I know that some of us will have many 

questions about this. But I have to say right off the start that it 

reminds me a bit of some of the ads we see on TV. And some of 

the recent ads, for example last night watching the Grey Cup 

some of us may have seen the Canada club ad that says, the 

only thing that tastes better than a Canada club drink is a 

bootlegged Canada club. 

 

And I guess the reference . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

that’s what it said. Well where I’m going with this is that, you 

know, we have a long and colourful history of dealing with 

liquor and liquor regulations for many decades — bootlegged 

even. And so this goes back a long, long time and particularly 

with Canadian Club. Many of you will know of course the 

history of bootlegging in Saskatchewan and the connection to 

Chicago and all of that, and Regina down on College Avenue 

and a small town outside of Yorkton and how that all ended up 

going to Montreal, the Bronfman family. 

 

And it’s, you know, and of course we also even have the 

tradition of Moose Jaw and the red light district. If you’ve read 

that book many years ago, Red Lights on the Prairies, the 

connection with Regina, getting on the train and heading down 

to Moose Jaw because that’s where the action was, down on 

River Street. And now Moose Jaw’s a bit of a hometown to me. 

I grew up just a little bit out, called Mortlach, a village called 

Mortlach, but we’d always go in to Moose Jaw. That’s where 

my grandpa lived and down on, they actually lived down on 

River Street, had no connections but that’s where he was . . . 

That I know of. But I’d better be careful how far I go with this. 

 

But Moose Jaw’s a wonderful town. But I don’t think there 

were any Forbeses in there but it was an interesting thing. 

 

So anyways, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot to say about The Alcohol 

and Gaming Regulation Act because it is critically important to 

Saskatchewan. And in many ways we support this because we 

think it’s reasonable for us to move forward and not be so 

conservative. I think as we see jurisdictions across Canada and 

North America look at how they can become a modern, 

responsible society, of course that involves liquor and what that 

means to our establishments, to our culture, and all of that. 

 

But we do have some questions clearly around some of the 

initiatives because we have some issues as well. Clearly when 

we talk about alcohol and liquor, there’s a downside. And we 

have to make sure that we deal with the downside because of 

the tragic results if we don’t do the right thing. And so in many 

ways we see the initiative that the government announced last 

week as having half measures and not completely going the full 

distance in terms of having a modern response to how do we 

modernize the liquor regulations in front of us. 

 

And of course we want to make sure that people feel like when 

they’re moving here or they’re coming here, they’re growing up 

here, that it’s a province that is responsive. And I’ll talk about 

some of the things that the minister has addressed. For example 

I know in 2008 there was the new regulation of being able to 

recork a bottle of wine in . . . Yes, Mr. Speaker, you’re 

responsible for that. You were the minister at the time. And 

that’s a fine, fine regulation. In fact our family has taken 

advantage of that several times because it’s a responsible thing 

to be able to go to a restaurant, order a bottle of wine, and not 

feel obligated to drink all of it just because you have to drink all 

of it, that in fact you can cork it after a couple of drinks. Well 

some people try. Some people do try to drink all of it, and that’s 

unfortunate. It can lead to unfortunate circumstances. But I 

think that’s only reasonable and fair, and I think that the 

restaurants that we’ve been in where that’s been able to happen, 

the servers have been very professional about it. And some 

people may be surprised that actually you can do it, but I think 

it’s only a reasonable thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we look at this, and we know that there were 

some 70-plus regulations and amendments to the Act. Of this 

there were only 10 that are in this bill, so 60-some are dealt 

with in the regulations, and we won’t get a chance to actually 

debate them on the floor here because they will go through 

Executive Council and that will be done that way. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And of course we have some questions about that, and we’ll be 

watching very carefully. And as we always do, we watch for the 

unintended consequences because when you have such a 

significant change — and they really are a significant change in 

an important area — that I know that I’ve been getting letters in 

anticipation of this, and so people will be watching. And it’s a 

big, big deal. We see the change in the government philosophy 

of new liquor board stores and what that’s going to mean for the 

outlying suburbs in our cities and what these changes will 

mean. So people will be watching for the unintended 

consequences. 

 

And we know that in Saskatchewan, and I wish it weren’t so, 

but we do have some issues about the consequences of binge 

drinking, especially among young people, and the impact it’s 

having both in terms of addictions but also in terms of 

accidents. Saskatchewan unfortunately, you know . . . And we 

could tell just from this past weekend with the severe weather 

that we’re having and the conditions of the roads and the 

impact, the deadly combination of that. And drinking too often 

leads to tragic results. And even if the weather is good, really 

with impairment it can be a significant problem.  

 

So that would’ve been something that we were looking for: 



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

stronger measures, stronger support for programs in place that 

deals with addictions, that deal with problem drinking, that deal 

with binge drinking and particularly drinking among young 

people. That in fact this is a responsibility that this government, 

all governments carry and carry . . . And it goes beyond party 

lines. 

 

People want a safe province. We’ve seen way too many tragic 

accidents, tragic accidents where somebody in the prime of their 

life has been cut down, unfortunately, by a drunk driver. And 

you know, we’re coming up to the Christmas season, and we’ll 

see the road stop program and all the initiatives making sure 

that people are being responsible drinkers. Those things are fine 

but, Mr. Speaker, I think that we need to do more. And so that’s 

what we would’ve looked forward to in the announcement 

around the liquor regulation, the changes to the SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] regulations, the 

liquor regulations. 

 

And so I want to talk a bit about that. I want to reflect a bit on 

the minister’s comments. And of course as I’ve said, the actual 

bill before us tonight is actually fairly short. It only has 10 

changes, but I do want to just reflect on one of these, and that’s 

the new section 116.2 and that is the circumstances in which a 

permittee may allow customers to bring their own wine. And if 

I quote from this section, “In this section, a person’s ‘own 

wine’ means wine that is not purchased from or otherwise 

served by the permittee.” And that would be the restaurant or 

the establishment that the people are visiting. And the second 

section: 

 

Subject to the regulations, a person may bring and 

consume his or her own wine at a permitted premises if: 

 

(a) the permit issued with respect to the permitted 

premises is within a class of permits prescribed in the 

regulations for the purposes of this section. 

 

That makes sense. It’s a relevant permit so I guess that’s 

straightforward. And “(b) in accordance with the permit, the 

permittee allows persons to bring and consume their own wine 

at . . . [those] premises.” Now it goes on to say: 

 

A permittee who allows a person to bring and consume 

his or her own wine at the . . . premises shall, on that 

person’s request, recork the person’s bottle of wine by 

using a new cork that is fully inserted into the bottle so 

that the top of the cork is flush with the opening of the 

bottle. 

 

So that’s a little bit of trivia I’ll now need to know. But it’s very 

interesting that we’ll be allowing people to bring their own 

wine, and apparently this is done across the country. I don’t 

know if it’s done in the United States, but it’s one that will 

bring a new kind of dining experience, and I think that it will be 

interesting. 

 

Now there were . . . I was listening to the radio the other day 

about what this may mean, and there’s a couple of things that I 

think people should be aware of. Of course this does not mean 

that it’s completely free. There will be service fees, a corkage 

fee type of thing where, you know, if you’re bringing your own 

wine, it doesn’t mean you get to open it by yourself and serve it 

yourself. Your server will still be doing that, and they will be 

charging you a fee for that. 

 

Now when we would think of a normal bottle, a typical bottle of 

wine that you would have at a restaurant and you see the 

markup, you automatically . . . And maybe it’s just the farmer 

in me, but I just think of it as just a profit, that that’s all they’re 

talking about is the profit, but it’s actually the service fee. And 

so there could be a significant charge. There could be a 

significant service fee, and it all depends on the quality of wine 

you bring. If you bring a cheaper, more inexpensive — let’s put 

it that way — more inexpensive bottle of wine, then they may 

not be treating it in the same way as a more expensive bottle of 

wine, and so the fee may be different. 

 

So that’ll be interesting to see how that plays out and of course 

who will offer that service or not. I don’t think that, if I’m 

reading this right, it’s not every restaurant will be able to offer 

this. But it talks about the relevant permit, so you will get to 

know your favourite restaurant that you will be able to go. And 

I think this makes some sense because, as a person was 

explaining, that there’s special occasions that you may want to 

have a certain bottle of wine, and you want to have that to 

celebrate an anniversary or birthday or something like that, and 

so that’s only reasonable. So I think that’s a fair thing. 

 

The other part of the cost that people should be aware of is the 

tipping that because, as you would know if you go to a 

restaurant of some worth, that the bills are, you know, reflect 

the quality of the meal, also the quality of the drink, the wine in 

the restaurant. So you should not . . . that does not diminish 

your tip in a lot of ways. So this does not mean that people 

should be thinking that their tips are all of a sudden cut in half 

and they don’t have to worry about that. There’s you know, I 

mean there still is an issue of an appropriate tipping fee. 

 

So I think that was, you know, it’ll be interesting how we adjust 

to this, I guess is where I’m going with this. This is not just, you 

know, the wild west that we once were. It’s not back to red 

lights on the Prairies. That we’re expecting a mature response to 

this and one that reflects that, you know, that we can act in 

mature way. And so I think that this is an important issue in 

front of us, how we deal with this, and it’s not one that we 

should take lightly. And as I said, it’s not the red lights on the 

Prairies, and I sure hope that wasn’t the intention of it. 

 

But speaking of the colour red, it was interesting what drove 

this initiative that the government has brought forward. And the 

minister really did talk about this last week when she talked 

about what was the driving force of this. And she talked about 

how, and I’ll quote this from the Throne Speech or from her 

speech. It was the October 2010 Throne Speech. The 

government announced a regulatory accountability initiative 

aimed at reducing red tape for Saskatchewan businesses. As 

part of this initiative, the government established the red tape 

committee, and it goes on, and she goes to say, the regulation of 

alcohol was her first area reviewed through the new committee 

process. So that was the driving force looking at red tape. And 

clearly I can appreciate that the liquor and gaming regulations 

or The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, and it’s a fairly 

significant Act, had a lot of red tape. And whether it was of 

value or not, that’s something we always have to take a look at. 

 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

Clearly as I just demonstrated when I was reading about 

recorking your wine, it just didn’t say recork the wine. It said 

recork the wine so the cork is flush, level with the bottle, the 

lips of the bottle. So you know, they’re very specific. It’s not 

halfway in. It’s not a quarter of the way in. It’s all the way in. 

And so, yes, they’re very serious about regulations. Now I don’t 

know if it may be over there in their shop, the alcohol and 

gaming regulation shop that they are very good at regulations, 

but it’s a very serious business. It’s a very serious business. So 

they have to strike that balance between what is common sense, 

a reasonable practice, and what is in the interest of the 

community.  

 

And so I think this is worth looking at. I am surprised that 

alcohol was the first target for red tape. I would have thought 

there would have been more. I don’t know if the alcohol and 

gaming regulations were the most serious of the problems with 

red tape. I know as our government, we also tackled that issue, 

and that was a big thing too. But we are where we are. And as I 

said, that in many ways we are supportive of these changes, but 

we would like to have seen a significant initiative on the other 

side. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll go through some of these things here that I 

think that are important. And I have talked about the bring your 

own wine, that option for patrons which will be very interesting 

to see how this plays out and how the restaurateurs in 

Saskatchewan work with that and what that will be in terms of 

the corkage fees that people will have to pay. But I think that 

people will be supportive and will think that it’s a new and 

innovative way in terms of our dining experience. And I think 

that, you know, when you go out and you travel around the 

country, you often think of your dining experiences. And I 

know when we go north, we think of the fishing. You know, it’s 

where you travel and what you think of. And I think this . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Wine and some fish. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes, a glass of wine and some fish. And I 

think, you know, actually I think this could work really well. 

But as I said, that we hope that this will be relatively received 

well. 

 

The other part that I would want to speak and just touch on just 

briefly is that the minister talked of two changes in this bill that 

will enhance public safety in establishments that serve alcohol. 

And I think this is an important area because clearly we have 

issues, and I will talk about . . . And it’s been in the news a lot 

about Prince Albert, and I’ll talk about that in a minute. But 

clearly if you live an area that has bars, late night 

establishments, you will know the challenges that occur because 

people are out and about and maybe they shouldn’t be. 

 

So the first one that she talks about is that intoxicated 

individuals would be able to remain in a permitted 

establishment until safe transportation can be arranged for them, 

and the Act will be clarified that the permittees have an 

obligation to contact the proper authorities if they know of or 

are becoming aware of unlawful, detrimental, or prohibited 

activity taking place on their premise. 

 

So there’s two things there. The one first, people who have 

drank too much and are asked to leave, but really it’s unsafe for 

them to leave. And I think this is a very, very important thing 

not only to the people who are intoxicated but to the general 

public who may actually run across these folks or, in the worse 

case scenario, if these folks actually get behind the wheel of a 

car and drive off. 

 

So we think this is an important one, and I think that . . . And I 

can tell you from my own experience in our neighbourhood of 

Caswell, and we live right on the edge of Idylwyld, and there’s 

three or four bars there, and we often see the results of 

overdrinking. And so this will be an interesting one, how it’s 

played out in our communities. Because when people have 

drank too much, it’s important they don’t just get tossed out. 

It’s important that they get cut off, that’s for sure, but they 

shouldn’t be tossed out. And it will be interesting to see how 

this plays out. 

 

You know, it may not be the high-end restaurants or the 

high-end lounges where this is the occasion. But you know, in 

my riding we have several places where the people are at risk 

because they have been drinking too much, some might even 

call it self-medicating because they’re addicted. They have 

addiction issues that they’re really dealing with. This is not a 

Saturday night issue, but it’s important that there be some 

responsibility for looking after these people, and I think this is 

critical. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I remember when just . . . it’s only 

been a few years and now P.A. [Prince Albert] is talking about 

this, that Saskatoon having a full-time detox centre and how 

important that is and how we’re dealing with public 

intoxication. So hopefully this will lead to more work in terms 

of that area, that people are just not tossed out, but the question 

is to make sure they have safe travel to some place. Now it 

could be questioned, where do they go? Are they going home or 

are they going to a detox centre? Are they going to the police 

station? Who determines that? 

 

It’ll be interesting when we have the questions in committees to 

know what the plan is there. And again, what is the plan for the 

people who are working in the establishment? Will they . . . 

And maybe perhaps this’ll lead to earlier identification of 

people who’ve drank too much, who are intoxicated, because 

it’s just easier not to deal with it when they’ve gone too far. So 

let’s hope that’s the story here, that in fact there’ll be an earlier 

cut-off because if people know they have to deal with people 

who’ve drank too much, that’s got to be a problem, and then 

they have to wait for the taxis. They have to wait for some ride 

home, and that’s a problem. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the second one talks about the amendment 

will contribute to public safety and the change will clarify that 

permittees are accountable for illegal activity occurring in their 

premises. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure, permittee, 

that’s a different kind of word, I’ve not ever really used that 

word, but the owner of the establishment, I’ll say for the folks 

at home. 

 

This is an interesting one because — again I’ll draw on my own 

experience living in Caswell and having several bars just across 

the way on Idylwyld — that the intention is about illegal 



2204 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

activity occurring in their premises. So I assume they’re talking 

about trafficking, drug trafficking in the bar that might be 

dealers doing that kind of stuff, drug sales, that type of thing. 

But I’m wondering if when they use the word in their premises, 

what happens in the parking lot? You don’t usually refer to the 

parking lot as in their premises. On their premises would have 

been a better word because often I am more concerned, as a 

member of the public, about what’s happening in the parking 

lot. And often people who run these bars and lounges aren’t 

aware of what’s happening in the parking lot. In fact they’re 

only concerned about what’s happening inside their four walls, 

but they don’t understand that their premises also include the 

parking lot. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know if you’ve 

been to some of these bars late at night, where you’ve seen the 

waiting lines and people are waiting to get into the bars, and 

they’re quite long and it’s gets to be kind of a raucous type of, a 

raucous kind of thing. You know we often see pictures of that in 

New York City or someplace else, but in fact it’s happening 

here in Saskatoon, Regina, and other cities here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that while the idea of the two safety 

regulations or amendments to the Act are worthy, we think that 

they could’ve gone farther and we’ll be watching those and 

we’ll be talking in committee about what other things could be 

done. You know, Mr. Speaker, the irony of what happened last 

week was not lost on many of us, that on the day that these 

announcements were made, several of us were downstairs in a 

breakfast with the kids from the prevention institute, talking 

about issues about binge drinking and how do we deal with that. 

 

And I think that is a reality that is coming home more and more. 

And I don’t know why it’s happening more. You know, we hear 

stories about United Kingdom and other countries where this is 

a problem, but we have issues here in Saskatchewan about that. 

And it’s one that we need to address head-on. And while we’re 

glad to deal with the red tape. And we’re glad to modernize 

and, you know, as I’ve said, you know, I’ve taken advantage of 

some of the newer regulations and I think they’re smart and we 

can all agree, but some of these things are other issues across 

party lines when you’re talking about binge drinking and the 

results of that, either short-term where that leads to accidents or 

alcohol poisoning. 

 

You know one of the other issues we have, and I’ve not heard 

stories about this in Saskatchewan, I know we do . . . the kids 

have . . . often get into binge drinking, but the other caffeine 

drinks, the ones that students use to stay up late at night to make 

sure they can study all night, but the deadly combination of 

those drinks — and with some of those drinks, not all of them, 

but some of them — and alcohol can be just tragic. And so we 

need more of that kind of thing. 

 

So it’ll be interesting to see what the impact of this bill is, these 

regulations. Are they expecting this to be cost neutral? Will 

there be more money coming in to the government coffers? You 

know, I know that tomorrow we’ll hear about the mid-year 

financial report and the minister’s alluded that things are much 

better and that we’ll be pleasantly surprised tomorrow. It will be 

interesting to know whether revenues have gone up in alcohol 

and gaming, and I’m not sure. We’ll wait until tomorrow to find 

out. But now for the folks at home, we’ll wait until tomorrow to 

find out. 

 

But if revenues do go up because of the results of this, and we 

won’t know for a year or several years down the road, I think it 

would only be wise for us to reinvest that into addiction and 

drinking education programs and that type of thing to make a 

commitment that we can drink in a mature, reasonable fashion 

and that everyone can be safe in this province. We don’t want to 

see a situation where, as I said, this becomes the wild west or 

red lights on the Prairies, and then 100 years later we can all 

chuckle about the stories that we hear about Moose Jaw or 

Regina, the bootlegging down to the States. But clearly they 

were tragic, tragic times, you know. And so we need to be very, 

very careful about that. 

 

And we know one city for sure is wrestling with that and of 

course that’s Prince Albert. And, you know, they’re dealing 

with the reality of people wrestling with addictions and the 

access of liquor in their city. And I know, and the minister has 

alluded to the fact that maybe they could make their own 

bylaws in dealing with this, but clearly this is the kind of issue 

that we have to come to terms with. And I’m not sure if it’s 

isolated to the city of Prince Albert. Is this the only city that we 

know of or it just happened to be the city that CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] last week talked about? And this is a 

story from November 19th and it talked about, “The city of 

Prince Albert is losing the battle with the bottle — as public 

drunkenness rates soar higher than any other city in 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, the city has a population of 35,000 

but it racks up more intoxication arrests than either Regina with 

a population of 193,000 or Saskatoon with a population of 

222,000. And the new police chief, Troy Cooper, said and I 

quote: 

 

Despite the good efforts of the people at health and 

addictions dealing with the issue, despite the good efforts 

of government at having an acute detox center, the 

problem is growing, and that’s concerning to us. 

 

So the police chief is seeing this. And now he goes on. This is 

what the actual results or the totals were for public intoxication. 

Last year, 2011, there were 2,808 arrests for public intoxication 

compared to 1,876 in Saskatoon. So you think a city of 35,000 

having approximately 3,000, like 1 in 10 — 1 in 10. Now I 

don’t think it’s everyone in the city, but there is some serious 

issues there. Or even . . . say 1 in 15 for public intoxication. 

That’s a significant issue. This seems to be the issue that clearly 

has gripped the city. 

 

And they say, they go on to say that statistics show the problem 

is getting worse. Between 2010 and ’11, the number of arrests 

went up about 6 per cent. Now when you’re talking about 

nearly 3,000 arrests, 6 per cent is a significant number. It’s a 

significant number. And so far in 2012, the numbers are up 

about 8 per cent compared to the same point last year. So you 

see from one year it went up 6 per cent, then another 8 per cent. 

So a total of 14 per cent. 

 

And then Cooper, the police chief, goes on to say the high rate 

of public intoxication is putting a strain on policing. About 40 

per cent of arrests are alcohol-related. And so that’s a real 

challenge, and that’s a real challenge for our third-largest city 

and we need to be able to give them support. And, you know, 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2205 

while the police chief says some of the things we’re doing are 

good, but clearly this is a crisis that they’re trying to deal with. 

And I don’t know how they felt about the announcements last 

week, but I think they would have felt a lot better if they felt 

there was another part to it, another part to it so they could deal 

with these issues in the city. Because we know that crime and 

drinking are largely related, and all the other issues: family 

abuse, all sorts of things, problems at work. It’s a huge issue. 

 

And then CBC went on and did a poll and this is what their 

online poll . . . and of course it’s not scientific; I’m not saying it 

is. But it’s worth . . . it also gives you a second look. Compared 

to the previous generation, how are we doing with the issue of 

abuse of alcohol? And the response was, much worse, 45 per 

cent. That was about 372 votes. About the same, 41 per cent, 

339 votes. And much better compared to a generation ago, 14 

per cent. So only 14 per cent, or 116, thought that we were 

doing much better than our parents in terms of dealing with 

alcohol. 

 

And that’s a sad statement that we think that, you know, in 

terms of our increase, in terms of our education levels. And in 

fact we’re a much more, much more highly educated society 

than we were, than our parents were. And we all know that and 

that’s not . . . That’s a given. That’s a for sure, that we should 

be able to deal with addictions. We should be able to deal with 

alcohol. Clearly it’s not an issue of literacy. It’s something else. 

And so this is something else, you know. And we have better 

health care. We have better professionals. We have so many 

other things going for us, but this is something we still wrestle 

with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I mean we’re clear that we support 

the changes that they’re modernizing, but there is this other part 

that needs to be dealt with. And we really do believe that we 

owe it to our generation, but particularly to our children, that if 

we do have the tools, if we had the capacity and the knowledge 

that this is a problem, then we are definitely obligated to do 

something about it. 

 

And this is why I say that we are looking forward to the other 

shoe. We’re looking forward to the other part because we 

cannot let this go. And this is a serious issue, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s one that we cannot lose sight of. And while it 

seems relatively simple and straightforward and we support 

social drinking, but then when it gets out of hand, we have to 

have the support for those who find it difficult. And it’s 

something that we just cannot, we cannot turn a blind eye to. 

 

And I think that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we need to be able to 

have that serious conversation, and if we can’t, then we have a 

problem. You know, clearly it is a responsibility of government. 

Alcohol and gaming is a big, significant responsibility of a 

provincial government. So clearly this is a job at hand. 

 

But so is the health care and all the things that come along with 

it, whether it’s addictions, whether it’s mental health, abusive 

relationships, the outcomes of alcohol abuse, and whether it’s 

detox — all of that. We’ve heard too many tragic stories of 

when things just go wrong. And suicide, clearly that is one. And 

I’m glad that my colleague raised that. Suicide is one that 

particularly young people, when they feel the despair of things, 

not being able to do the things that we think they should be able 

to handle, and life has got out of control because they’re dealing 

with an addiction they can’t get control of . . . And alcoholism 

is a significant, significant problem. And when you see that 

kind of poll result that some 15 per cent, only 15 per cent think 

we’ve got a better handle on it than the previous generation, 

clearly we’ve got work left to do. 

 

[20:45] 

 

And so you can go through the list. And there’s many stats 

about Saskatchewan. And as I said, it was just somewhat ironic 

and not lost on many on this side that the announcement was 

made during Addictions Awareness Week. 

 

But you know, and we’re not alone in this. There are other 

observers and people who are talking about this. You know, 

MADD [Mothers Against Drunk Driving] reports that 

Saskatchewan has the worst drunk driving record in the country 

and says the province is doing little about it. And of course, we 

all know MADD, Mothers Against Drunk Driving, significant 

folks that we have to listen to because these people — many, 

many of them — have felt the pain of what happens when 

somebody gets behind the wheel drunk and should not be 

driving. And they’ve worked tirelessly to get their points across 

that we must do more about this to stop drunk driving. And so 

we need to do something about it. 

 

So here what the, this is what MADD says about death rate 

from drunk driving. “In Saskatchewan, it is more than double 

the national average, 8.44 per 100,000.” And MADD said this 

in April, that the province, and I quote, “. . . has not enacted 

[and this is where] any significant initiatives in the past three 

years.” So we need to do something about this and this should 

be done hand in hand with these regulations. It’s clear that red 

tape . . . You should do something about red tape, but there’s a 

social implication of these changes that must be addressed. 

 

And of course, you know, we talked about the Prince Albert 

public intoxication where it’s gone up some 6 per cent in the 

previous year, 8 per cent for a total of 14 per cent over two 

years — more arrests dealing with public intoxication than 

compared to Saskatoon. And how does that work? 

 

So this is something that needs to be dealt with and it’s one that 

cannot be ignored. I know that many, many folks will be talking 

about this and watching this, and particularly over the 

Christmas season. You know, we all will be going to different 

social functions and we will all hopefully come home safe, but 

we all hope that we do it in a responsible way. 

 

And it is interesting to see how younger people are dealing with 

this. On one hand, you know, it’s very encouraging to see, and I 

see this with my own kids, that they’re used to having 

designated drivers, and somebody will be that person. But you 

know, Mr. Speaker, as I said, this is something that we have to 

wrestle with because as well with those kids, they’ve come to 

know the tragic results that we can go through. And I know, and 

I know everyone in this legislature will know of some tragic 

circumstance where . . . And you can go through the different 

benchmarks, and whether a young person was killed in a 

drunk-related vehicle accident, we all know people who are 

dealing with alcoholism, and whether the pain of what that 

means in terms of relationships, what that means in terms of 



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

their work, lost productivity, just as we talked earlier in terms of 

the suicide issue. 

 

And clearly in the North that’s a particularly huge issue, one 

that’s very, very tragic because we never know what the 

potential and realized would be from those folks. But if 

somebody felt so bleak that their future felt so bleak that they 

had no other alternative then, and we know that in many ways 

alcohol is the enabler of that, well this legislation, these 

regulations, ease the access for that. 

 

We also hope that we see, and we encourage the government, 

and we’ll be watching the government to make sure, and we’re 

pretty confident that the staff at SLGA are very aware of this 

and watching the unintended consequences, that we don’t see 

any further increase in terms of alcoholism, binge drinking, and 

that type of thing, and in fact, that we can get a better handle on 

this. But we know many cases, that’s not the case, that in fact if 

you simply ease the access to liquor that people get it easier. 

That follows, doesn’t it? It’s pretty straightforward. We’d like 

to think that people will be more mature about it, and we worry 

about this. I worry about it because in my own riding and in 

Saskatoon Centre, we’ve seen a real change in terms of the 

communities that wrestle with ease of access and whether, you 

know, the liquor off-sales that are attached to restaurants just 

make it that much easier. And it’s a tough, tough thing, a very 

tough thing. 

 

And we see people who deal with tragic circumstances and turn 

to the bottle. It sounds kind of simplistic and that type of thing, 

but I could tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve just had phone calls, 

actually in the last couple of days of a fellow whose daughter 

had died, and he’s in detox and he’s calling about . . . He’s just 

really in a messed-up state. And this guy is just really was 

somebody who had a very productive life and he’s dealing with 

some real issues. And I know when he’s straight and good, he’s 

a wonderful guy but alcohol and drugs have got him in a tough, 

tough spot, and it’s hard for him to deal with real life, tragic 

circumstances. 

 

But you know, this is a thing that we need to do. And we talk 

about education, public education, strengthening education so 

young people can learn those skills of how to, how to survive 

the tough blows that we’ll all get. We all get tough blows. You 

know, if somebody passes away from something tragic, we 

have to able to respond. We shouldn’t be able to turn to a drink 

to resolve that. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Speaker, I think that this is that kind of 

legislation that it is within the mandate of the government and it 

is their responsibility to make sure that the regulations do fit the 

society we live in. And so many of the changes we are 

supportive of and we think it’s a matter of getting with the 

times. But as I said, the other shoe, the other half is significant. 

And we’ll be watching over the next year or two to see if there 

are more resources put into addictions, put into detox, to also to 

support the police, to support the circumstances that we see in 

Prince Albert. And so we can all rally behind this and say that 

we’re ready for it. And I hope we are ready for it. But 

sometimes I worry that, I worry that when we just use red tape 

as a driving force and profit motive, that’s not good enough 

because the social costs are real too. 

 

So I see a little bit of that when I see those two safety 

amendments. It’ll be interesting because, as I said, in my riding 

we deal with that an awful lot. It’ll be interesting to see if the 

establishments actually do keep people in the bars before they 

toss them out, when they know it’s going to be dangerous. And 

you know how harsh the winter months can be here, when 

somebody is tossed out who shouldn’t be — should be kept in. 

And you know the end result too, if they’re not serving them up 

to that point where they’re too intoxicated, that’s actually not a 

bad thing. Because they know the impact is they’ll have to look 

after them when they’ve had way too much. So I hope that’s the 

results. 

 

And as well, you know, as I said, the parking lot issue, that 

that’s also considered when talking about illegal activities. It’s 

not just within the four walls, but it’s also on the parking lot 

that the owner of the establishment is responsible for what goes 

on in the parking lot. That’s hugely, hugely important. 

 

So I don’t want to go on to too many specifics within the 

70-some amendments. We could be here for quite a while. And 

as I said, it’s not a matter of yea and nay on both of those. I 

mean it will be 60-some of them will be going through the 

cabinet, and we won’t see them until they’re published in the 

Gazette, and that will be that. 

 

But we will be watching over the next year or two and just to 

know that we think this a hugely important issue in 

Saskatchewan. It’s not just modernizing, but it’s modernizing 

with a social conscience that we will look out for our young 

people and we will look out for those who are vulnerable to 

make sure that they don’t find themselves in a circumstance that 

boy, we all wish that nobody was in, and that in fact we reduce 

the number of accidents on the highways which are outstanding 

for Saskatchewan when you compare them across Canada, that 

in fact that we can see those fatality rates, we can see those 

fatality rates decline. And I think that’s the call that this 

government must answer. 

 

As I said, we’ll be looking at the financial papers tomorrow and 

to see is more of this money . . . And particularly if this is done 

as a profit motive for the government, then clearly they have a 

moral obligation, a moral obligation to do more work around 

education about responsible drinking and around suicide 

prevention, all of those things that are connected to this. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, with that I know many, many of us, 

almost all of us will want to talk about this, and of course we’ll 

have a lot of questions when it comes to committee. And as I 

said, that there was time . . . We have quite a history in 

Saskatchewan. You go back to the red lights on the Prairies or 

the bootlegging into the States. Of course that’s all colourful 

and interesting reading now, but those times were challenging 

too. But it’s time for us to get with the times. But as I said, we 

must do more to deal with this. And of course the whole issue 

of addictions, drunk driving, and fetal alcohol syndrome is very 

important as well. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many of us will have 

questions about this. We’ll want to rise and speak at some 

length about this because it’s an important issue. I have got 

letters about many of the issues here and people are concerned 

about that. 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to move adjournment 

of Bill No. 71, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 

Act, 2012. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 71. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 45 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak about Bill No. 45, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. And this 

legislation is to be called The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this bill is only one page long and 

unfortunately it includes quite a number of issues in that one 

page. And so I’m going to take some time here to look at what 

this legislation appears to be doing. 

 

There are effectively a couple of issues that are being dealt with 

and they go to the heart of how a Crown corporation — when 

here we’re talking about two separate Crowns that are related 

— how they finance their activities and what kinds of 

accountability structures are in place that would govern that 

financial activity. 

 

So let’s look at the first part of this Act, and that’s basically 

section 2. And in section 2(2), a provision is deleted from the 

present Act and another provision put in place. So the existing 

legislation right now says — for The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act, so this is the SaskTel Act — that 

when where a purchase price or sale price of real property 

included in one transaction exceeds $100,000, the approval of 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council shall be obtained. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Quite a simple, straightforward statement, but what does this 

mean? What this means is that every time that SaskTel buys 

some property for a building or for a site for a cell tower, I think 

the minister identified, or for any other activity of SaskTel, that 

particular transaction needs to be recorded in a format that 

would go to the provincial cabinet, and the cabinet would have 

to make a decision which results in an order in council. An 

order in council is usually signed by the Premier and then by 

the Lieutenant Governor, or sometimes it’ll be the Deputy 

Premier or another minister designated to sign it and then by the 

Lieutenant Governor or the Chief Justice as the signing 

authority for the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

So why this procedure? Why this type of a piece of legislation 

here? Well practically, the issue that arises is that you want to 

have public scrutiny of transactions that are, in this case, greater 

than $100,000. Now the argument appears to be from the 

minister that that limit of $100,000 is too small. Now that’s one 

argument that people can take, but the other side of that is that 

the public will then have orders in councils or official records 

that are public of all transactions where SaskTel purchases 

property. And you know, maybe a little bit of extra effort for 

SaskTel to do that, but I’m not certain that the remedy that’s 

proposed in this legislation is actually of benefit to the public. 

And let me explain why. 

 

So that existing provision right now, where it has to be very 

public when any property worth more than $100,000 is 

purchased or sold — and by public I mean it becomes an 

official order in council which is on the record with a number 

that we can all go and look and read the actual decision — 

what’s being proposed in this Bill 45 is that that clause should 

be replaced with this clause: 

 

“(3) The corporation shall obtain the approval of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council if the purchase price or 

sale price of real property included in one transaction 

entered into by the corporation exceeds the amount fixed 

by the Lieutenant Governor in Council”. 

 

Now that seems reasonable on the face of it, just like the 

previous one. But the catch is we don’t have a clear amount of 

money stated in this particular legislation. And the amount can 

actually be fixed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council from 

time to time without having a scrutiny by this legislature. And, 

Mr. Speaker, one of the issues over the years has been the 

ability of governments to spend money outside the scrutiny of 

the legislature. So this particular provision gives the discretion 

to the Lieutenant Governor in Council to set the amount of the 

purchase price or sale price of real property. 

 

So what could happen? Well that amount could be set by order 

in council to be $1 million or it could be $5 million or it could 

be some larger amount, effectively meaning that property could 

be bought and sold by this Crown corporation without public 

information being provided in the way that this particular 

legislation sets out. So what that particular clause and what the 

suggestion here is that it gives much more flexibility to the 

Premier and the cabinet to borrow money, or in this case 

particularly sell or buy property for SaskTel without doing the 

full paperwork that would give the public the information that 

they need when this particular transaction takes place. 

 

Now as we go further into section 2 of this Bill No. 45, we go to 

section 2(3). And what happens there is that the existing 

provision in section 28 says: 

 

The said sums of money shall be raised in accordance with 

the provisions of The Financial Administration Act, 1993, 

and may be borrowed for any term or terms not exceeding 

thirty years. 

 

So that’s the existing legislation in this Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act. 



2208 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

And this change that’s being proposed is this, the new clause 

would say: 

 

“(2) Any moneys that the Minister of Finance is 

authorized to borrow pursuant to subsection (1) are to be 

borrowed in accordance with The Financial 

Administration Act, 1993”. 

 

So what they’ve done is removed the restriction on borrowing 

for longer than 30 years. 

 

Now what’s the implication of that particular clause? Well the 

implication is that money can be borrowed for 30 or 40 or 50 

years, which reduces the amount payable in each year for that 

loan. But it stretches out the responsibility, you know, for one 

or two, maybe even three, at least two generations of people. 

And the present legislation that we have, under the SaskTel Act, 

The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act, says that we 

shouldn’t be borrowing money for longer than 30 years. 

 

Now why is this an issue? It’s an issue because, as the minister 

says, there’s abilities now to borrow money for longer than 30 

years. But it’s an issue for us in opposition. It’s an issue for the 

public of Saskatchewan because we’ve all seen and heard what 

the federal Minister of Finance Mr. Flaherty did just a few 

months ago. He stepped in to the whole home mortgage market 

and said, we’re not going to let people borrow money for longer 

than 30 years because they get themselves financially 

committed in situations where they are not able to pay the 

money back. And we all know that the effect of that has been a 

bit of a chill on the housing markets in Toronto and Vancouver, 

maybe less so in Saskatchewan. But even here, people don’t 

qualify to borrow as much money because they’re not able to 

lower those payments and spread them over, in over 40 years. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what it strikes me as, that the purpose of 

this particular legislation is to give the province the ability to 

borrow more money and spread it out over a longer time and 

get ourselves into a financial situation which is more difficult. 

 

We know that the federal government stepped in on the home 

mortgage issue around this length of time to borrow money 

because they were concerned about the kinds of commitments 

that were being made. And we all saw in the newspaper articles 

and the television stories about this about how much lower 

value a house people could afford to buy when they had this 

30-year limit on their mortgage. Because people would go into 

a mortgage broker or into a bank or credit union and say, on my 

budget I think I can afford $1,400 a month to buy a house. And 

the mortgage broker or the banker or credit union manager 

would say, with $1,400 you can borrow whatever the amount is 

if, say, it’s 300,000 or $250,000 at the present mortgages which 

allow the purchase over 40 years. Well all of a sudden when 

that limit was 30 years, the $1,400 allowed them a considerable 

amount less money available to buy a house, and all of a sudden 

they couldn’t afford as big a house as they thought they could, 

based on the mortgage ability. 

 

Well it’s exactly the same principle that’s in this particular 

legislation, only it’s going the opposite way of what the federal 

Finance minister has warned Canadians about. This is going the 

other way and giving the Government of Saskatchewan — the 

present Government of Saskatchewan, the Premier and the 

cabinet — the ability to borrow money over a longer period of 

time. And therefore you’re able to borrow more money, but 

you’re also making longer term commitment that puts people in 

a financial pickle over a longer period of time. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, this short piece of legislation has in it then two pieces. 

One is accountability about purchasing and selling of land, but a 

second one is the accountability about how long money can be 

borrowed for. 

 

Now when you look at the legislation section 3 you get into the 

next part of the amendment. And it’s basically the amendments 

related to The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 

Corporation Act, and it’s the same kind of amendment. One of 

them is to allow for the sale or purchase of property worth more 

than $100,000 and the second part is the ability to borrow 

money for longer than 30 years. 

 

And so both parts of this legislation are allowing the 

government to step into a Crown corporation, provide less 

accountability on what they’re buying and selling as far as 

property is concerned, and then borrowing more money over a 

longer period of time, therefore creating a longer and more 

expensive commitment for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now when I look at the words of the minister on this particular 

point, the way he describes it, and I quote from November the 

5th, and this is the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure, the 

Minister for SaskTel. He says: 

 

Over the past five years, the Canada bond market has 

expanded to include bonds issued for 30 years or more. 

This financing option, which has not been available to the 

province or SaskTel for a very long time, is made possible 

now due to our recent credit upgrades. The provincial 

Department of Finance has started borrowing at these 

longer terms, and should we fail to amend this restriction, 

it could potentially impact SaskTel’s ability to participate 

directly in the provincial borrowing program. If the 

provincial Department of Finance determines the 

borrowing for a term longer than 30 years is desirable for 

the province and SaskTel cannot participate, then the 

interest costs that SaskTel will be paying will be higher. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I put that whole quote on the record because 

it goes right to the heart of what’s wrong with this bill. It goes 

right to the heart of this ability to borrow and spread the cost 

out over a much longer period, and it doesn’t come back and 

look at the question of how much is this actually going to cost 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the reasons that these previous restrictions were here as 

it related to the term of borrowing was because of the fact that 

commitments ended up being made at certain times in the 

history of this province that ended up costing everybody way 

more money than they should have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this may be another sign that we’ve been 

seeing in different places that the government is running out of 

money in the total amounts they have available. This gives 

some flexibility to borrow some more money and spread that 

return, or the cost of it, over a longer term. Because just like 

when you’re buying that house that’s too expensive for your 

budget, if you can borrow it at a 40-year mortgage instead of a 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2209 

30-year mortgage, you can afford to borrow more money. And, 

Mr. Speaker, when you’re paying it back after whatever the 

length of the term of the loan is, you will have paid a lot more 

money. But if you’re in the present situation as we are now in 

this province, and you need to somehow have the books show 

that your expenses are less, this is one of the things that you do. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the concerns that I’m raising about 

this one-page bill do relate to the finances of the province. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why are these restrictions here? Well I want 

to go back and review some of the information that we received 

in February of 1992. And this, in February of 1992, the 

Saskatchewan Financial Management Review Commission 

came back with a report to the Minister of Finance of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, this report is 

quite lengthy and I encourage people to read it if they get a 

chance. I think it’s about 190 pages approximately. But the 

important part of this particular Saskatchewan financial 

management review was that it went and looked at a number of 

issues related to the finances of the province of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the best way to summarize what it 

was looking at is to look a bit at what’s in the report. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they started out by looking at the challenges 

that were being faced in the fall of 1991 and early spring or 

winter of 1992. And the issue was that Saskatchewan was in a 

very, very difficult financial situation. And it was a combination 

of many sort of international issues, local issues, but the biggest 

question, the biggest issue was that government spending was 

beyond the ability of the province to generate the revenue to 

cover that spending. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, they went and looked at, okay, how are 

we keeping the books in the province of Saskatchewan? How 

are we into this situation where we don’t really know how much 

the province of Saskatchewan owes and how much we have to 

pay on an annual basis? And so in chapter 2 of this report . . . 

chapter 1, they set out the challenges and the issues. 

 

Chapter 2, they started looking at accounting principles and 

what kinds of accounting principles a province should use. And 

this is where they set out quite clearly that public sector 

accounting principles as prepared and promoted by the private 

accounting firms as well as the Provincial Auditor should be 

used for examining all books of the province. And they went 

through what the implications of that would be for the province. 

 

Then they went on in chapter 3 to take a look at the financial 

position of the province. And this was a bit of an issue because 

they hadn’t really had a budget in that last year of that 

government, and so they ended up having to try to reconstruct 

and figure out what kinds of commitments were out there. And 

it’s a very interesting read to see how many guarantees of loans 

or guarantees of projects where there hadn’t been a proper 

accounting of how much was actually owed. And so that part of 

the job of this group of people on the Saskatchewan Financial 

Management Review Commission was to actually figure out 

how much money is owing by the province. So in that chapter 3 

they set out the financial position of the province. 

 

In chapter 4 they got into a review of all the transactions and 

commitments and the process of how the province had been 

involved. And this chapter and the subsequent chapter around 

their observations and conclusions around transactions and 

commitments is why I’m referencing this particular report as it 

relates to Bill 45, which is this legislation around the SaskTel 

and . . . Sask Telecommunications and Sask 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. Because what 

the Saskatchewan Financial Management Review Commission 

did and said . . . And I guess it’s often referred by shorthand by 

the Chair’s name, the Gass Commission, for Don Gass who was 

the chairperson. What they said was that there were a number of 

issues around the process that commitments were made and the 

borrowing that took place. And they said there were within 

government some good practices that were taking place around 

some major projects but, unfortunately, around a whole number 

of other projects, the ability to manage them hadn’t been 

properly done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was when the discretion or when the 

governors — if we can use an old term about engines — the 

governor that kind of keeps the thing from running off the 

wheel, kind of. I mean the whole flywheel, everything flying 

apart. When that governor isn’t properly positioned in the 

whole operation, then you can end up with things that actually 

cause everything to blow up. And, Mr. Speaker, the legislation 

that we are talking about here, Bill 45, is a type of governor 

around the buying and selling of property within SaskTel or 

SaskTel holdings . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I ask 

leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

privilege tonight to introduce to you Senator Mike Vehle. He’s 

here visiting from South Dakota and Senator Vehle lives in 

Mitchell, South Dakota. 

 

He was elected to the South Dakota House of Representatives 

in 2004 and 2006 and was elected to the South Dakota senate in 

2008 and 2010, and now was recently elected again to the 

senate in South Dakota just recently. 

 

And the senator has quite a resume here. He served on the 

agriculture and natural resources committee, and the 

transportation committee in the House of Representatives, and 

also as a senator was appointed chairman of the senate state 

transportation committee, also served on the agriculture and 

natural resources committee and judicial committee. And the 

resume goes on and on, but please join me in welcoming the 

senator to our legislature. And he and the other members from 

the Midwest United States will be around the legislature for the 

next few days. So please welcome them to our legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

Opposition. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this particular bill 

. . . I think I can also recognize the member from South Dakota 

in the sense that my grandfather lived in South Dakota from 

1905 to 1912. And he worked as a well driller, drilling both 

water wells and oil wells. And he drilled a lot of wells around 

Mitchell, South Dakota, working for the man who later became 

the governor of South Dakota. 

 

And I know that a few years ago when we were visiting at 

Rapid City for the Midwest legislative conference meeting, we 

went over to see the graves of my great-aunt and great-uncle 

and other relatives there, and it’s very clear that there are a lot 

of ties between South Dakota and Saskatchewan. 

 

And one thing we know about South Dakota is that they don’t 

like a lack of accountability in how money is borrowed by 

governments. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that some of the 

questions that I’m asking tonight relate to that basic common 

sense Saskatchewan perspective that says, let’s not get 

ourselves into trouble by changing the rules of borrowing in a 

way that lacks accountability, that lacks basic . . . lacks or 

prevents basic information from going to the public of 

Saskatchewan and causes further difficulty for the province. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, I was just in the middle of explaining 

why the Report of the Saskatchewan Financial Management 

Review Commission dated February 1992 relates to this 

particular bill. And, Mr. Speaker, it relates to this bill because 

what the bill is doing is taking off some of the controls or the 

limits on how much money can be borrowed by SaskTel. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s always a dangerous thing to do when you’re 

getting an inkling that maybe this government needs to borrow 

money against Crowns to fund some of the things that they’re 

just doing in their regular business. And, Mr. Speaker, we will 

get a little more information tomorrow I think when we see 

some of the financial reports, but the kinds of changes that are 

being made here are troubling. 

 

Now another aspect of this report is that it really starts talking 

about how decisions are made and how you want to make sure 

that there’s full accountability of your borrowing decisions and, 

as in a peripheral way, how you buy and sell assets within a 

Crown corporation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we I think — and I guess I speak on behalf 

of what I would say is a vast majority of Saskatchewan people 

— want to err on the side of caution and make sure that there 

are the limits on the reporting of transactions and on the 

extending of the borrowing beyond 30 years, because when you 

get into a situation where that borrowing is going to get you 

into financial trouble, you’re not just causing problems for the 

present citizens of the province, you’re causing problems out 

about two generations. And that is way beyond what our 

responsibility is here. Our responsibility is to make sure that we 

spend only the money that we have and that we do it in a way 

that’s fair and reasonable. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges that comes from 

legislation like this is that we have also a situation where we 

know that the government has stepped in and taken dividends or 

taken funds out of the Crown corporations and taken them onto 

the operations side of government. And the net effect of that is 

to reduce the debt in the General Revenue Fund side or the 

operating side and push it over onto the Crown corporations. 

 

Now we know that the result of the 1992 review was that 

substantial debts had to be moved back the other direction, had 

to be moved off of the Crowns back into the General Revenue 

Fund so that the Crowns could actually survive. And, Mr. 

Speaker, any time that you make the changes that are proposed 

in Bill 45 here, you’re starting to limit the accountability that 

will prevent these further problems. 

 

Now why raise a question around this particular bill? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that what we’re seeing is a continual erosion of 

the accountability structures that were put in place after the 

financial difficulties of the ’80s. As the minister stated in his 

speech, he provides some rationale that talks about changing 

how we borrow money, but he doesn’t go to why some of these 

restrictions were put in place at the first time. 

 

[21:30] 

 

And so I think that we need to recognize that these strictures or 

these methods of control have been developed for appropriate 

purposes and that we shouldn’t change them without having 

clear parameters where the changes go because what this 

particular change does is it eliminates from this legislature the 

financial accountability around SaskTel and the Sask 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation. 

 

So when we look at other pieces of legislation that are also 

basically giving the discretion outside of this place, we end up 

raising issues. Now I know for many years there are always 

suggestions about how we can move decisions into regulations 

to make them easier for the administration of a particular area. 

And there’s some of those that make sense because there are the 

regulations that allow that to happen.  

 

And I think it’s quite obvious from when we were talking about 

the previous bill tonight about liquor control, that many of the 

changes that were going to be made were going to be made in 

the regulations and in the policy, but only 10 of the 70 changes 

were going to be made in the legislation. Well that’s a reflection 

of a transfer of much of that control to the administrative 

structure. That may be appropriate as it relates to liquor, and I 

think that that’s right. 

 

But when it comes to the financial health of the province, when 

it comes to the buying and selling of property that’s owned by 

SaskTel or SaskTel Holding, I think we need to be very careful 

about giving away that ability to control ultimately what 

happens, giving away that control from the legislature because 

no matter what happens, the financial accountability comes 

back to the legislature. But we can’t monitor that unless we 

actually have the information. And this legislation is designed 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2211 

in a way to effectively blunt or eliminate the reporting until an 

audit, maybe a year later. And I think that’s just the wrong way 

to do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this bill as I said before is only one page 

long, and it has these changes to The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act and The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act, but they are 

extremely important around the accountability for the finances 

of the province for all the reasons that I’ve listed. 

 

At this point I know that other of my colleagues want to speak 

about this particular legislation because of their concern for the 

finances of the province and for financial accountability of the 

province as it relates to a Crown corporation. At this point I will 

adjourn debate on this matter. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 45, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 46 — The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 46, An Act to 

amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act. And again it 

seems like a relatively straightforward two-page bill but, Mr. 

Speaker, this is an important issue and one that I think we need 

to take some time to reflect on and have a lot of questions. And 

as I’ve been reading some of the comments, clearly there’s 

more here than just a couple of pages. And so we will have a 

fair bit to say about this and of course questions when we get 

into committee. 

 

But I think what we have to talk about . . . And really it is very 

interesting as my colleague, the member from Lakeview, when 

I was reading his notes, every section sort of has a story to tell. 

And it is too bad that the minister didn’t go on at length because 

sometimes if we had a little bit more detail in the speeches that 

the minister gave, then we wouldn’t be speculating here what 

could be behind this. Because some of these sections really 

leave one to wonder, where did this come from? What is the 

background to this? Why is this like this ? Because we see 

unique features in this bill that we don’t see in other pieces of 

legislation. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about pensions, 

sometimes we can disassociate with it and not think it’s an 

important thing. But really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s really 

important we take the time to think this through carefully, you 

know. Because in many ways pensions are social contracts with 

people to ensure that if they do stop working at a time that, 

whether it’s 65 or 60 or something like that, that they can live 

the remainder of their years in comfort and somebody else will 

have a job and that it will all work out. And this is something 

that’s arisen over many, many years, if not centuries, of this 

thinking that if we put away some savings and it’s held in trust, 

that it will be looked after and that people can retire in a fashion 

that hopefully will meet their needs. It may not be luxurious, 

depending how their lifestyle is, but that they will have their 

needs met. 

 

And we see more and more, and I’ll get into this, Mr. Speaker, 

because we read in the papers all the time about pensions 

having challenges and what the implications of that are and are 

they really a challenge or is this some sort of . . . is there 

something more to it. 

 

But I do want to just reflect specifically on the bill a bit before 

we get into the minister’s comments, you know. One, section 7, 

talks about: 

 

“(9.1) Subject to subsection (6), the commission may, 

before the term of: 

 

(a) the chairperson expires, appoint the chairperson for 

one additional term of one year; and 

 

(b) the vice-chairperson expires, appoint the 

vice-chairperson for one additional term of one year”. 

 

So that’s an interesting thing that for some reason that they’re 

feeling that they need to have that ability to extend the 

leadership. And what is the reason behind that? Now I don’t 

believe, and we’ll review the minister’s comments, but that it 

doesn’t really reflect on why that is the case that it seemed like 

. . . So there must be something behind that. And so we’ll have 

a question: what gave rise to the idea that we need to be able to 

have the ability to expand the chairperson and the Chair’s role 

for an additional year? What happened that caused the rise that 

we may be here tonight debating this point? And clearly there 

must be something there. 

 

The other one that I do want to reflect on is the next one: 

 

“Majority and restriction on liability 

 

7.01(1) Subject to subsection (2), a decision or any 

other action taken at a meeting of the commission 

constitutes a decision or action of the commission if it 

is voted for or approved by a majority of the members 

of the commission present at the meeting. 

 

Now I understand that there is five members on the board, so 

that would make it, could be 3 to 2. But it goes on to say: 

 

(2) No member of the commission is liable with respect to 

a decision or an action taken at a meeting of the 

commission if: 

 

(a) in the case of a member who was present at the 

meeting, the member: 

 



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

(i) did not vote for or otherwise approve the decision 

or action taken at the meeting; and 

 

(ii) requests that his or her dissent be entered into the 

minutes of the meeting; or 

 

(b) the member was not present at the meeting at which 

the decision was approved or action taken”. 

 

Which is a kind of an odd one that you don’t . . . I mean does 

that imply that those who voted for the decision have all the 

liability? That those who did not vote for it don’t have any 

share of the responsibility? That’s, you know, as my colleague 

pointed out, that this is a pretty rare kind of section, and this 

may in fact be maybe the only time we’ve seen this in 

legislation in Saskatchewan. 

 

So why is it when we’re talking about pensions that the liability 

is limited, and particularly to those who — could be only one or 

two members — who don’t agree with a decision would have 

immunity? This is unusual. So clearly, clearly there must be a 

story behind that, as my colleague said. And I think that we’ll 

have questions about that and would be worthwhile hearing 

about that. But the minister chose not to share that information, 

but we can only speculate. We just think it’s odd. It’s not a 

usual type of governance procedure. And we will wait for that, 

and we’ll hear the answers why and if that’s common practice, 

if that’s now a common practice. I’m not sure. 

 

Another one here, the next section 5. The following subsection 

is added after subsection 20.1(2), and it’s: 

 

“(3) At any time before the . . . death of a member, the 

member’s spouse may revoke a waiver provided pursuant 

to subsection (2) by providing a written notice of the 

revocation in a form acceptable to the commission”.  

 

So that’s quite a thing. And so what caused rise to this? And 

again you know, we’ll look through the minister’s comments, 

but I don’t see any rationale for that, and we’ll be taking a look. 

 

So these amendments, and there’s one more talking about: 

 

If a beneficiary is the surviving spouse of a deceased 

employee, the surviving spouse may, instead of receiving 

the amount to which the beneficiary is entitled . . . [may] 

make an election by providing notice to the commission 

. . . 

 

And then it goes on to details. 

 

So it’s an interesting piece of legislation that actually causes 

rise for more questions than answers, and we’re not sure if it’s 

what the reasons are behind it. Clearly when we take a look 

around the country and North America, around the world, 

pension plans are under attack in many ways, and whether it’s 

because of critics thinking that they’re not solvent or that they 

really aren’t, they don’t have the funds for them. This is an 

issue that’s before us. 

 

So when we do these kind of amendments, particularly when 

they’re so specific, it’s critical, it’s very critical, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that we get it right, that there are no unintended 

consequences, that we don’t do something that we regret later 

on. And so we will have some questions here. 

 

But I’ll take a minute here to reflect on the minister’s comments 

that he made back on November 5th when he entered into the 

second round or this second reading speeches. He talks about 

how the municipal employees’ pension plan has some 16,000 

members in it and 4,000 pensioners. And it’s a plan that works 

for employees of school divisions, urban and rural 

municipalities, regional colleges, regional public libraries, and 

other local authorities within the province. So it’s really an 

important plan and many people count on it being there and that 

it will be there for them as they grow and age and will meet all 

their needs because that’s why you put the money aside. 

 

And he talks about the two issues really, the two key concerns 

of pensions really is around the solvency, that it will be there, 

that you can count on it. And as we’ve come to appreciate, 

that’s not the case necessarily. So in other parts of Canada and 

in particular the other parts of North America, we think about 

United States, particularly where you look at California having 

issues in meeting ends meet there. 

 

[21:45] 

 

And the second key concern is really about fairness. And this 

one is absolutely right, that there is a balance between how you 

perceive the contributions of the person who’s about to retire 

and what the implications are for those who are left in the 

workforce and those taxpayers to make sure the plan is solvent. 

It’s really important that there is a level of fairness, and there is 

a lot of trust involved that we will look after people. And that’s 

what happens when pension plans are used for a whole host of 

variety of reasons, whether they’re investments, and we think of 

the Ontario teachers fund as a major, major investment tool in 

Ontario. And clearly that that’s an example of how it can be 

used to benefit teachers or the employees in terms of making 

sure that they get their best return. 

 

So we want to reflect through this, and I want to just take a 

minute to look at what the minister has said about this and to 

people at home may be interested in this and when they look 

back. It talks about — and it’s just one or two sentences — but 

it talks about allowing: 

 

. . . the commission to extend the terms of the 

Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson at times when 

leadership continuity is vital and their original terms are 

nearing an end. It will, for clarity purposes, modify the 

Act to note that a simple majority of commission 

members is required for all decisions made by the 

commission. 

 

Well that makes sense. And it talks about: 

 

. . . align the Act with provincial pension legislation, 

provide for a lifetime pension benefit to be paid to an 

eligible spouse where a member dies . . . it will eliminate 

ambiguity. The Act will be modified to clearly state that a 

spousal waiver to a pension benefit is revocable. 

 

So that’s all they say about the changes. And so as my 

colleague said a lot of the . . . When you look at the four or five 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

amendments, there’s more to it than just one or two sentences. 

We have a lot of questions about that. And so when a piece of 

legislation is drafted to solve a problem, we have to make sure 

and have confidence that that problem is contained, that in fact 

we’re not creating a situation where there will be further 

unintended consequences, that in fact by solving one problem 

you create five new ones. We have to make sure that that’s a 

circumstance, and it would be interesting when we talk to the 

drafters and the minister in committee to make sure that that is 

actually the case. 

 

And as I’ve talked about earlier, the whole issue around the 

leadership continuity, the idea that some members, if they’re on 

the dissenting end of the vote, that they can actually have their 

votes registered, and that eliminates any liability. That’s an odd 

thing and we’ve not seen that kind of thing before. 

 

So as my colleague from Regina Lakeview said, he says and I 

quote, “I think we’re owed a bigger explanation on that 

particular provision that’s here.” We are owed bigger 

explanations. We are owed more fuller, more robust 

explanations. And sometimes when we just get one or two lines, 

it leaves us thinking, what else? There must be more to this. 

You know, when you’re talking about 16,000 pensions or 

20,000 pensions, that clearly these people want answers. And 

they’re probably watching, and they’re worried about what does 

this really mean. And so they have questions. 

 

I appreciate too how it is that we really need to think about this 

as deferred compensation. And in fact this is a way that many of 

us view this, and that the money that’s managed by the board, 

that’s incorporated under this legislation, is being held in trust 

for the employer, for the employee. Yes. And I think that we 

really do have to think about that. And it’s a sacred trust 

because I think that we don’t think of these people because they 

are not in the workforce as much. And we often see them in 

other circumstances, and we often think that they may be living 

the life of Riley, but at their early ages, when they’re in their 

early 60s, 70s, that they do have concerns about will they have 

enough money when the tough . . . when it really gets going and 

it’s tough times. 

 

So I do appreciate what people have said about this but, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I want to take a look and talk a bit about this 

on perhaps a larger perspective because we need to think about 

this in terms of the scale of issues around pensions around 

Canada, around the world. Because as we’ve gone through this 

baby boom time and we’re now getting into the issue of who 

will be supporting the baby boomers, we often hear that 

whether it’s in health care or whether it’s just, as I say, in 

pension, this is a real problem. 

 

And so I know that when we talk about cities wrestling with 

issues, I just want to take a minute and look at this article. It’s 

from London, Ontario, and it’s a description of issues around 

what’s happening in London, Ontario. And the heading is 

“Municipal pension plan needs fixing.” And it starts off by 

saying, and I quote: 

 

London taxpayers are being hit by more than $6 million 

in additional pension contributions for city workers over 

three years because the plan is struggling with a growing 

deficit. 

The city was on the hook for $20 million a year in 

pension contributions in 2010 for all the workers 

including firefighters and police. 

 

The amount grew by over 10 per cent, grew by 2.1 million last 

year and will climb the same this year, about 2 million, to more 

than 26 million in 2013. 

 

And so this is a big challenge for them, and it’s a big hit for 

taxpayers. And as it’s been debated that, you know, taxpayers 

and municipalities are faced with a lot of, lot of issues including 

pensions. And we hear that in our own province. But we also 

hear the issue about the growing infrastructure challenge and 

how they are facing crumbling streets, water systems, 

transportation systems, also the cultural and recreational 

deficits. These are things that we take for granted. And 

taxpayers are left holding the bag, and what are they going to 

do? 

 

And so here we have London, Ontario talking about this. They 

talk about Montreal where the city’s pensions contributions 

have rocketed to $600 million a year from $130 million four 

years ago. So $130 million four years ago in 2008 now is some 

$600 million. Clearly that’s a challenge for folks, and it’ll be 

interesting to see what Montreal comes up to do with it. It talks 

about St. John. Regina, here in Saskatchewan, also having 

serious pension trouble. And so there you go. So clearly these 

issues are starting to pop up across the country, and we need to 

make sure that we get a handle and we get in front of this. 

 

And so when we meet with the people in committee, we will 

definitely be asking them questions about that because it’s a 

real challenge. And so it will be interesting to see what kind of 

leadership this government provides for it. I want to take a look. 

 

This was an article that talks about unsustainable public 

pensions in Ontario and what the Ontario Tory leader, Tim 

Hudak, would do. And this is from November 19th in the 

Toronto Sun. Hudak says, “An Ontario Tory government would 

consider overhauling public pensions so that new employees — 

and not taxpayers — bear the financial risks of their plan.” 

 

So that’s where he would go. He would go with the new 

employees, not the taxpayers. Now that would be an interesting 

challenge because clearly we have to make sure that our 

pensions, our public pensions are sustainable. But he released a 

paper, Tim Hudak, a white paper on sustainable retirement 

security, said the combination of low interest rates, longer life 

expectancy, and the increased number of retirees are combining 

to create an unfunded liability crisis that could cause the 

taxpayers in Ontario as much as $100 billion. 

 

So he’s going to take a look at how they can turn it around. And 

you know, it’s an interesting thing here because I think this kind 

of plan could create more problems. He says, and I quote, “It 

seems whenever the government members’ pension [plans] is in 

trouble, it’s taxpayers who have to foot the bill.” And then, I 

quote, “Taxpayers who don’t have their own pensions are asked 

to pay more and more taxes for those who do.” 

 

So here you have that split in society between those who do 

have pensions and those who don’t. And who pays? And 

particularly when it comes to public servants and municipal 



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

employees, who will be responsible for the solvency of the 

plan? You know, it was a commitment and it was a deal that 

was signed in good faith by employees that they would have 

pensions, that if they put some aside, that the municipalities 

would do likewise. And you see, if they’re not handled well, 

you might end up like a situation in Ontario. And if you have 

this continue on with the kind of plans that the Tory leader, Tim 

Hudak, says, you could have some real problems. You could 

have some real problems. 

 

And I think that, you know . . . And it’s interesting because he 

focuses on, Tim Hudak focuses in on the Ontario teachers’ plan 

which he says has an unfunded liability of $9.6 billion, which 

he says is a prime example of just how expensive a defined 

benefit plan can be for taxpayers. Now but the commitment was 

to these employees that there would be a pension. 

 

So it’s clear that we have to get this right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and we’re not sure if that’s the case with the bill that’s before us 

because we know it’s a big issue. It will be interesting when we 

get into committee to say, have they been able to get the bell on 

the cat with this? Or how are Saskatchewan, how is the plan for 

Saskatchewan municipal employees? And so for the 20,000 

people who are involved, is it going to meet their needs? 

 

And of course, you know, the . . . And it’s interesting as you 

read through some of the articles, and I just want to bring up 

one last one and it’s from the HuffPost and it’s November 20th, 

2012. It talks about, “Harper and the public pension crisis: 

experts question severity of problem.” And it talks about 

whether or not we really do have a question of retirement and 

enough money put aside and that type of thing. 

 

But as you know, we’ve just had a government, a federal 

government who’s raised the retirement age to 67, and that 

happened in the spring omnibus bill. And what impact that will 

have on people working will be interesting. 

 

Now clearly, people who do end up working to 65 often are 

those . . . I mean there’s a couple of different groups, one that, 

those who love to work and will work until they are finished, 

whether it’s people who are in careers and find that it’s meeting 

their needs and they want to work for as long as they can. And 

that’s not a problem. But often there are those who are more 

vulnerable and those people find themselves in a situation 

where they have to work because they have no other choice; 

they don’t have a pension. And so when you have the pension 

raised, age raised to 67, it’s a tough thing because these folks, 

the demographics and stats show that they don’t live as long. 

They may not even reach the age of 67, and so this is a real 

challenge. And so they may even have to work longer because 

they just don’t have the funds. And of course, as . . . We’ve 

talked about this as well and we know in Saskatchewan where 

we have waiting lists for seniors’ housing, and that seems to be 

a reality. 

 

So these different ways that governments have tackled the issue 

of financial security for seniors is a big, big challenge. So while 

tonight we’re debating The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, it’s one that has a much bigger impact on us 

and one that we can’t just think of one little aspect. And as I 

said, it’s the unintended consequences that we’re looking for. 

And clearly, the four or five amendments they’re putting 

forward, you know, I mean seem relatively straightforward. 

There’s two or three that we have questions about, that if it 

really does have the, you know . . . They’re solving one 

problem and I hope they’re not creating five more by it. And 

before you know it, you just sort of get into a bit of a Ponzi 

scheme here of solving problems, and we don’t want to see that 

happen. 

 

[22:00] 

 

But we do have a lot of questions about this. And as my 

colleague from Lakeview said, there must be stories behind 

each one of them because they’re so, so specific. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that many of us will want to get in and 

have some discussion on this bill before it gets to committee 

because we think it’s an important one. We know folks who are 

in these circumstances. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would like to move adjournment of Bill No. 46, An Act to 

amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 46. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy Government House 

Leader has moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:02.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2191 

 Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2193 

 Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2201 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2207 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2211 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2200 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2200 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2200 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2200 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2200 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2209 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




