




















































Hansard: December 03, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 22B  MONDAY, DECEMBER 3, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2349 

 December 3, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, the session is 

resumed. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 74 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 74 — The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

evening to join in on the discussion that has occurred already on 

Bill No. 74, An Act to amend The Cities Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation contains a number of 

different components as identified by the minister in his second 

reading speech on November 27th of this year, of course 

identifying the different areas where this piece of legislation, 

this amendment, the areas that would be affected. The actual 

Act itself, Mr. Speaker, The Cities Act, is quite substantial, as 

members can see by the Act that I’m holding. It’s a number of 

pages and fairly lengthy, as one would expect, Mr. Speaker, 

when dealing with an issue as important as our cities here in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that individuals here in the province live 

in a variety of settings. Sometimes it’s a very urban centre in 

our two largest cities of Saskatoon and Regina. Sometimes it’s 

a smaller urban setting in a medium-sized city. Sometimes it’s 

in a town or a hamlet, Mr. Speaker, and sometimes it’s on an 

acreage or on a farm. So we know there are a number of 

different settings where individuals in the province choose to 

live. And of course that’s a good thing, as individuals have the 

choice to choose where in fact they would like to live according 

to their occupations, particular areas where they may have an 

attachment to the region, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so in looking at this piece of legislation, The Cities Act, it’s 

important to ensure that any sort of changes that may come 

forward through the amendment to The Cities Act, it’s 

important to ensure that they are the right changes that are 

needed for this particular piece of legislation because we know 

that a good number of people, many people here in 

Saskatchewan, live in cities. That’s a reality. And not just 

individuals who live in the city, but the amendments put 

forward in this Act also relate to RMs [rural municipality] that 

may be adjacent to a city. And it talks about the relationship 

between the two orders of government or two jurisdictional 

bodies, I should say. 

 

In looking at this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, the content 

is divided up into four main areas as identified in the minister’s 

second reading speech and then also as seen in the actual 

amendment to the Act. The first component, Mr. Speaker, deals 

with, as the minister says, has to do with boundary alterations 

or annexations with respect to a city adjacent to another 

municipality. 

 

So we know, Mr. Speaker, in a number of jurisdictions in the 

province where the cities are growing due to a number of 

factors, we see situations where the city boundaries need to 

expand in order to accommodate the growth of the city. And in 

these situations, this of course affects the neighbouring 

municipalities. I think, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatoon for example 

being adjacent to the RM of Corman Park. There are situations 

where as the city limits of Saskatoon, my home constituency, 

expand, this of course has implications to the surrounding rural 

municipalities. So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, as we consider 

any of these types of changes, it’s important to ensure that there 

is the proper relationship between a city and rural municipality. 

 

So what this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, seeks to do is to 

provide some greater clarity and understanding with respect to 

the relationship between those two groups. Specifically, Mr. 

Speaker, what this amendment would propose to do is to 

provide a new time limit on how long a municipality must wait 

for a response to proposed annexation by a city. And in this 

situation, Mr. Speaker, you can see how there might be a 

situation where, if the relationship between the city and the 

rural municipality might not be as positive as one might hope it 

would be — and in politics and in governance, this happens 

from time to time — there may be the opportunity, there may 

be the instance, Mr. Speaker, where a situation arises between 

the two sides where the rural municipality is not in favour of 

the annexation that is being brought forward by this city. And 

in situations like this, it’s important to ensure that there is the 

necessary mechanism to ensure that the matter is resolved in a 

timely manner. And so what this does, Mr. Speaker, is puts a 

new time limit in place so that the city is not left waiting in the 

event that a municipality is slow-walking an application for 

annexation, or a response I should say. 

 

And it’s not, Mr. Speaker, something that is out of the realm of 

possibility, so it’s necessary and appropriate for our legislation 

to reflect the current reality. I would be curious, Mr. Speaker — 

this was not mentioned in the minister’s second reading speech 

— but I would be curious if this is coming out of a particular 

location, a particular event between a city and a rural 

municipality where things didn’t go as smoothly as perhaps we 

would hope. So the minister’s second reading speech is quiet on 

that detail. Perhaps through the committee process we’re able to 

see, Mr. Speaker, if this is coming out of that area of interest. 

 

It also, Mr. Speaker, in this first section of the proposed 

amendment with respect to the relationship between the city 

and the municipality, it talks about how mediation is required 

before the Saskatchewan Municipal Board hears and decides an 

application for annexation. The Municipal Board in this 

instance, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, would be acting as a 

quasi-judicial body that would provide a ruling, basically look 

at the facts as a party that is not interested directly in either side 

and to provide some sort of objective opinion on what is the 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

right course of action. 

 

So what this legislation suggests, Mr. Speaker, instead of 

automatically bumping it to that level where ruling needs to 

take place, why not see what could be accomplished through 

mediation? And, Mr. Speaker, to me that seems like a 

reasonable step. You know, when two sides can work things out 

through mediation, that is a favourable outcome as opposed to 

taking a more adversarial approach. I recognize that from time 

to time, Mr. Speaker, the adversarial approach to conflict will 

be there and should be there. And it’s appropriate, and we do 

need the Municipal Board to be in a position where it can make 

rulings on situations where there is a conflict. That being said, 

when mediation can do the trick, so to speak, why not 

encourage that and see if that could be a way of causing a 

resolution? 

 

It’s also, Mr. Speaker, I think very important to, with respect to 

the amendments that are put forward here, Mr. Speaker, to clear 

up any sort of misunderstanding or ambiguity there may be 

about how an application may be amended or withdrawn at any 

time up until the board completes its review. So this is the idea, 

Mr. Speaker, that if an issue is bumped to the board to provide a 

ruling, if in the meantime the two sides can come together and 

find some sort of agreement or some sort of favourable 

resolution for this — both sides, on the issue — then why not 

allow both sides to renew the application and de-escalate any 

sort of conflict that may be there, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So for this first section at least, Mr. Speaker, this seems like 

mostly common sense approaches. I know, Mr. Speaker, the 

amendments that are put forward here in Bill No. 74, An Act to 

amend The Cities Act, it is consistent with the Act to amend 

The Municipalities Act because these are complementary pieces 

of legislation that address different components of our cities. 

And so it only does make sense, Mr. Speaker, that if changes 

are occurring in one Act, we would ensure that the necessary 

changes are also occurring in the complementary Act. And so in 

my view, Mr. Speaker, it does seem like it is an appropriate 

type of change, based on the information that I know through 

the legislation and the comments of the minister. 

 

It will be interesting, Mr. Speaker, in the weeks and months 

ahead, to hear from players within the realm of municipal 

politics as to whether or not these proposed changes are in fact 

consistent with what will make the relationship between cities 

and municipalities work more effectively. 

 

The minister in his remarks suggests that there has been a fair 

amount of consultation that has occurred between the sides, and 

that is good, Mr. Speaker. So I hope that the proposed changes 

being brought forward in this section of the amendment are in 

fact consistent with what individuals who are on the ground at 

the municipal level do in fact want and see as an appropriate 

and a responsive action to the current situation. 

 

So that was the first section, Mr. Speaker, that basically 

addressed the relationship between municipalities and cities. 

And that’s the first section. 

 

The second section, Mr. Speaker, as identified by the minister’s 

second reading speech and as obviously stated in the actual 

amendments themselves, has to do with the other amendments 

that have taken place with respect to The Municipalities Act and 

The Northern Municipalities Act. And these proposed 

amendments, Mr. Speaker, have to do with amendments that 

would allow cities to add unpaid city utility charges incurred by 

a tenant to property taxes, provided that the prior notice is given 

to the tenant and the property owner, and that any utility 

deposits are applied to the charges. And this is as it relates, Mr. 

Speaker, to trailers and trailer home . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. 

Speaker, as it’s identified. This is the notion, Mr. Speaker, that 

if there are utility payments that are owed at a property due to 

the neglect of a renter, it allows the city to add those amounts 

on to the property taxes that the owner of the property would be 

paying. 

 

Now of course the owner of the property pays those property 

taxes through the rent that is collected from the property in 

question, so it’s basically, Mr. Speaker, providing a bit more of 

an incentive in order for the property owner to ensure that the 

renter is in fact paying utilities and staying on top of things with 

respect to the property as it relates to utilities that might be 

delivered through the municipality. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we obviously want all people to pay their 

bills when it comes to utilities. That ensures that the public 

services that are provided are able to carry on in a good way. 

We know from time to time, Mr. Speaker — and this happens 

with people in different areas of the province and from different 

walks of life — we know from time to time there are instances 

where individuals do not keep up with their payments and the 

issue of arrears comes up and the question of how the 

municipality gets payment for utilities that are owed. 

 

So this, Mr. Speaker, is bringing the property owner into the 

equation. One could imagine a situation where utilities are 

owed by a renter of a location, and when the owner of the 

location discovers that the utilities owed are being added to the 

property taxes, I would imagine, Mr. Speaker, that the owner 

would apply some pressure and some persuasion to the renter in 

order provide payment for the utilities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this raises a number of important questions I 

think from the perspective of the municipality and the city and 

the utility provider but also from the perspective of the owner 

of the property and the renter, Mr. Speaker. Now one would 

hope that when an owner of the property rents the property to 

the renter, that a proper lease is in place and a rental agreement 

which clearly details what the responsibilities are of the renter 

with respect to paying the utilities. Now I know there are 

different levels of attention that are paid by property owners, 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to leases, and clearly having a 

detailed list and a rental agreement is the wisest approach 

because it clearly articulates what the responsibilities are of 

each side with respect to paying utilities, paying rent, upkeep of 

the property, and all of those items. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, by taking this approach, by allowing the 

owed utilities to be added to the property taxes, it is bringing 

the owner of the property into the equation in a much more 

significant way than what had been there previously, at least in 

my reading of the legislation and my understanding of it. 

 

So I think it is appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to have a discussion as 

to whether or not it’s appropriate to bring the owner of the 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

property into that position because it really is putting the owner 

on the hook, so to speak, with respect to utilities that may be 

owed. One could imagine a situation where the owner then goes 

after the renter in a way that would encourage the renter to 

provide payment for back utilities, back payments. Now there 

could be the situation, Mr. Speaker, where a renter does not 

appreciate that pressure and the renter decides to leave and go 

somewhere else. In this situation, Mr. Speaker, it would mean 

that the owner of the property is on the hook for the payment of 

those utilities because they’ve been added to the property taxes 

which the owner of the property would be paying. 

 

So it’s not a minor point because it does have implications for 

individuals in the province who are property owners. And of 

course we encourage everyone in the province to pay their 

utilities. We encourage everyone to pay their taxes, but we 

know, based on experience and stories that we hear, that this 

isn’t always the case, as we have rules in place for a reason and 

the need to enforce people to do this. 

 

So I would be curious, Mr. Speaker, on the feedback that has 

been received from other organizations with respect to the 

wisdom of this approach, specifically associations related to 

landlords and those that are in charge of properties. 

 

[19:15] 

 

It does say, Mr. Speaker, that this change was requested by 

SUMA, Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. And I 

could understand why SUMA would be requesting this change, 

Mr. Speaker, because it provides a greater ability for SUMA to 

collect monies that are owed. But it is important when, in 

making any sort of legislative change, it is appropriate to strike 

the right balance between the request of the urban municipality 

and other considerations that may be present. And when 

government is doing any sort of consultation on any type of 

legislation, it’s also necessary to ensure that we’re hearing from 

a variety of perspectives and a variety of interests. And so in 

this situation it’s necessary to hear from SUMA most certainly, 

as they are the voice for urban municipalities, and we really do 

appreciate the work that they do here in the province. 

 

But it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to hear from renter 

associations and from landlord associations with respect to how 

this change might actually work on the ground and what sort of 

consequences, either intended or unintended, that it may have 

for the municipal environment throughout the province. 

Because what we do want to create, Mr. Speaker, is the type of 

environment in the province where there are ample properties 

available to be rented, where we encourage good renting 

practices by renters, and we also encourage good practices by 

landlords with respect to the properties that they are in charge 

of. 

 

So we want to strike the right balance here. We want to ensure 

that municipalities get their fair share and what they are owed 

with respect to utilities that they provide and services that they 

provide. So we want municipalities to receive their taxes, to 

receive payment for services when they’re delivering the utility, 

Mr. Speaker. We want landlords to be able to collect their rent 

in order to do well off of their investment because landlords 

play a very important role in providing good quality housing to 

many people here in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, we want 

renters to be treated with respect, to have affordable 

accommodations, and to also live up to their end of the rental 

agreement. 

 

So whenever we’re making changes to legislation, when we’re 

looking at possible amendments to The Cities Act, it’s 

important to keep all of those components in mind. And it’s 

important to ensure that we are striking the right and correct 

balance with respect to the needs of municipalities, the needs of 

landlords, the needs of renters, and not to mention the best 

interests of all of those groups as well, not just simply their 

needs, Mr. Speaker. We want all of those organizations to 

thrive and to do well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the first section that I talked about had to do 

with the relationship between cities and municipalities as it 

relates to annexations and as it relates to providing more clarity 

with respect to the process that is in place when there is a 

dispute between the city and a rural municipality as it relates to 

annexation, the notion of giving a different timeline with 

respect to how long it takes for a municipality to provide 

comment and feedback on a proposed annexation, basically 

tightening it up, or not tightening it up necessarily but 

providing some clear parameters with respect to the time limit 

that is allowed for a municipality to provide comment on 

annexation. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, the changes in the first section of the 

proposed amendments deal with the issue of mediation. 

Essentially if we can prevent this situation from being escalated 

to a level where it is a conflict and where the municipal board 

needs to make a ruling and do a hearing, we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that costs time. We know that costs dollars and, Mr. 

Speaker, it can also create a situation where there is conflict 

between the two jurisdictional bodies, and that’s not the kind of 

approach that we want in the province. In all situations when 

we can have opposing sides come to neutral agreement, come to 

compromise, put the best interest of citizens in both 

jurisdictions and citizens of the entire province at the forefront 

of the concerns, that of course is the approach that we want to 

take. So that was the first section. 

 

Now the second section, Mr. Speaker, had to do with changes 

that were being requested by SUMA with respect to back 

payments that were owed by renters on properties, specifically 

trailers, and providing the ability of municipalities to go after 

those amounts through the provision that amounts that are owed 

could be attached to property taxes, thereby putting the owner 

on the hook who would be paying the taxes, but who would be 

collecting the profits through the rent that is acquired because 

of the rental. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s bringing the landlord, the owner into the 

equation into a much more substantial and significant way. It 

could be effective, Mr. Speaker, but we also have to ensure that 

it’s not putting an unnecessary burden on the owner. And we 

have to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that it is treating the renters 

properly, and we have to ensure that the municipalities 

throughout the mix are also receiving the dollars that they are 

owed for the services that are provided. 

 

So I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the provisions that are being 

put forward in the amendment would in fact be talking about 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

balance, would in fact be talking about compromise, and would 

in fact be talking about what is the best approach to have all of 

these interests taken care of. So that is my hope and desire. 

 

Based on the comments made by the minister during his second 

reading speech, it sounds like, at least at this stage, that most of 

the input and feedback has been obtained through the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. I hope that is 

correct. But it will be interesting, Mr. Speaker, in the coming 

weeks and months to see if there are other organizations in the 

province who want to add their two cents on this issue of many 

cents with respect to who is owed money and who pays it. 

That’s the second component. 

 

The third component, Mr. Speaker, is a very interesting topic 

because it relates to changes that have been made at the 

provincial level which are having implications at the municipal 

level. And on this topic, Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about the 

New West Partnership Agreement and the Agreement on 

Internal Trade. So this is the notion, Mr. Speaker, that at the 

provincial level, the provincial government has decided to enter 

into agreements with neighbouring provinces with respect to a 

number of issues but, as I understand it, based on the comments 

that have been made by members opposite, the main idea and 

point is to provide greater harmonization within the 

jurisdictions in order to encourage the smooth operation of 

activities, either business or otherwise, between the provincial 

jurisdictions. 

 

At face value, Mr. Speaker, this notion of providing 

harmonization has merit and makes sense in my view. The 

catch is, Mr. Speaker, there’s another side of the coin. And we 

need to ensure that as we go down this path of increased 

harmonization between the jurisdictions, we also have to 

respect and take heed of the local uniqueness of locations with 

respect to objectives that they may have. Now these objectives 

may vary, Mr. Speaker. I think perhaps the most obvious one 

that would come to my mind right off the top would be when 

there is a local municipality that is interested in pursuing a 

certain policy path in order to encourage the well-being of the 

local area. And one can think of business improvement districts 

as one example, Mr. Speaker, where local businesses and other 

organizations have come together in order to make decisions for 

the interests of that local area and, in so doing, encourage the 

well-being of all people, encourage the well-being of 

businesses, of community-based organizations, and then the 

citizens that would interact with both of those organizations. 

 

So while on the one level, Mr. Speaker, harmonization and 

coordination between jurisdictions is a good thing — and I’m 

talking interprovincially that is important — we do have to 

keep our eye on the ball with respect to how it plays out on the 

ground when there are local circumstances that require our 

attention, specifically at the municipal level. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, we can think of a number of issues here where there 

may be interests along local procurement, as one example, 

where a municipality chooses to obtain a service or a good 

through a local supplier because they see that as a benefit to the 

local economic region. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard cities 

and towns and other municipal jurisdictions chime in on this 

because they see this as an important component of having 

strong local economies. And what makes a strong provincial 

economy, Mr. Speaker, are strong local economies. 

So we can’t, Mr. Speaker, toss out and ignore the role and 

responsibilities at the local level simply because we have 

entered into agreements at the provincial level. As with the 

comments that I provided in the second section with respect to 

providing the correct balance between desires of SUMA, 

landlords, and renters, in the same way, Mr. Speaker, we have 

to strike the right balance with respect to obligations that we 

have through the New West Partnership and the Agreement on 

Internal Trade and then the role of local governments in 

providing the very best future for their citizens. 

 

This particular change, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the issue of 

business licensing requirements. And as the minister identified 

in his second reading speech, it’s the notion that if an individual 

had a business licence in one municipality, the municipality 

could enter into an arrangement with another municipality, 

basically allowing the transferable recognition of that business 

licence. 

 

So it’s the notion here, you know, if community X was in a 

voluntary agreement with community Y, that they would 

respect each other’s process in place with respect to business 

licences, that the business, if they were setting up shop or 

pursuing economic opportunity in another community, they 

wouldn’t have to go through the process of acquiring another 

business licence, but that the business licence in community X 

would be recognized by the business licence process of 

community Y. And as the minister stated in his second reading 

speech, this is coming out of the agreements that the 

government has entered into with respect to the New West 

Partnership as well as the Agreement on Internal Trade. 

 

Now the minister said this in his second reading speech, Mr. 

Speaker, that was provided on November 27, 2012. And at that 

time, Mr. Speaker, the minister made a few comments and he 

said: 

 

This will encourage municipalities to reconcile their 

business licensing regimes similar to what Saskatchewan 

has done in partnership with the provinces of Alberta and 

British Columbia regarding the extraprovincial business 

registration option that became effective this past July. 

 

So it’s taken the experience from the provincial level, Mr. 

Speaker, and applying it to the municipal level. So the notion 

that Saskatoon and Regina or Saskatoon and Moose Jaw or 

Saskatoon and Warman — a new city, for example — could 

have a relationship where they would respect each other’s 

process for business licence approval and that an individual 

could set up shop in that community in a faster manner if they 

were looking at expanding their business or providing services 

in another community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at face value this seems like a reasonable 

approach to me because coordination is a good thing. And we 

are in the same province, so if we are able to smooth the 

process and facilitate how a business may be able to expand its 

operations throughout the province, at face value, Mr. Speaker, 

that seems reasonable to me. But as I mentioned in the previous 

sections, it’s important to hear from chambers of commerce in 

different municipalities and different areas to see just how in 

fact they feel about this piece of legislation because we 

wouldn’t want to be shoving a piece or foisting a piece of 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

legislation upon municipalities if they did not agree on it. And I 

understand by the minister’s remarks that it is a voluntary 

arrangement, but even with that being said, it’s necessary that 

we have the right safeguards in place in order to ensure that we 

do strike that proper balance between the different levels. So I 

think that is an important thing to consider. 

 

But we do, Mr. Speaker, I mean we want to encourage 

businesses to do well. We want to encourage their expansion. 

We want to encourage their smooth operation in different 

jurisdictions within a province, between different municipal 

levels. So if there are steps we can take at the municipal level, I 

think that is a smart thing. And I realize at times it can be 

difficult to have municipalities agree on everything, but I hope 

this would be another opportunity where the ministry has done 

the proper consultation through SUMA, and SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] for that 

matter, and any other organization that would have a stake in 

this issue. I hope that they would have done the necessary 

consultation and that the necessary discussions would have 

occurred in order to ensure that the right approach is being 

pursued here in the legislation. 

 

So that’s the third component, Mr. Speaker. It talks about 

licensing arrangements on a voluntary basis between different 

jurisdictions within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So the first area, as I talked about it, had to do with the 

relationship between cities and other municipalities as it relates 

to annexation, providing more clarity around timelines, 

providing more clarity around the constructive role that 

mediation can play.  

 

The second component, Mr. Speaker, talked about changes with 

respect to requests that were made by SUMA as it relates to 

unpaid utilities and how this can now be added on to property 

taxes so that municipalities are able to get the monies that are 

owed to them through the renters eventually in the long run, 

Mr. Speaker.  

 

And the third component had to do with greater harmonization 

and smoothing of any sort of differences there may be between 

municipalities. And as it says in this legislation, so I will have 

to believe it, Mr. Speaker, that it’s on a voluntary basis. And I 

see that as a good thing because it’s better to entice people into 

the situation as opposed to forcing them into it. So it is 

voluntary. They can see the merit of it. 

 

So that was the first component of the legislation. That was the 

second component. That was the third component. And before I 

conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I do want to make a few 

remarks on the fourth component, the final component of the 

proposed amendments to the Bill No. 74, An Act to amend The 

Cities Act. And, Mr. Speaker, this has to do with some changes, 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to requirements that the local councils 

may have with respect to meeting minutes and technology 

regarding service or filing of assessment appeal notices, sort of 

the nuts and bolts of running municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And this request in the fourth section is coming from city 

solicitors, city assessors, and city clerks, so the people, Mr. 

Speaker, who ensure that city business is done well and done 

properly and in a timely manner. Of course the leadership is 

provided by elected members of council, but we do know that, 

as in many levels and orders of government, it’s those who are 

working in the bureaucracy who actually get the job done at the 

end of day for the delivery of policy and different positions. 

 

So this has to do with some changes in order to ensure that 

there’s proper consistency and that the local level has the ability 

to do the job that it needs to do. And again, Mr. Speaker, some 

of these changes came through SUMA, the Saskatchewan 

Association of City Clerks, and other important consultation. 

So I hope, Mr. Speaker, that those consultations did in fact take 

place and that the changes being suggested here in the 

legislation are in fact consistent with what the local level wants. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve thoroughly appreciated the opportunity 

and enjoyed the opportunity to provide a few comments on Bill 

No. 74, An Act to amend The Cities Act. I appreciate the fact 

that members opposite have also appreciated these comments. 

That warms my heart. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move to adjourn debate on this piece of legislation. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 74, The Cities Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 75 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 75 — The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate this evening as it relates to Bill No. 75, 

The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, and to offer some 

comments and also to raise some questions that we have as it 

relates to the intent of this piece of legislation and to seek to 

ensure that the consultation that we would expect to have 

occurred to derive this piece of legislation has occurred, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have important stakeholders all through the North that 

would be, in the full expectation of the official opposition, 

would have been involved in building this legislation, 

communities that are directly impacted by the changes that are 

being put forward. And it’s alleged by government opposite 

that these communities, that New North themself, that these 

municipalities through SUMA, have been consulted. But it’s 

certainly our intent to make sure that’s the case. And I know 

over the coming weeks and months it will be our work to be 

following up with those communities, with New North, with 

SUMA themself to ensure that that consultation that we would 

expect to have occurred has occurred. 

 



2354 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

Quite simply, far too often we see this government push 

forward changes to legislation without doing the proper 

consultation, the proper listening, the proper understanding with 

those whom are impacted. And I think there’s no more clear 

example than the Minister of Labour who continues to bring 

forward large changes, significant changes to labour legislation 

without any consultation to those who are impacted — working 

families all across this province. 

 

So when it relates to Bill No. 75, when we look at the three 

provisions that have been put forward, what we look to here is 

to seek an understanding that this bill is in fact in the best 

interest of those communities in the North. Is this bill in the 

best interest of Green Lake? Is this bill in the best interest of La 

Ronge or Air Ronge? Is this bill in the best interest of Timber 

Bay or Beauval or Ile-a-la-Crosse? Mr. Speaker, these are the 

kinds of questions that we’re going to be having and meetings 

we’ll be having in the days, weeks, and months to come. We’ll 

be travelling throughout the North meeting with these 

stakeholders. Is this in the best interest of Southend and Pelican 

Narrows? Is it in the best interest of Cumberland House and 

Wollaston Lake, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We haven’t had any confirmation, Mr. Speaker, from members 

opposite that in fact these changes reflect the needs and the 

challenges of the North. And I hear the members working their 

way up the highway there, and that’s right. From Beauval up 

through Ile-a-la-Crosse and in through Dillon and then Buffalo 

Narrows and up to La Loche: is this in the best interests of the 

North? It’s awfully important for us to ensure. And you can go 

up the other way, Mr. Speaker. We can think of La Ronge and 

Stanley Mission and Missinipe and up further through 

Wollaston Lake. We need to make sure that we’re serving the 

interests of those northern communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the northern communities of 

Saskatchewan are far too often an afterthought of this 

government, far too often not considered as it relates to building 

out legislation or building out programs. The very North, Mr. 

Speaker, that is a vibrant part of providing the resources and 

revenues that this province requires and far too often those 

resources, those revenues bypass the North, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s why when legislation that’s built that directly impacts the 

North is put together by this government, it’s reasonable, it’s 

reasonable that we would question whether or not the proper 

consultation has occurred with those communities for whom 

it’s impacted. 

 

And we’re talking about vibrant communities when we’re 

talking about Creighton and Denare Beach and Pelican 

Narrows. And in many ways what we have to understand, these 

are some of the youngest populations in the entire province and 

growing populations with distinct needs and tremendous 

opportunity, but not if treated as an afterthought as we’ve seen 

far too often by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems that basically as we head north, the 

interests of this government wane, and it’s almost as though we 

hit the forest fringe and hit Prince Albert and hit the bridge that 

this government can’t properly repair, and as we move beyond 

that place across that bridge we get into the further north and 

we see communities of great need and communities that need 

support. 

When I look at the minister’s comments as it relates to Bill No. 

75, I recognize that he’s highlighted that some of the changes 

are brought forward as it relates to a competitiveness strategy, 

Mr. Speaker. For that there’s not a lot of clarity that’s been put 

forward, not a lot of information as to what specific changes are 

being put forward. 

 

As well, it relates to business licensing and overweight and 

vehicle permitting, Mr. Speaker, boundary alteration, and 

specifically municipal procurement, Mr. Speaker. And you 

know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the, it’s 

interesting when we look at what’s happening with municipal 

procurement in this province. The impacts and the decisions are 

being made at one level. They’re being made by government in 

a unilateral fashion by way of the New West Trade Agreement 

and, as it’s mentioned by the member from Nutana, in a very 

dictatorial fashion. And now communities are just starting to 

realize what the impact is. 

 

And so it’s going to be, in part it’s going to be our work to go 

out there and make sure we understand what this legislation 

before us means for these communities. But also it’s finally a 

full realization maybe for some communities about what the 

New West Partnership means for their community and the fact 

that the New West Partnership was signed by this government 

in a way that didn’t reflect any consultation with Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, with broad-based ramifications of which 

we’re just realizing with every new piece of legislation that’s 

brought forward. And now a government that’s in many ways 

tying the hands of local communities and of communities 

themselves from making the decisions that reflect the best 

interests of those communities or reflect the decisions that those 

members, those councillors have been democratically elected to 

make, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is something that we need to speak to in this 

Assembly. It’s something that we need to address far too often. 

We see sweeping changes brought forward by this government 

that have impacts back to people, back to neighbourhoods, back 

to schools, and in this case communities but broader than 

communities — our local economies, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

talking about local procurement strategies, Mr. Speaker. I think 

it’s a fair conversation to talk about making sure that 

communities have the ability with their public dollar to consider 

how they might utilize those dollars within their region or 

within our province. The fact now that that democratic right 

that they have been elected to fulfill has been taken away from 

them, their hands are tied, Mr. Speaker, speaks to a government 

that is not interested in hearing from stakeholders who are 

directly impacted on decisions that it’s making. 

 

And I think specifically we need to look at this New West 

Trade Agreement. We need to fully understand how this is 

going to impact cost itself, Mr. Speaker. I hear anecdotally from 

many that what the impact is, is that this broad-based tendering 

process is in fact driving the cost up for many of the smaller 

sized contracts, Mr. Speaker. That’s costing us more. It’s 

costing us more and potentially sending public dollars far 

outside Saskatchewan and certainly not able for us to derive the 

Saskatchewan benefit or, as the member from Nutana says, not 

allowing us to capture the Saskatchewan advantage that we 

should be able to have control of and to have certainty over 

achieving, Mr. Speaker. 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

We look a little further here. There’s also changes as it relates 

to northern councils, providing them greater ability to deal with 

inactive municipal development corporations. And it also 

clarifies provisions regarding northern hamlet incorporation as 

well as northern settlement dissolution. These are all important 

matters, and in some ways some of these may be practical 

changes. But what we need to fully understand is that these do 

reflect the needs of these communities throughout New North. 

We need to make sure that these communities have been heard 

in this process. 

 

And I know our northern members will be engaging in this 

consultation. Certainly our MLA from Cumberland will be 

doing that and certainly our MLA from Athabasca, engaging 

throughout their constituencies because really this government 

in a single-handed way making decisions that impact the North, 

Mr. Speaker, we know this government hasn’t had great interest 

in serving the North in the past, Mr. Speaker. And we can’t 

simply take this government at their word when they say 

they’ve consulted and that the changes that are being brought 

forward reflect the consultation that they’ve heard. So trust, I 

guess, don’t blame us, Mr. Speaker, for not taking them at their 

word on this front. We’ve seen far too often a government 

that’s pushed ahead a reckless legislative agenda, one that 

hasn’t reflected the consultation that’s required and one that 

doesn’t reflect the needs of stakeholders. 

 

When we get into this a little further, there’s also some changes 

as it relates to terms of office for members appointed to the 

Northern Municipal Trust Account Management Board. And 

those changes, in many ways, look to be about bringing this 

trust into a level of consistency with municipal terms. This may 

be quite reasonable, Mr. Speaker, but I know who I will be 

listening to on this front, Mr. Speaker. It won’t be a minister 

opposite from southern Saskatchewan who’s making changes 

that impact the North unilaterally. Who I’ll be listening to on 

this front, Mr. Speaker, our northern members. It will be the 

communities all through the North, whether Timber Bay or 

Green Lake or Beauval or Pelican Narrows or Denare Beach or 

Creighton, Mr. Speaker. All the way throughout the North, 

these are the communities that I’ll be listening to — that we’ll 

be listening to — and that our MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] will be leading consultation with over 

the coming weeks and months. 

 

I’d like to also address another item here, Mr. Speaker, and that 

relates to the third item, and this speaks about improving 

wording within the bill, improving consistency of language. 

And this seems to be nothing more than housekeeping in nature 

at first consideration. Certainly we’ll need to ensure that’s the 

case through that consultation, and certainly we’ll be ensuring 

to do that. 

 

In some ways, Mr. Speaker, I see this as a real failed 

opportunity. I believe that if this government were truly intent 

on listening and hearing the challenges and opportunities of 

New North and of our northern municipalities and of the people 

of the North, there was a tremendous opportunity to bring 

forward mechanisms and supports that went much, much 

beyond what was brought forward here. Municipalities all 

across this province, southern and northern, are facing 

significant pressures by way of strain on their infrastructure, by 

way of water quality — drinking water, Mr. Speaker, and waste 

water, Mr. Speaker. And what I believe many municipalities, 

and I understand it to be true for many through the North is it’s 

those sort of mechanisms, those sorts of supports that would 

have been supported by those municipalities throughout the 

North. And unfortunately I see this as a missed opportunity to 

address some of the real challenges that those municipalities are 

facing. 

 

We’ll go focus in a little bit further on some of the changes 

from a practical perspective. Some of them relate to boundary 

alteration provisions and improve and expedite the annexation 

process. This is something we want to really make sure we’re 

getting right because that annexation process is one that 

certainly is a difficult process at times for municipalities, and 

we need to make sure that all interests are represented on this 

front. We need to make sure that we’re not simply putting 

forward a process that’s rushed, one that’s heavy-handed or on 

the side of one interest or another, and in fact that we’re 

focused on the best interests of those communities. 

 

And I know annexation can be . . . It’s different for many of 

those northern communities and it’s a challenge for many of 

our southern communities. And I recognize that there’s changes 

that have been brought forward by this government as it relates 

to annexation and processes and timelines and roles of the 

municipal board timelines to trigger reviews with the municipal 

board, Mr. Speaker. But one thing I know is that we want to 

make sure that we’re affording the proper democratic process to 

these communities to make sure they’re serving the best 

interests of their constituents. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And I know why sometimes these processes take some time. I 

know in through Estevan and in through Yorkton and in Regina 

and in communities all across this province, annexation is a 

process that can be a challenge. What we’re making sure 

through this process, through this consultation is that the 

interests of communities are served and that we don’t simply 

have a heavy hand of government here, Mr. Speaker, to 

overhaul processes that we should make sure continue to reflect 

the ability of communities to be involved with, Mr. Speaker, 

that those that are elected in those communities can play a role 

in making sure they’re serving their constituents’ best interests. 

 

Move on to another little bit here. There’s discussion here about 

this encouraging municipalities to work co-operatively to 

resolve issues and differences and to promote and support the 

growth and development occurring in our province and in our 

communities. That’s the statement from the minister. Certainly 

it seems reasonable in nature, and I believe it’s the approach 

that Saskatchewan people and communities employ when 

dealing with disputes anyway, seeking that co-operative 

approach to resolve challenges and pressures. And now what 

we need to make sure is that the changes that are being brought 

forward don’t tie the hands of those communities when they’re 

entering into dispute resolution because in fact we want to 

make sure that they have the autonomy that they deserve and 

require to serve their communities, and in fact that that’s not 

something that’s being taken away from them. 

 

There’s a second category of amendments that have been put 

forward as well that are more specific to the North, I 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

understand. And I understand the minister suggests that they 

support greater accountability, and he goes on to suggest that 

the bill includes amendments to assist northern municipalities 

to address inactive municipal development corporations. We 

want to make sure that these are done in a practical way and to 

make sure that they’re done in a transparent way, Mr. Speaker, 

to make sure that those that have been entrusted, those 

corporations or those dollars are winding these down in an 

appropriate fashion that’s done in a . . . well, that can withstand 

public scrutiny and that follows processes that serves the best 

interests of their shareholders and the public at large. Those are 

the kinds of aspects of these structures that we’ll be looking for. 

 

We also recognize that the municipalities involved have a 

primary responsibility to address these issues by either 

dissolving the corporation or remedying any non-compliance 

issues. So it speaks about placing a responsibility back on these 

communities to make sure they’re dealing with any defunct or 

inactive municipal development corporations, and that would 

seem reasonable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I want to do is fully understand from those 

communities through the North whether or not this is in fact in 

their best interests. And certainly it would seem reasonable that 

we would want to wind down development corporations that 

are no longer operational, but we want to make sure that some 

of those development corporations aren’t in fact simply waiting 

for a period in time for which they may be of great benefit 

again and, if so, then we want to make sure that we’re 

providing the tools that these communities need to develop their 

local economies, to serve the people of the North, and to build 

vibrant, healthy, strong communities for tomorrow, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And at the end of it, that has to be the goal for any legislation as 

it relates to municipalities in this province, whether in the Far 

North or whether in the South. It has to be taking the 

opportunity to build healthier, stronger communities for 

tomorrow and for our future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know the members, our MLAs from the North that know 

the North well, that live in the North, Mr. Speaker, that speak 

for the North, that are the voice for the North, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to make sure we’re listening to those members that 

certainly bring back to us in this Assembly on a regular basis 

the unique challenges, but also the unique opportunities that 

exist all through the North, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s on the 

west side, whether it’s on the east side, whether it’s in the 

central part of our province, and making sure that we’re 

bringing forward changes that are enabling the kind of progress 

that I know northerners are seeking, Mr. Speaker, that I know 

northerners are wanting, Mr. Speaker, and they are seeking 

progress in this province, Mr. Speaker, and they are seeking 

progress for their own communities. 

 

So where I get concerned is where we have a government made 

up of southerners, Mr. Speaker, that make changes that impact 

the North, Mr. Speaker, with a concern that it’s been done with 

very little consultation with for whom this impacts, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s where we will serve as the official 

opposition of this province to make sure that that voice for the 

North — that voice for all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — is 

represented as we’re looking at the overhaul and changes as it 

relates to municipalities in this province. 

 

We’ve been talking about some of the changes to the 

municipalities as it relates to the 16 cities, Mr. Speaker, in this 

province. We’ve also been speaking about some of the changes 

as it relates to the urban municipalities and rural municipalities 

all across primarily southern Saskatchewan. We want to make 

sure we’re listening to all of those communities and making 

sure that they’ve been engaged in this process. 

 

When I’m looking at some of the other changes that have been 

made and reading through the minister’s comments, Mr. 

Speaker, I understand that this bill also contains some 

amendments related to northern hamlet incorporation as well as 

northern settlement dissolution. And this is important for us to 

make sure . . . reflect the needs of the North and reflect the 

community structures of the North, reflect the demands of the 

North which, Mr. Speaker, to be frank are quite different than 

what many of those members opposite would be aware of, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know our MLAs for the North are a regular and 

strong voice for these communities, and I know they’ll serve 

those communities as the voice for the North on these very 

changes in seeking out and to ensure that these changes in fact 

serve the best interests of the North. If not, I can guarantee 

you’ll be seeing amendments and challenge and proposition 

from the official opposition in this province. 

 

To go on, the minister suggests that “The northern hamlet 

incorporation amendments include a prescribed minimum 

taxable assessment as a criterion for northern hamlet 

incorporation.” We want to make sure that that criterion, that 

taxable assessment is set at the appropriate level, Mr. Speaker, 

and that it doesn’t reflect just the southern interests that these 

members may know, Mr. Speaker. We want to make sure they 

reflect the northern circumstance. 

 

This amendment will, it’s also suggested by the minister 

opposite that: 

 

This amendment will provide greater consistency between 

this Act and The Municipalities Act with respect to 

incorporation at the first level of municipal status, and it’s 

intended to ensure municipal capacity at this level.  

 

That’s important, Mr. Speaker, but we do need to make sure 

that those communities that are impacted at that very first stage 

of municipal development, of municipal incorporation, are 

served. So when we’re looking at some of the changes here, and 

we’re looking at the criterion that’s put in place for the hamlet 

incorporation structure, we really need to make sure that this is 

reflecting that widespread, diverse, vast land that is the North, 

Mr. Speaker, and serving not only the geographic demands of 

the region but serving the people of the region, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s the sort of information we’ll be seeking as we work 

in the coming weeks, months ahead to ensure that this 

legislation reflects the needs and captures the opportunities that 

it must for the North, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also goes on to talk about the dissolution of northern 

settlements. And on that front we want to make sure that this is 

being called for by the North, Mr. Speaker. Is this something 

that’s being pushed upon on the North by politicians of the 

South, Mr. Speaker? I know it’s something that the member for 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

Athabasca and the member from Cumberland will be 

establishing in the months moving forward. 

 

One of the last main categories of these amendments and this 

legislation reflect, as I understand, requests of stakeholders to 

clarify certain administrative matters such as the signing of 

council meeting minutes. Sounds reasonable, Mr. Speaker. It 

sounds to be something of a housekeeping nature, a refinement 

in legislation that reflects how our councils operate, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll be making sure that it’s in fact reflective of the 

stakeholders that are mentioned here, those communities all 

through the North that are building stronger communities every 

day, working towards strengthening the North through their 

work in their communities. 

 

It also highlights that there’s changes as it relates to consistent 

terminology regarding service or filing of assessment appeal 

notices. That sounds very reasonable, Mr. Speaker. Very 

reasonable, although we’ll be doing consultation to make sure 

that in fact that’s the case. 

 

It also talks a bit about adding contact information for appellant 

agents to assess appeal notices. And it certainly seems like a 

practical steps to enable the North to work towards some of the 

opportunities and challenges they’re working towards, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we’re looking at many, many changes that are here. These 

changes, I understand, were initially requested by others in the 

municipal sector — that’s what’s stated by the minister, Mr. 

Speaker — to either The Cities Act or The Municipalities Act. 

And what we need to make sure though, Mr. Speaker, when 

we’re looking at these — and I continue to hear about The 

Cities Act from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker — is that 

there’s a unique difference between our 16 cities of the South, 

Mr. Speaker, and those of the North, those communities, Mr. 

Speaker, all through the North that are rooted in through a rich 

and vast land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that those communities’ 

interests are served through this process. And we certainly 

don’t have a lot of certainty with this government when we look 

at the broader context of how this government’s operating in 

bringing forward legislation. A surprise piece of legislation 

that’s coming forward tomorrow to this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to a labour overhaul or labour legislation 

overhaul of that government — labour legislation that’s been 

built in a co-operative spirit, in a co-operative fashion over the 

past 100 years, Mr. Speaker, being overhauled in one fell 

swoop and coming forward tomorrow as a complete surprise to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve better than a 

government with a heavy hand. Saskatchewan people deserve 

better than a government that thinks they know best when it 

comes to the rights of workers in this province, when it comes 

to communities in this province, or when it comes to the North, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that listening and a connection to communities 

would serve this government well, Mr. Speaker, a government 

that I’m continuing to hear concerns around a detachment to the 

real issues facing Saskatchewan communities and a disinterest 

in the real issues facing Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so when we’re looking at the changes that are proposed as 

it relates to our northern communities, Mr. Speaker, and I look 

to our two northern members that are here with us tonight and I 

know how important it is, whether it’s the member from 

Athabasca as he’s driving back through Green Lake and 

Beauval and Ile-a-la-Crosse and Dillon and Buffalo Narrows 

and up through La Loche, I know how important it will be to 

that member to make sure that this bill itself respects the 

interests of those communities and puts those communities on 

the kind of footing that they deserve, allowing them to make 

sure they have the ability to influence and determine a bright 

future within their communities and for the region as a whole. 

 

I could go through the string of communities through the 

member from Cumberland’s constituency, but there’s no need 

to do that here tonight, Mr. Speaker, because that’s the sort of 

consultation, that’s the sort of listening that this official 

opposition will be doing, led by those MLAs from the North — 

the member from Athabasca, the member from Cumberland — 

the voices for the North, Mr. Speaker, who will make sure that 

the northern interests are served, served, Mr. Speaker, at a time 

when it seems to often be an afterthought of the current 

government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time we’ll have days and 

weeks and months ahead of us of consultation. We’ll have 

potentially some amendments, potentially proposals for this 

government, and certainly we’ll be bringing back the listening 

that will occur across this province, back to this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. So at this point in time, I adjourn Bill No. 75, The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 75, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2349 

 Bill No. 75 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


