




















































Hansard: November 07, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 9A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1805 

 November 7, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip . . . 

Government Whip, sorry. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’m honoured 

to introduce to you someone I’ve known for a lot of years, a 

friend of mine from Yorkton seated in your gallery — just give 

us a wave there, Aaron — Mr. Aaron Nagy. Mr. Speaker, 

Aaron was a friend of Jimmy Ray Wiebe who was killed while 

working at a gas station in Yorkton just last year. Since then 

Aaron has been very outspoken about the need to do more to 

protect those working in vulnerable situations. Aaron is joined 

by his friends today, Jennifer Netzel and Derek Lukey, all of 

whom I had the pleasure to meet with today along with the 

Minister of Labour in his office and have lunch. 

 

Along with them, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Andrew Klukas from the 

Western Convenience Store Association. Andrew and the 

Convenience Store Association were very co-operative and 

provided valuable insight on how to better protect those 

working in convenience stores late at night. 

 

These individuals are here today to honour the memory of 

Jimmy Wiebe and recognize the changes we made as a result of 

their efforts to protect those working alone. I would ask all 

members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to rise and join with the member from Yorkton in 

welcoming Aaron Nagy and his friends Jennifer and Derek here 

as well. Aaron of course is no stranger to this House, as he’s 

been here several times on this very important cause. And it’s a 

good day, and I’m looking forward to hearing more about the 

announcements that the minister may have. 

 

And I also want to say hello to Andrew Klukas who’s just 

around the corner there. Hello, Andrew. He and I visited this 

summer as well to talk about the importance of creating safe 

environments in convenience stores and gas stations when 

they’re open 24 hours. And I sure appreciate his insights. 

 

So I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming those 

folks to our legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is an honour and a privilege to introduce two 

guests seated in your gallery. With us today, Mr. Speaker, are 

two people from the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business. Dan Kelly is the president and chief executive officer 

and Marilyn Braun-Pollon is vice-president, prairie and 

agri-business. 

 

Ms. Pollon advocates the views of the federation’s agricultural 

and small-business sectors, and she also serves as the media 

spokesperson for over 5,000 CFIB [Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business] members here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Kelly first served as policy analyst for the CFIB in 1994 

and soon after became director of provincial affairs for 

Manitoba. In 1999 he moved to Calgary to become the 

federation’s western vice-president and later took the role of 

senior vice-president, legislative affairs, in 2009. In June of 

2012, Mr. Kelly was named president and CEO [chief executive 

officer] of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business. 

He has led many initiatives, including the call for balanced 

budget laws and workers’ compensation reform. In 2010 he 

also led a successful campaign to establish a code of conduct 

for the credit and debit card industry in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in welcoming 

Mr. Dan Kelly and Ms. Marilyn Braun-Pollon to the 

Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join the minister opposite and welcome Ms. Marilyn 

Braun-Pollon and Mr. Dan Kelly to their Assembly. They do 

provide advocacy and leadership on behalf of Saskatchewan 

businesses. Certainly I look forward to regular meetings with 

the CFIB and am able to find often some common areas of 

interest. And sometimes we don’t agree on all matters, but it’s 

certainly an important dialogue that goes on in building out a 

good policy. So I certainly join with the minister to welcome 

these Saskatchewan leaders to their Assembly. 

 

While also on my feet I’d like to just quickly mention — I 

know the member opposite will also introduce these 

individuals, but while on my feet — Mr. Stuart Wilson and his 

grade 10s from Melville. And I’ve gotten to know Mr. Wilson a 

little bit over the past few years. It’s a pleasure to see you here 

again with your students. And I wish your wife well in her 

service again to the school board out there in Yorkton, the 

Catholic school board. It’s nice to see you here today. I ask all 

members to welcome these individuals to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s an honour 

for me to rise today and welcome someone to the Legislative 

Assembly who is important to all of us. It’s my CA 

[constituency assistant], Heather Howell-Shiplack. I know all 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] know how 

important their constituency assistants are to them and the work 

they do that make us look good all day. And she’s got a tougher 

job than most, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank her for being 

patient with a new MLA. And I’m slowly learning the ropes, 

but she’s a great help and keeps me on time and keeps me on 

schedule. So I just wanted everyone to welcome Heather to her 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce 30 grade 10 students from Melville 

Comprehensive High School. The students today are 

accompanied by their teachers, Stuart Wilson and John 

Svenson, and chaperone Gloria Lipinski. And I’d ask all 

members to welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Legislative Assembly, some guests that are seated in your 

gallery. These are members from the Saskatchewan Real Estate 

Association. 

 

For the past two days, we’ve had the opportunity to meet and 

discuss issues with the members of the Saskatchewan Real 

Estate Association. They met with both sides of the House, both 

caucuses. I think there is probably some very good information 

that has been shared back and forth. 

 

And we all know that realtors are very progressive. They like to 

have their thumb on the pulse of the economy. So it’s a very 

worthwhile group for us to be sitting down and meeting with 

and finding out exactly where our province is headed. I had the 

opportunity to meet with them this morning and discuss the 

Premier’s growth plan for the province. They were very 

impressed. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join in in 

welcoming the realtors who are here in question period today. 

We enjoyed the chance to visit yesterday. But this morning we 

had a group, I think, of more than 25, maybe 30, who met with 

us in our caucus room, and we learned many things about issues 

in Saskatchewan. And what we also learned is that there are 

many aspects of how we organize ourselves in Saskatchewan 

that require further work. And so, Mr. Speaker, we will be 

working with realtors and others to make sure things are better 

here in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. In some 

schools across our province, it’s bring your child to work day, 

and this was a choice that we made in our household very 

recently. So in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me 

to introduce our youngest child, our daughter Faith, who’s in 

grade 9 at the Swift Current Comprehensive High School. She’s 

accompanied today by the itinerary co-ordinator in my office, 

Shannon Andrews, who we’re going to lose soon, at least for a 

time, because her and her husband are determined to help the 

government with its growth plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to introduce Faith to you and 

through you to all the members. Faith had to choose which 

parent she might want to be with today. Tami is going to be 

busy today in her schedule inspecting properties. She’s an 

assessor and so most of it would be outdoors. And I guess I 

won by default, but it’s great to have her here. She is 

academically a high performer. She’s very talented. So in every 

important way, she’s following after her mom. And I’d ask all 

members to welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on expanding cell coverage. And the 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along with the 

adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; Buffalo 

River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of St. George’s Hill; English 

River First Nation, also known as Patuanak, and the 

hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows First Nation along 

with the community of Turnor Lake, including all the 

neighbouring communities in each of these areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 

from Patuanak, from Canoe Lake, from Turnor Lake. And I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 

petition regarding the need for a publicly accessible asbestos 

registry: 

 

Whereas the Government of Saskatchewan has lists 

respecting public buildings that contain asbestos; whereas 

these lists must be accessed individually through freedom 

of information requests pursuant to The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act; whereas 

asbestos that is not properly encapsulated poses a public 

health risk; whereas the availability of information about 

asbestos allows individuals to make informed decisions 

regarding their health and safety. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take immediate action to increase protection of workers, 

patients, students, and the public by passing Bill 604, the 

asbestos right-to-know Act, which will make a list of 

public buildings containing asbestos available to the 

public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of the leadership and community of 

Wollaston Lake. In 2008, February, the government announced 

an all-season road would be built. By the end of construction, 

2012, that road has not been built. 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

That the Government of Saskatchewan stop turning their 

backs on the people from northern Saskatchewan and 

start investing in public highways in the North. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the construction on the 

road to Wollaston Lake, which was started under the 

previous NDP government, has shown little to no progress 

and must be completed quickly. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people from Wollaston Lake. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Day of Remembrance 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on Sunday we mark the 

armistice of November 11th, 1918, and today we held a 

ceremony of remembrance held here at the legislature. I’m 

honoured to recognize all the men and women who currently 

serve and have served our proud nation in pursuit of freedom 

and peace. 

 

Like so many across our province, a history of service to our 

nation is part of my family’s story. My grandfather left 

Saskatchewan a young farmer to serve our nation with the 

distinguished Regina Rifles regiment. Today tucked with pride 

in the pocket of my jacket is my grandfather’s soldier’s service 

and pay book. This book was carried with him from his 

departure to his landing in Normandy and throughout the war. 

The final entry is dated February 18th, 1945. It’s signed by a 

captain named Orchard and simply states, “wounded, 

Germany.” 

 

My grandfather’s service was ended by a bullet in the battle of 

Moyland Wood. These common stories of sacrifice and service 

run deep in this province. They cross political divides and 

communities, and they in part shape us as a nation, a province, 

as families, and as individuals. 

 

It is with pride and respect that I not only remember my 

grandfather, but that I remember all that have served and 

currently serve our proud nation. I ask all members of this 

Assembly to join with me in extending our thanks. May we 

remember and may our resolve for peace be strong. In the 

words of John McCrae, “The torch; be yours to hold it high.” 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

A wreath was laid this morning at the Saskatchewan War 

Memorial as part of the government’s annual Service of 

Remembrance for the Public Service. Today we gather as a 

public service and as a province to remember the deeds of those 

who have given the ultimate sacrifice so we may live in a land 

that knows peace and prosperity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, along with all Canadians, look back in awe at 

the sacrifices that a generation of Canadians made not only for 

our country but for the free world. It is so very important to 

stop and reflect on those men and women who have and 

continue to give so much. 

 

This year marks the 70th anniversary of the battle of Dieppe, 

which took place in 1942 during the Second World War in 

northern France. The battle is considered one of the darkest 

chapters in Canadian military history. Roughly 5,000 Canadian 

soldiers participated in the battle, including soldiers from the 

South Saskatchewan Regiment. More than half of those who 

participated in the raid were killed, wounded, or taken prisoner 

by Axis forces. We remember those brave men and women by 

wearing poppies, attending ceremonies, and visiting memorials. 

We remember on this day, lest we forget, why we must work 

for peace every other day of the year. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Film Industry Workers 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to give you 

a small sampling of the human cost and the loss to our province 

because of the Sask Party government’s decision to cut the film 

employment tax credit. Daryl Davis, moved to Toronto, award 

winning film editor, Gemini nomination for Moccasin Flats, 

editor for Corner Gas. Dean Evans, moved to Calgary, Gemini 

winning film editor. Tamara Harrod, moved to Toronto, 

hairstylist, nominated for a Gemini for The Englishman’s Boy. 

Andrew Gordon, moved to Vancouver, gaffer, SMPIA 

[Saskatchewan Media Production Industry Association] 

Showcase mentor award. Lesley Rosiak, moved to Vancouver, 

make-up artist. Terry Silva, moved to Winnipeg, camera 

assistant. Donavon Fraser, moved to Calgary, camera assistant. 

Ashley Tuchscherer, moved to Toronto, scenic artist. 

 

Rob King, moving to Toronto, Gemini and Canadian Comedy 

award-winning director. Carmen Kotyk, moving to Winnipeg, 

Gemini award-winning casting director. Terry Mialkowsky, 

moving to Toronto, producer-director, first assistant director, 

co-creator of Dust Up airing on Discovery Channel. Shannon 

Jardine, moving to Toronto, actress and producer, two-time 

Showcase award nominee for best actress, co-creator of Dust 

Up airing on Discovery Channel. Nova Herman Alberts, 

moving to the Yukon, communications and development 

programmer for SMPIA, Gemini nomination. Roger Roscue, 

moved to Vancouver, boom operator. Ian McBain, moved to 

Toronto, editor. Jen Egroff, moved to Calgary, leading digital 

content creator. Sheree Fondeur, moved to Vancouver, third 

assistant director. 

 

I see, Mr. Speaker, I’m out of time, but I’m not out of the 

growing list of people who are leaving our province. Thank 

you. 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Skin Cancer Screening 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 

at the Legislative Building, a sun awareness and skin cancer 

screening program was held by the Canadian Dermatologists 

Association. The goal was to shine a light on the growing 

number of incidents of skin cancer in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, skin cancer is the most commonly diagnosed 

cancer in Saskatchewan. In 2009, of the almost 9,000 new 

cancers diagnosed in Saskatchewan, 3,100 were skin cancers. 

Mr. Speaker, men have a higher incidence of the three main 

types of skin cancers: basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell 

carcinoma, and melanoma. 

 

Yesterday Dr. Roberta McKay, a Regina dermatologist and 

regional director of the Canadian Dermatology Association, and 

Regina dermatologist Dr. Karen Holfeld screened 47 MLAs and 

staff for skin cancer at the legislative building. 

 

If detected early, the cure rate for skin cancer is around 90 per 

cent. Dr. Roberta McKay urges everyone to go see their family 

doctor if you have a mole or freckles that change in shape, 

colour, or size, and any lesions that do not heal in four weeks. 

Mr. Speaker, skin cancer is one of the most preventable forms 

of cancer. Simply by limiting sun exposure, using sunscreen, 

and wearing a hat, you can significantly reduce your chances of 

skin cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Dr. 

Roberta McKay and Dr. Karen Holfeld for their educational 

program yesterday. And I encourage everyone to get screened 

for this preventable form of cancer. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Quality of Life Day Program 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in the House to inform all members that construction will begin 

soon on a significant expansion of the Regina branch of the 

Sask Abilities Council. That expansion will enable the Abilities 

Council to launch the new quality of life day program, which in 

turn will help improve the lives of people with intellectual 

disabilities in Regina. Mr. Speaker, the program will provide 

valuable services for 21 people, including 10 individuals from 

the community living wait-list. 

 

Our government is pleased to support this initiative with 

$350,000 in capital funding and annual funding of just over 

$98,000. Our investment in this project is part of our 

commitment to eliminate the wait-list of 440 Saskatchewan 

people with intellectual disabilities who require programs and 

services. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, our government is on pace to reach that 

goal by the end of March 2013, just a few short months from 

now, and our supports of projects like the new quality of life 

program at the Abilities Council will help to ensure that we stay 

on pace. By doing so, we will also make Saskatchewan a best 

place in Canada for people with disabilities. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

honoured to rise in the Assembly today to help celebrate the 

most recent inductees of the Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame. On 

Saturday, November 2nd the Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame 

held its 27th annual induction ceremony and banquet, where 

our Minister of Sport was an invited guest. Mr. Speaker, two 

outstanding Saskatoon athletes, three builders, and two 

Saskatoon-based teams were inducted. 

 

Curtis Leschyshyn, a former member of the Saskatoon Blades 

and Stanley Cup champion with the Colorado Avalanche, and 

Duk Sang Ha, a seven-time Canadian champion in tae kwon do 

and 1999 world championship competitor were inducted as 

athletes. 

 

As well, Mark Tennant, a former coach of the University of 

Saskatchewan women’s volleyball team, was inducted into the 

Hall of Fame as a builder. As coach, he won three consecutive 

Canadian championships. 

 

Judy Warwick, a track and field coach who’s been involved in 

the sport for more than 30 years, and Mr. Dale Yellowlees, the 

voice of track and field and a great Greystone resident, were all 

inducted as builders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 1968 University of Saskatchewan men’s 

cross-country team and the 1988 University of Saskatchewan 

men’s volleyball team were both the 2012 team inductees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in congratulating 

all of the 2012 Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame inductees. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Rams Defeat Huskies for Place in Canada West Finals 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to recognize the University of Regina Rams, who on 

Friday, November 2nd defeated the University of Saskatchewan 

Huskies 31 to 9 to earn a spot in the Hardy Cup. Mr. Speaker, 

the elements held both offences scoreless for the first quarter, 

but the Rams managed to get on track and got their offence 

rolling with a series of long completions. Meanwhile the Rams 

D [defence] held the dogs to a safety and a defensive 

touchdown. Rams quarterback Marc Mueller went 21 for 32 for 

393 yards passing, for 83 per cent of the Rams’ total yards in 

the game. The Rams’ defence put on an impressive 

performance as well, holding the University of Saskatchewan 

Huskies to a total of 190 yards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Rams will go on now to face the number one 

ranked team in Canada, the University of Calgary Dinos, in the 

Canada West finals this weekend in Calgary. The nationally 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

ranked Rams look to continue with their winning ways and earn 

the right to compete for the Vanier Cup. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] Huskies on a valiant effort and wish all their 

players the best of luck in the future, and I ask all members to 

join me in congratulating the University of Regina Rams with a 

resounding win. I want U of R [University of Regina] players, 

coaches, and staff to know that they have a whole province 

behind them as they march towards a national championship. 

Go Rams. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry and Other Creative 

Industries 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A year ago today, 

Saskatchewan families in the film and television industry 

couldn’t imagine they would soon have to leave their province 

to earn a living. In fact the Sask Party 2011 platform bragged 

about having increased the funding for the Saskatchewan film 

employment tax credit. Mr. Speaker, that is the platform that 

this minister and his government ran on. 

 

How could this government run on a platform of support for the 

film industry and a tax credit only to take the opposite approach 

just a few short months later? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I have said before in this House and I’ve said to my 

honourable friend, there is no other business in the province of 

Saskatchewan that enjoys a 45 per cent refundable tax credit on 

their labour cost, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure every business would 

love to have that opportunity. So that being said, Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Finance and this government made some 

difficult decisions this past budget to eliminate this refundable 

tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are now going through a consultation process with our 

creative industries to come up with a mechanism to support, in 

a fair manner, Mr. Speaker, across the piece, all of our creative 

industries in the province of Saskatchewan, a long-term 

sustainable mechanism to support those industries. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supporters across 

Canada are taking to social media today to stand with the 

Saskatchewan film industry and challenge the Sask Party’s poor 

decision to end this tax credit. People from across Canada are 

showing their support on Facebook and Twitter. In fact 

#supportSKfilm, as of noon today, was the top trending topic in 

Canada on Twitter with more than 2 million people having seen 

it. Canadians are shocked to see this once thriving 

Saskatchewan film industry cut off by the knees, or at the knees 

by the Sask Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier is a fan of social media when it comes 

to garden gnomes and fishing derbies. What does he have to 

tweet to all those who support the Saskatchewan film industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I indicated in my previous answer, we are undertaking a 

consultation process with our creative industries in this 

province to come up with a long-term, sustainable mechanism 

for support in a fair manner, Mr. Speaker. As the president of 

SMPIA, the Saskatchewan media industry production 

association, wrote to me on October 3rd — these are her words, 

Mr. Speaker, Holly Baird, the president of SMPIA, not mine — 

in requesting a new support mechanism in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Ms. Baird went on to say, and I quote, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

It should support greater Saskatchewan expenditures to 

promote industry sustainability. It should be as cost 

neutral as possible. It needs to meet sector requirements 

while not participating in what is seen as a bidding war. 

And it cannot be a tax-related initiative [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

We have had a number of consultation meetings with all of the 

creative industries across the province, Mr. Speaker. We are 

working towards building a model that we can present to all of 

the creative industries that will be fair and sustainable. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A year ago today 

the Premier said, “We will be a government that keeps its 

promises, that admits easily of mistakes. We will make them. 

We’ll take responsibility for them. We will fix them.” 

 

These are good words, Mr. Speaker, but they certainly ring 

hollow because the Premier has had many months and many 

opportunities to admit his mistake on the film tax credit. So far 

this has not happened. But it isn’t too late. The Premier can 

stand today and admit that the people of Saskatchewan did not 

vote to kill the film industry. He’d be a better person for it. Will 

the Premier do the right thing, admit his colossal mistake and 

fix the mess he’s made, starting today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, a year ago today the 

people of Saskatchewan spoke loud and clear about the 

platform they wanted to see implemented in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, a year ago today, the people of 

Saskatchewan voted 64 per cent for this party and its platform 

which included as the base principle, Mr. Speaker, a balanced 

budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve said to the people of Saskatchewan that we 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

were going to make difficult budget decisions — difficult 

budget decisions to invest in people living with disabilities, Mr. 

Speaker, to invest in seniors, seniors, Mr. Speaker, low-income 

seniors, our most vulnerable seniors in the province. At the end 

of this mandate, we will have tripled the seniors’ income plan, 

Mr. Speaker. We also campaigned on removing 115,000 

low-income people, Mr. Speaker, off the provincial tax rolls. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I often get the hon. member telling me that 

Manitoba is the model that we ought to be following. A single 

mother making $25,000 a year, Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba, pays 

almost 400 per cent more provincial income tax than in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We think that’s better public policy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Status of Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party spent the 

better part of last year trying to convince Saskatchewan people 

that the budget was balanced, but as the numbers rolled in and 

as the facts hit the paper, the Sask Party was forced to admit 

something else: it was another budget deficit, the third in a row 

in fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the Sask Party wasted no time to distract from that by 

focusing on next year, our current year, and claiming it had 

tabled a balanced budget. They even spent public dollars on 

expensive billboards trying to make that claim. At the financial 

first quarter, they continued to make this claim. Mr. Speaker, 

this budget’s supposed balance has been precarious from day 

one. Does that minister stand by his claim of budgetary balance 

here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, this government and the Saskatchewan Party are 

very proud of this budget. Mr. Speaker, it is the only balanced 

budget in all of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand where the opposition comes from. 

The opposition, Mr. Speaker, was at a time when this province 

was under severe decline. Mr. Speaker, we are looking at a 

province that is moving forward. We have a growth agenda, 

Mr. Speaker, and with growth there are challenges: no doubt, 

Mr. Speaker. We want to be able to spend more money on 

infrastructure. We want to be able to spend more money on 

utilization, Mr. Speaker, because with 80,000 more people — 

something that that opposition over there knows nothing about, 

Mr. Speaker — we have challenges that we are meeting. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is a balanced budget. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Clearly, Mr. Speaker, that government 

doesn’t let the facts stand in its way, Mr. Speaker, evidenced in 

that answer. Mr. Speaker, at budget, government projected 

$705 million for its potash revenues, a 56 per cent increase over 

the previous year. We felt that number was inflated, overly 

optimistic. As Finance critic I sounded cautions moments after 

the budget was tabled: 

 

As an area of caution, it would seem that this government 

is possibly once again betting too much on a large increase 

in potash revenues. If this rosy prediction does not pan 

out, this budget’s foundation is damaged. 

 

We’re still concerned, Mr. Speaker, and the government hasn’t 

shared any information to refute these concerns. To the 

minister: be straight with Saskatchewan people. What is the 

current projection for potash revenues, and is it on track? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when we tabled the quarter 1 estimates, we made some 

adjustments, Mr. Speaker, in the first quarter. We had adjusted 

our projections on the non-renewable resource sector. Mr. 

Speaker, we had built into our budget $3.1 billion worth of 

revenue from the non-renewable resource sector, and in the first 

three months we knew that that estimate for the oil and gas 

industry was high. And we made those changes, Mr. Speaker, 

after Q1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be delivering to the people of 

Saskatchewan the mid-year forecast. The mid-year forecast will 

contain the update for the summary financial statement, Mr. 

Speaker. It will contain the answers to the very questions that 

the member asks. So I ask him just to bear with us, Mr. 

Speaker, as all of the material is compiled. And, Mr. Speaker, 

very soon, in the month of November, we will indicate to the 

people of Saskatchewan our mid-year, which will be a report on 

the growth and revenue fund plus the summary financial 

statements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on budget day, as Finance 

critic I raised concern over the budget and its impact on people 

and communities, and if this budget was once again not 

trustworthy. In the first quarter financial report, this 

government downgraded, as mentioned, some of its revenues 

and announced $55 million of cuts. Yet those cuts have never 

been detailed or described to the public. 

 

This government owes Saskatchewan people the straight goods 

on the cuts it has made or the cuts it plans to make. Many 

people and communities are anxious and quite simply 

concerned over this. Cuts certainly do impact people. To the 

minister: where were these cuts made? What were the impacts 

on Saskatchewan people? And are there further cuts coming at 

mid-year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

one of the things that we will do is to provide all of the 

information that the member is asking for, Mr. Speaker. The 

province’s budget has been noticed by many — the last, in fact 

the last five budgets, Mr. Speaker. The province of 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

Saskatchewan has just received a credit rating update, Mr. 

Speaker. We have a AAA credit rating. Mr. Speaker, the only 

time in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the member asks questions 

when he can’t even answer the questions asked by Erin Weir. 

Erin Weir asked the questions of the leadership candidate over 

there: say, you know, the proposal that you have before us, in 

fact for his leadership campaign, Mr. Speaker, is a deficit, Mr. 

Speaker, a deficit plan. Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member 

opposite that in mid-year all of his concerns will be addressed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the government put 

forward a budget with a flawed foundation from day one. 

Instead of tracking the markets, making adjustments, and being 

straight with Saskatchewan people, they embarked on an 

expensive game of budgetary spin, boastful billboards touting 

its precarious budget. The problem is while the billboards were 

saying one thing, the government’s balance sheet was telling an 

entirely different story. One was fiction, the other fact. 

 

Now government’s draining again from the rainy day fund. It’s 

adopted a costly privatized approach to infrastructure, and it’s 

starting to liquidate its assets, putting ISC [Information 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], as an example, up for 

sale. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of spinning the reality and damaging, 

short-sighted budgetary tricks and sell-offs that don’t serve our 

best interests, when will this government level with 

Saskatchewan people about the true state of our finances and 

start managing them properly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

opposite knows that in planning a budget we rely on a lot of 

input, Mr. Speaker, the input from Global Insight, the input 

from the Conference Board of Canada, the information from the 

Centre for Spatial Economics, TD [Toronto Dominion] Bank, 

RBC [Royal Bank of Canada], Bank of Montreal, CIBC 

[Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce], Scotiabank, Mr. 

Speaker. And also we rely on the private sector to supply the 

numbers, Mr. Speaker, that we built into the budget. 

 

No one knows, Mr. Speaker, what is happening in the world 

and how it will affect the price of a barrel of oil, how it will 

affect the price of potash, Mr. Speaker. Those are things that we 

need to pay attention to as the year moves through, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is still going to lead 

in many, many categories, Mr. Speaker. We know that that is of 

keen interest to the people of Saskatchewan. It’s of interest to 

the people that are coming to this province and continuing on 

our growth agenda. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Potential for Small Nuclear Reactors 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People are noticing 

that the Premier often makes surprise announcements to the 

people by musing out loud to the media. It’s a very odd habit. 

He’s introducing complex topics without any announcement 

either in the Sask Party’s pre-Throne Speech growth plan, the 

Throne Speech itself, or even their election platform. It appears 

to be an agenda of secrecy and surprise. 

 

The latest example is yesterday’s musings about bringing 

nuclear power to the province’s North. When he had an 

opportunity to maybe discuss a plan for long-term care facilities 

and roads in the North, Mr. Speaker, the Premier instead chose 

to announce he is looking at nuclear power generation in the 

North. Why did the Premier suddenly announce plans to 

develop nuclear power in the North? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, because the press 

gallery were asking some very good questions. We were having 

a discussion I think about the recent trade agreement, the recent 

nuclear co-operation agreement that we’ve struck with India. 

We want to acknowledge the fact that our Prime Minister, the 

federal government, have now two important markets for our 

uranium, have opened them up through nuclear co-operation 

agreements. I think it’s the first time in the history of a federal 

government, of a Prime Minister, to take that very specific 

Saskatchewan issue and put it on the table in terms of the 

potential for uranium sales in India and in China. And so as we 

discussed about ways to add value to uranium — I think it was 

a columnist from the Leader-Post was asking about 

value-added opportunities — we pointed out that, you know, 

perhaps down the road in northern Canada there’s a case for 

small-reactor technology development in these remote areas. So 

I simply agreed that this is the kind of value-added we needed 

to do. 

 

This was part of our innovation agenda. We want to be leading 

in this regard. That’s why we funded the Sylvia Fedoruk 

Canadian Centre For Nuclear Innovation at the University of 

Saskatchewan. We’ve got partners with Hitachi, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s where that comes from. It comes from a good discussion 

in the province of Saskatchewan, just out there, one that we’re 

happy to have with her as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s new 

weather balloon idea on nuclear power generation came in 

without any warning. He said, “Is there an opportunity in the 

mid and the long term for small reactors, 20, 30, 40 megawatts? 

We think there is.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan already participated 

in earnest in the Perrins commission in 2009, the Sask Party 

government’s own study. The Perrins report was clear: “The 

overwhelming response to this public consultation was that 

nuclear power generation should not be a choice for 

Saskatchewan.” But yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has 

already chosen the location and a new reactor and figured out 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

what size it would be. If he has already a plan developed, Mr. 

Speaker, why doesn’t he release it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a two-year-old 

secret. Mr. Speaker, this side of the House announced a couple 

of years ago, maybe longer, that we would be funding the 

Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation at the University of 

Saskatchewan. We announced our vision for reclaiming 

leadership in nuclear medicine. That was part of it, and that is 

exactly what we’ve been doing. 

 

But we also said then that we want to lead in terms of R & D 

[research and development] into potential small-reactor 

development. We even announced thereafter that we had a 

partnership with Hitachi. Hitachi is a partner in that centre . . . 

Well she’s shaking her head. She ought to get on the Google 

and just research it, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what the 

government said. We have a partnership with Hitachi. Hitachi’s 

interested in small nuclear technology. This is a 

two-and-half-year-old secret. 

 

I can get why the hon. members are asking questions. They are 

uncomfortable even with mining uranium in this province. 

They’re uncomfortable with the fact that half of the workforce 

in those mines are First Nations. They’re uncomfortable with 

adding any value to it at all. We’re not. We want to lead, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, of course the people 

of Saskatchewan support research involving nuclear medicine. 

And of course they support research about all forms of energy, 

including developing renewables and the cost of each type of 

energy production. But, Mr. Speaker, even small reactors being 

developed in China have price tags in the neighbourhood of $1 

billion. That’s why people have clear concerns about nuclear 

power generation — because of the high fiscal and 

environmental costs. 

 

Nuclear power seems to be the only egg in the Premier’s basket 

when it comes to sustaining our growing energy needs. If 

nuclear power in the North is the Sask Party government’s new 

policy, where is the public consultation? And what will this 

new policy cost the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, there is no 

surprise here. A couple of years ago the government announced 

it would be funding, at the University of Saskatchewan, the 

creation of the Canadian Nuclear Innovation Centre. It’s now 

been named for Dr. Fedoruk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t very long ago — five decades ago or so 

— when this province was a leader in terms of nuclear 

medicine. This is the province that pioneered cobalt treatment. 

And since then, after years of that member’s party in power, the 

CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] in power, after 

their discomfort with anything having to do with uranium, this 

sort of a very uncomfortable relationship even with mining 

uranium, we have lost our advantage. 

 

We have lost our advantage in this important sector, though we 

mine 20 per cent of the world’s uranium, though 44 per cent of 

the workforce is Aboriginal in terms of the mining of that 

uranium, though we’re home to one of the world’s leading 

companies, in fact the leading company in the world in 

uranium. They are uncomfortable. Many that support their party 

— and we’ve heard from them — would like to ban uranium 

mining altogether, Mr. Speaker. They are on the wrong side of 

the uranium issue, and until they understand that, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re going to be out of step with northern development 

opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Funding for Health Sciences Building 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not uncomfortable with the 

topic, and that’s why we’re asking questions. Our concerns are 

with the lack of transparency and the lack of detail that has 

been provided by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this week in question period, we discussed 

how the Sask Party government has cast a cloud of doubt over 

the College of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan by 

breaking its promise to fund the Health Sciences Building at the 

University of Saskatchewan and calling into question, raising 

doubts whether or not the board of governors are able to go 

ahead on this vitally important project to have it completed. 

This could raise serious implications for the College of 

Medicine, affecting accreditation and its national reputation. 

 

My question to the minister: at a time when so many 

communities need physicians here in Saskatchewan, why will 

he not ensure that the College of Medicine is on sound footing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware of the issues and 

challenges that exist at the College of Medicine. These are 

things that have existed for a large number of years, mostly 

under the period of time when the members opposite were in 

government. 

 

Since the time that we’ve formed government, Mr. Speaker, we 

have done the Academic Health Sciences Building, and we’re 

supplying major funding for the upgrade of C and D wings. Mr. 

Speaker, I can also advise the members opposite and advise the 

House that the University of Saskatchewan is looking at issues 

regarding A and B wings and what the cost ramifications are of 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan takes those issues 

very seriously. I’ve had a number of meetings with the 

president of the university, and she is working carefully with 

the college. We respect their independence, but we will 

continue to work with them and watch carefully to ensure that 

things go as they should within that college, Mr. Speaker. 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Physician Locum Programs 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, of course the university president 

and administration is taking this seriously. What we need is for 

the government to also take this seriously and live up to its 

election commitment to fully fund the Health Sciences 

Building. 

 

It’s not just the long-term supply of physicians where the Sask 

Party is dropping the ball, as we’ve seen with their actions with 

the Health Sciences Building. There’s also a huge, immediate 

need in many communities for physicians throughout the 

province. Right now we know that there are 118 physician 

vacancies posted online. 

 

In last year’s Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, there was a promise 

of 20 new locum doctors to serve communities on a short-time 

basis and this was not to replace, but to also work alongside the 

existing locum program provided by the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association. My question to the minister: how many physicians 

are currently working in the new locum program? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much. I want to thank 

the member for his question. Certainly we are well aware what 

the needs are throughout Saskatchewan when it comes to the 

physician issue, Mr. Speaker. This government has put in place 

a 10-year health human resource plan, Mr. Speaker, that speaks 

not just to physicians but to other health care professionals, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We are, as the member knows and has referenced in his 

question, we are working on a new rural locum program, Mr. 

Speaker. What we want to do is work with regions so that those 

regions have at their disposal, not just locums through the SMA 

[Saskatchewan Medical Association] program that is already in 

existence, but also a dedicated regional locum program so that 

regions themselves have at their disposal locums to move 

throughout the regions to address service disruptions when 

those occur. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the context is fine and helpful, 

but the question was: how many physicians are working in the 

new locum program right now? We know the Sask Party has a 

long way to go to have the full complement of 20 physicians 

that it has promised to be working in the program. 

 

There’s currently an existing locum program provided by the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, which provides relief 

coverage to rural communities across Saskatchewan. The SMA 

has run this program effectively, directly assisting physician 

practices in rural Saskatchewan, but it hasn’t always been easy 

for the SMA to recruit enough physicians into the program. As 

the minister struggles to find enough physicians for his new 

program, this will inevitably create competition as the SMA is 

also seeking to attract physicians into the existing rural relief 

program. 

 

My question to the minister: is this new program banned from 

poaching physicians from the existing relief program provided 

by the Saskatchewan Medical Association? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, certainly, certainly we 

want to see this new locum, rural locum program, complement 

the work that’s already being done by the SMA with their 

locum program. However, Mr. Speaker, we do know that 

through the SMA program, that is really seen as a short-term 

solution to some of the issues that is being faced, particularly in 

rural or remote areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rural locum program that was announced by 

this government, what we are looking to do is to provide 

assistance to regional health authorities to have essentially their 

own regional locum program, so that on a, what I would say 

would be a longer time frame, a locum could be utilized in 

particularly rural and remote areas while perhaps that region is 

waiting for a physician going through the SIPPA 

[Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment] 

program or other recruitment. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while this isn’t intended to certainly replace or 

duplicate the SMA rural locum program. It’s really to enhance 

the services that regions have at their disposal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Again, Mr. Speaker, no answer to the question: 

how many physicians are practising currently in the new 

program? Many communities struggle to find physicians and 

have them practising in their towns. And we’ve seen this 

routinely cause bidding wars as RMs [rural municipality], 

towns, NGOs [non-governmental organization] work together, 

Mr. Speaker, in order to attract physicians to their community. 

 

Many people are concerned that the new locum program may 

make it more difficult to recruit local doctors to specific 

communities, especially when the province may have deeper 

pockets than what a non-profit operating in the community may 

have. My question to the minister: on behalf of the many 

communities that are working hard to attract physicians to their 

towns, how will he ensure that the new locum program does not 

take physicians away from the communities that are doing the 

hard work right now for long-term supply of physicians? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly know that we 

need to be and have been working with regional health 

authorities and communities as it relates to recruiting and 

retaining physicians across this province, Mr. Speaker. This 

idea that communities are involved in the recruitment process 

certainly isn’t a new fact, a new idea, Mr. Speaker. In fact this 

summer I attended a centennial celebration in my constituency, 

Mr. Speaker. And as a part of that celebration they read out a 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

bit of the history of the RM, and about 90 years ago the RM put 

money in to recruit physicians. So we know that this is 

something that hasn’t happened just in the last five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we announced that we wanted to move forward 

with a new program, with a 20 rural locum pool, Mr. Speaker. 

We think that we could have approximately 11 by the end of 

this year, Mr. Speaker. It is a four-year commitment, though. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s a part of our plan to recruit physicians 

through a new program for international and through more 

training seats here at home. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Safety for Late-Night Workers 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to rise in the Assembly to introduce a workplace safety 

measure that will improve the safety and security of workers in 

late-night retail establishments. Our government is committed 

to promoting workers because they are the province’s most 

important resource. They set us apart from other jurisdictions 

across the country and around the world. We are taking further 

steps to protect the health and safety of Saskatchewan workers. 

 

In June of 2011 while working at a gas station in Yorkton, 

Jimmy Ray Wiebe was murdered. The tragic murder of Jimmy 

Wiebe brought the discussion of workplace violence to the 

forefront. Employers have an obligation to protect employees 

from violence in the workplace. To ensure that we are doing 

everything to protect vulnerable workers, officials from the 

Ministry of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety canvassed 

safety legislation in other provinces and met with stakeholders. 

They provided input on ways to improve violence protection for 

workers and late-night retail workers in particular. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to share with you that we are 

implementing regulations requiring employers to provide 

additional protections for late-night retail workers providing 

services between the hours of 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. These 

measures include safe cash handling procedures, use of video 

cameras, and the provision of appropriate visibility and signage 

for all late-night retail premises. Most importantly the 

regulation will require a check-in system and personal 

emergency transmitter be provided to all workers working 

alone in late-night retail. As well employers will also be 

required to conduct a workplace hazard assessment. The 

additional protections are effective and enforceable. They are 

best practices modelled after other jurisdictions. We will work 

diligently to educate workplaces and continue enforcement 

efforts to achieve compliance and ensure safety for late-night 

retail workers. 

 

With this announcement we honour Jimmy Wiebe, and we 

thank Aaron Nagy who worked faithfully and tirelessly to 

advocate for additional protection for late-night retail workers. I 

also want to thank Andrew Klukas, who is here in the visitor’s 

gallery today, and the Western Convenience Stores Association 

for their co-operation and input. Mr. Speaker, I also want to 

recognize the member opposite who has also made this a 

significant cause for him and also has a family member that has 

been involved in a workplace incident. 

 

Our government values and respects the contribution of 

Saskatchewan’s working population, and we want to ensure that 

Jimmy Wiebe did not die in vain. Because of him, many people 

in Saskatchewan will have even greater protection than before. 

We will continue to enforce, monitor, and update best practices. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

thank the minister for sharing a copy of the statement with me 

in advance and for the many conversations we’ve had over the 

past year leading up to today’s statement. 

 

I do want to congratulate the government for their work in 

passing these regulations. The NDP [New Democratic Party] is 

pleased that a year of advocacy for Jimmy’s law has led to an 

increase in safety regulations for late-night retail workers. And 

although they fall short of the measures we were proposing in 

our private member’s bill named Jimmy’s law, I believe it’s a 

positive step forward and will be a welcome improvement for 

workers and their families. 

 

Following the introduction of my private member’s bill, I 

conducted a late-night tour of workplaces around the province 

and visited with workers on the night shift in eight different 

cities. What I heard is that they felt vulnerable and anxious. 

Everyone working a night shift is keenly aware of those tragic 

cases where an employee has become a victim. I want to as well 

acknowledge the pain faced by the families and friends of these 

victims. Survivors continue to live on with the memory of what 

has happened, and the healing is difficult. 

 

One of these victims was Jimmy Wiebe, the namesake for our 

private member’s bill. Jimmy deserved better protection. All 

workers deserve better protection, therefore steps to increase 

security and workplace safety are needed and welcome. And as 

I said, the new regulations are a good first step, but enforcement 

of the new regulations will be critical. According to a hazard 

alert released by the ministry’s own occupational health and 

safety division in May, non-compliance with the existing lower 

safety requirements was only 80 per cent. Making sure that 

business owners and workers are aware of and following the 

rules is an important part, ongoing part of governing. 

 

I too want to thank several people who helped contribute to the 

success of our campaign to bring safer working conditions to 

late-night workers. And they include in our own caucus staff, in 

helping produce the petition, the bill, our researcher Rod 

Scansen; the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour], Lori 

Johb, Heath Smith and Larry Hubich, amongst others; Darren 

Kaytor, a survivor of two late night robberies this past spring in 

Saskatoon who came out with us on our tour and was very 

eloquent; and of course Aaron Nagy who really was the driving 

force behind this all. And I too want to acknowledge the Wiebe 

family for their support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I conclude, I want to acknowledge the human 

face of workplace safety and in particular the clerks who work 

in vulnerable at-risk situations such as late-night retail. It is so 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

personal because almost all of us know someone who works a 

late shift. These people are often young, perhaps their first job. 

Sometimes they are retirees just trying to make ends meet or 

students working in order to afford a higher education. These 

are people with dreams, and they are people with families and 

friends who have connections to our community. They are 

people who deserve to be safe in their workplace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve read into the record over the course of the 

past year names of clerks and others across Canada who’ve 

died violently in their workplace, not to mention the untold 

number of near misses of dangerous occurrences. Now on a 

personal note, I want to, I’d like to thank the minister for his 

thoughtful words, as our own family has experienced first-hand 

last month the harsh reality of a late-night robbery. Fortunately 

our daughter wasn’t harmed, and for that we are thankful. 

 

I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that today our actions are an 

important first step in making our province a safer place to 

work. That is our job as legislators, and I am encouraged by the 

progress on our journey. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 59, 

The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 59, The Animal Identification 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the question ? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 60, 

The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 60, The Animal Products Amendment 

Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 62, 

The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport that Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 

2012 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport that Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now introduced and 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 65, The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved first reading of Bill No. 65, The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Transportation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

privilege to rise and speak about Bill No. 61, an Act to amend 

the railway amendment Act. The Railway Amendment Act 

outlines the railway abandonment process, which requires 

railway owners to offer to sell their railway lines to interested 

parties before being allowed to permanently abandon their 

railway. The abandonment process requires that a railway 

owner first advertise their intentions to either sell or abandon 

the line and invite any expressions of interest from buyers. 

Currently the Highway Traffic Board has insufficient authority 

to remedy a situation where either the seller or the potential 

buyer is negotiating in bad faith. 

 

In the government purchase phase, a municipal government is 

required to either decline or accept the offer to purchase the net 

salvage value within 60 days of receiving the offer, and they 

can only request a net salvage value after they have accepted 

the offer. As a result, they are forced to make a critical decision 

without knowing what the exact purchase price will be. 

 

It was therefore proposed that The Railway Act be amended to 

adopt the following provisions. To address bad faith negotiation 

allegations against the seller during the sale phase, we are 

proposing to give the Highway Traffic Board new powers to 

evaluate the dispute and, if necessary, issue an order to the 

parties to enter an agreement that the board believes is fair and 

reasonable. Alternatively if the board believes the potential 

buyer is negotiating in bad faith, the board has the authority to 

relieve the seller of their obligation to continue negotiating with 

the interested party. 

 

In order to give municipal governments more comfort in their 

decision to accept the offer to purchase, we are proposing an 

amendment that will allow municipal governments the 

opportunity to request a net salvage value cost estimate before 

accepting the offer. Ultimately the need for these changes stems 

from insuring that abandon process provides an interested buyer 

with every opportunity to reach a fair agreement with the 

railway seller. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 61, An Act to 

amend The Railway Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways and Transportation 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 61, The Railway 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is the Assembly . . . I recognize the 

member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise once again on behalf of the opposition to give 

our initial comments on Bill 61, which is really an Act to 

amend the railway system throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan. As I understand, the minister with some of his 

speaking points raised the notion that some of these railway 

companies throughout our province decide to sell their line 

either through a salvage process or even selling it to somebody 

who might even want to retain the rights to run the rail system 

in that particular area. It gives us a lot of . . . there’s a lot of 

different information that we need to find out, and we need to 

seek to see whether this is a good option or not. 

 

Obviously from the opposition perspective, we want to be able 

to utilize the rail system throughout Saskatchewan as best we 

can because we know that the stress and strain on the highway 

system throughout northern Saskatchewan and southern and 

south Saskatchewan and all throughout our provinces, that 

really that there is a lot of strain on the highway system.  

 

And you can see evidence of that, whether it’s a truck hauling 

ore out of the North or whether it’s a farmer hauling grain from 

their field, that a lot of the stress has been placed from the 

railway system back onto the highway system, Mr. Speaker, 

through our grid roads and our main highways that we see the 

stress. And we see the strain of all the traffic and, of course, 

hauling all the products on the highways. So obviously it 

doesn’t make sense that the province and the people of 

Saskatchewan look at the option that was available many, many 

years ago at a greater rate, and that’s to use the rail system that 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So this is a very interesting bill, Mr. Speaker, because 

obviously at the outset the people of Saskatchewan would say, 

yes I think a rail transportation system would be advantageous. 

How would we run these systems? How would we pay for the 

purchase of these rights to, you know, to run freight on rail, and 

so on and so forth? Because we know that there are a number of 

major rail companies, whether it’s VIA or some of the other rail 

operators in the country, that used to have running rights in the 

province and have since abandoned Saskatchewan and, quite 

frankly, abandoned rural Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a lot of questions about why they done that, and the hurt 

and the harm that they caused not only the agricultural sector, 

but the economy in general, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this bill, I think at the outset that there’s a lot of points that I 

want to raise on this bill, primarily because I think people 

haven’t had the time to really discuss the issue of folks that I 

see on my trips back home now and then the fact that they’re 

tearing up rail lines. And to me, I think that that’s a huge, 

colossal waste of money because the rail lines are there. It 

could be a valuable tool to haul a number of freight cars loaded 

with farm products and loaded with forestry products and so on 

and so forth. Why can’t they simply keep that line running? 

Because I’m sure it could be used. 

 

And it’s kind of a disappointment to me, Mr. Speaker, when we 

see the fact that these rail lines are being torn up. And 

obviously this bill speaks about the opportunity for both the 

buyer and the seller and the province to inject themselves in the 

process. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s only fair that we do 

that to see what is going on. Because obviously you would 

assume that after six years the Saskatchewan Party government 

would have figured this out, but it’s taken them six years, and 

how many more tracks and how many kilometres of track have 

we lost in the meantime? 

 

So that’s one of the things I think is really important. Is this too 

little too late to help alleviate the stress on our highway system? 

I believe it is, Mr. Speaker. Now how many more kilometres is 

this Act going to impact, Mr. Speaker? I don’t know that 

information. The minister didn’t allude to it, didn’t speak about 

it. So we need to find that out. 

 

As well we also need to find out the basic information, like how 

many different tracks are being owned and operated by 

producer-friendly co-operatives? Is there any tracks owned by 

municipal co-operatives? Is there any private track operatives in 

the province that have an interest in any of these tracks that are 

deemed to be expendable by the major players and therefore for 

sale? A lot of this information, as an opposition, we need to 

have. 

 

Now I don’t know what the larger railway companies would 

have to say about this particular Act and, you know, the 

companies that abandoned Saskatchewan. And my only point is 

that I don’t want to . . . I really don’t care what they have to say 

about the whole notion of what their decision is on the railway 

system in Saskatchewan, because they did abandon the 

producer. They did abandon our province and, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

something that I don’t think we should encourage in terms of 

having consultation with them. 

But we ought to be able to put some measures in there that will 

protect the Saskatchewan people’s interest on a continual basis, 

and I do hope that this bill is able to salvage some of the tracks 

that are out there that could be used or could be purchased, or 

there could be some good discussion on how different groups 

can purchase the track and keep the track running for their own 

purposes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that when you look at the 

notion of bad faith . . . Now obviously bad faith has got a lot of 

legal connotations to it. Perhaps these companies — and I pray 

that it’s not case — but some of these larger companies would 

want to keep running rights away from some of these 

co-operatives. Because obviously they have a business interest 

and the large corporations want to be able to keep control of 

how many railway systems are operational, how much are 

being hauled by the transportation system of rail. 

 

So all these questions that the major companies would have an 

interest in, we have to know exactly what their end game is in, 

Mr. Speaker. I doubt very much if the ministry and this 

particular minister has that information, but it’d be very 

valuable if we did have the information as to what their future 

plans are when it comes to Saskatchewan. 

 

At the outset, Mr. Speaker, I spoke about the value to our 

economy if we’re able to transfer as much of the produce 

transferred throughout our province, if you were able to have a 

good system of rail and then highway. There’s no question 

about it, that if we had a complementary role and that we’re 

able to envision this, Mr. Speaker, that it’d be a really 

important, important, vital piece to rural Saskatchewan to have 

that transportation system call a rail line. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know in Meadow Lake that there’s been 

lot of discussions with the RM, with the town of Meadow Lake, 

on having a rail system that would be able to serve that region 

from Meadow Lake to North Battleford. Now I don’t know how 

far along that this particular government has had and the 

success that they have had in trying to forward that particular 

argument, that particular case. I know that I did attend a 

meeting with the RM and that there was a few people from the 

town of Meadow Lake as well, or the city now, and they did 

talk about the fact that they needed support on purchasing some 

of these lines and that they needed ongoing support. 

 

So when we talk about bad faith, Mr. Speaker, I’m not just 

simply referencing the parties that may want to buy the rights to 

the rail system in a specified area or the party that wants to sell 

those rights, Mr. Speaker. I’m also talking about the 

government in terms of their faith in helping this system along. 

 

Now in the case of Meadow Lake, if they’re not going to help 

the RM and the city of Meadow Lake to have this rail system 

put in place so they’re able to transfer a lot of goods produced 

in that particular area to North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, then 

there’s a bit of bad faith on the province as well. Because you 

can’t just simply say that we want to look at how they’re selling 

these lines. You’ve got to also come up with a solution on how 

you fund and finance these lines to help the people really keep 

that rail line system going. And I know that there’s a lot of 

discussions, Mr. Speaker. We’re privy to some of them, but this 

is one example of how a town or a city has been trying to reach 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

out to this government to help address two things. One is to 

keep their economy moving, and a big part of that economic 

building is to ensure that you have a way to transfer and 

transport your goods and services that you produce in that area. 

And the second point that the people would make is that we 

ought to have a complementary system between a rail-line 

system and a highway system. Because if you don’t have both, 

then the stress of transporting all those goods and services 

produced out of Meadow Lake area is all transferred to one part 

of that system, which is called the highway system. 

 

So I know they’ve been working very hard, the RM and the city 

and many producers and many business people. They are 

working hard to try and get this rail-line system going. But my 

real question, Mr. Speaker, when a minister makes reference to 

bad faith, is there some bad faith on the part of the government 

by not adequately supporting them financially to put that line in 

place? Because the end result is there is less strain on our 

highway system as a result of a line, a rail-line that ran from 

Meadow Lake to North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the obvious answer is yes. I think there’s a great business 

case made for that line and I think people were very, very 

surprised that when all the opportunity came for the province to 

do something about it, they simply walked away from all the 

discussion. And Meadow Lake was once again left to look at 

themselves as the only people that are advocating for this in 

supporting this notion. And I think that in many, many ways 

there was a lot of bad faith expressed and shown by the Sask 

Party government towards the Meadow Lake folks that were 

trying to retain the right to run a rail-line system from Meadow 

Lake to North Battleford, which would’ve been good for their 

economic activity and good for the entire region, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we look at some of the notions and the comments and the 

initial look at this bill. There are many, many ways. There are 

many, many ways that we would like to ensure the people of 

Saskatchewan have a good transportation system 

complemented by a great rail-line system that is owned and 

operated by co-operatives throughout the province. Nothing 

wrong with that concept at all, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely nothing 

wrong with that concept. 

 

So you know, when you hear bills of this sort coming forward, 

Bill 61, we really want to pay a lot of attention to it. We want to 

pay a lot of attention to it because what again I point out is that, 

if it is an effort to stop the multinational rail-line corporation 

from really hurting Saskatchewan’s growth, simply for the 

reason they don’t want to see any competition in our province, 

then we don’t want to focus the blame on the people that are 

trying to build these rail-line co-operatives. They’re the ones 

that are trying to make a difference, Mr. Speaker, and we have 

to capitalize on that. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So we need to tell the multinational rail-line companies that, if 

you’re going to start tearing up tracks and you’re going to start 

selling these running rights without any consultation with the 

people of the impacted area, then something ought to be done 

about that to stop that. We absolutely, totally agree, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’ll continue having and holding that strong 

belief. 

On the flip side, if the community co-operatives, as evidenced 

in Meadow Lake, put together a compelling plan and a business 

plan to have the rail-line system developed in consort with them 

as partners and then we don’t do anything to help support them 

in that regard, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that considered bad faith as a 

government? And the answer is, absolutely. It is considered bad 

faith. Because not only are you hurting that economy, you’re 

hurting all these different economies along that route that could 

have benefited from a really, really superior transportation 

system that has a road component to it, a highway component 

to it, but also has a rail-line transportation system as part of that 

overall transportation strategy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of questions that we have on this 

particular bill. I look at the comments the minister made in 

reference to net salvage value assessment option. Obviously it’s 

pretty self-explanatory that, in a sense, that if they want to sell a 

line, they look at the net salvage value of the line if there’s no 

economic value. How do you figure out those values, Mr. 

Speaker, if you’re not giving the communities the opportunity 

to purchase those lines when they’re intact and the running 

rights that many of these large corporations may own? How 

could you actually go down the path to say, well before 

anything happens, let’s look at the net salvage value of that 

line? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s almost as if they’re giving up 

before they even got into the fight. 

 

And I say, shame to the Saskatchewan Party that you should 

capitalize on the energy and on the enthusiasm of the people of 

the Meadow Lake area that had been asking you for years to 

support their system of rail-line development, to support their 

system and their request to develop a rail-line co-operative so 

that they’re able to transfer goods and services efficiently, 

effectively, and not put all the strain on the main highway that 

runs to Meadow Lake and of course to North Battleford and 

south. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of bad faith that I see that the 

Saskatchewan Party has shown on this particular file. It’s very 

obvious as you see the strategy of the Sask Party. They now 

tend to say, okay, the multinational, large federal transportation 

companies, the rail line companies, the big, bad corporate rail-

line companies, we want to make sure they don’t show bad 

faith to the producer-owned co-operatives. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re just right next door to the large 

corporations that have shown bad faith to many people that had 

some initiative and faith that they can run their own rail line. 

And what I mean by that, Mr. Speaker, is that they in no way, 

shape, or form did try and support some of the local initiatives 

that I’m aware of in the northwest part of Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it is a prevalent problem all throughout 

the province and that many, many people in many, many 

communities are watching this particular bill with a lot of 

interest. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I see that as you look at some of the 

challenges of transportation in our province, you’ll get some of 

the work being done around the Saskatoon area. You can see 

the impact of how — the potentially positive impact — of how 

the city of Meadow Lake and some of the RM of Meadow Lake 

and some of the supporting RMs in that area, when they say 

there’s a great economic case for the province to help us with 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

this rail-line project, they make a compelling argument, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So as you begin to see how you connect the dots by having a 

solid rail-line system put in from Meadow Lake to North 

Battleford, and then you go on to Saskatoon from there and 

then you start seeing Saskatoon and the number of 

transportation improvements being made to the city. And that’s 

about the ease in the moving of goods and services, Mr. 

Speaker. And then you go on to Vancouver, to the Vancouver 

port where you can again transfer your products and services 

worldwide, Mr. Speaker, it makes a really good, compelling 

argument of how everything is connected. So, Mr. Speaker, it is 

the principle of good, solid, cost-efficient transportation of 

goods, Mr. Speaker, that many people argue about when they 

bring forward the argument of rail-line support. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in Big River, Meadow Lake, those are some 

of the communities that I notice in my travels that you see rail 

lines in those areas being torn up. And it’s a crying shame, Mr. 

Speaker, because those rail lines . . . I don’t know what the 

salvage value is of a kilometre of rail line, but imagine what 

that kilometre of rail line can actually save you on not only 

transportation costs but the wear and tear on our provincial 

highway system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there’s a lot of complementary arguments, and I think if 

there’s any bad faith to be mentioned with this particular bill, 

the bad faith is that the people of the city of Meadow Lake 

really reached out to this government to help them with this 

particular project, and they simply turned their back on them 

and they failed them miserably. So there is a lot of bad faith 

when we talk about some of the transportation opportunities 

with rail line as being shown on a continual basis by the Sask 

Party government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have many more comments on Bill 61. I 

know that as we go down this path that there is a number of 

colleagues of mine that are paying very close attention to 

everything this particular minister does in transportation. We 

pray that he doesn’t mess things up, and we pray that he takes 

the opportunity to really learn how to do things right and learn 

from the examples of the people of Meadow Lake. So that, I 

think, that’s one of the lessons and one of the points that we’d 

like to make earlier on. 

 

And the other point I would like to do, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 61, 

on Bill 61 is to ask for some of those folks, the people that are 

advocating a greater use of the rail-line system in 

Saskatchewan, to stop them from tearing up these rail lines, to 

have them come to the Assembly to come join the opposition in 

pressing this government to stop acting in bad faith when it 

comes to protecting rail lines, and of course to try as best as 

possible to financially support them in purchasing those 

running rights from some of the larger corporations so they can 

use them for their own co-operatives, for their own 

communities, and for their own economies. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues that we want to raise in 

this particular bill. I just see that this bill has a lot of 

shortcomings. It doesn’t answer a lot of questions. And the 

amount of kilometres that are being impacted, which 

organizations have had success? The best practices of some of 

the organizations that are successful, how much money did they 

have to put in? How are the discussions with our national 

railway companies, how are those going? How’s the 

relationship of this government with a lot of the larger players 

in this industry? These are some of the questions that we have 

to ask, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know one thing for sure as a result of this bill, that they 

appear they want to be able to take on these larger companies. 

But, Mr. Speaker, they’re not giving the people the resources 

nor the time nor the support to really make a difference when it 

comes to shortline rail service in some of these areas. And 

that’s a crying shame, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of the things 

that I point out when the minister makes reference to bad faith. 

There’s a lot of bad faith, Mr. Speaker, and it’s shown every 

single day to those people that show that initiative, by the 

Saskatchewan Party government. And I say, shame on them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s important that we continue to point out that people have 

the opportunity to come to the Assembly, express their views 

on whether this bill is proper. The opposition are going to take 

the next two or three months to look at this particular bill, go 

forward and ask people, is there anything that we can do to 

strengthen your hand, to support your cause? Let the opposition 

know, and we will take on the Saskatchewan Party to make sure 

they don’t simply say, oh, it’s those big national rail-line 

companies that are doing all this damage. In the meantime, 

they’re sitting there crossing their fingers that they aren’t asked 

for any money. And if they’re not asked for any money, they 

point out the bogeyman to all these people. Then all of the 

sudden the attention is not focused on them. 

 

So I think it’s important that the people of Saskatchewan know 

that there’s a lot of bad faith expressed to the people that want 

to take rail-line transportation opportunities to the maximum. 

And that bad faith many, many times is being shown by the 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more issues we want to raise on 

this bill. We can go on for quite some time, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

prepared to go on for quite some time if need be because the 

impact and the effect, what the people are hauling, the products, 

the discussions, the years, the money, all these issues, there’s so 

many things that we can speak about, Mr. Speaker. I can go on 

for hours here, Mr. Speaker. I could go on for hours. 

 

But I want to make sure, I want to make sure of one thing: that 

the Saskatchewan Party fundamentally believe that it’s all about 

private enterprise, Mr. Speaker. And it’s amazing, they talk 

about private enterprise, that there’s . . . We believe they have a 

strong role to play of course. But it’s amazing, the moment they 

stop hearing private enterprise is when organizations that want 

to take over running rights for rail lines and actually build up 

these rail lines, when they come ask these guys for money, they 

say, sorry, we believe in private enterprise, so you guys are a 

co-operative. I don’t think you guys should get into . . . We 

don’t believe, as Sask Party, you guys should get into owning a 

rail line. 

 

So they sometimes are confusing, Mr. Speaker. They’re very 

confusing to their own supporters. And we all know, within the 

NDP ranks, they’re always confused, Mr. Speaker. And I think 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

quite frankly that’s something that needs to be said from time to 

time just to remind their members that there are a lot of people 

watching what they do on rail-line companies through bills like 

this, Bill 61. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be other members of my 

trusted caucus that are going to have a lot of comments on this 

bill. I’m going to have an opportunity to express more of these 

concerns as the Assembly proceeds. We have several months 

before the spring sitting in which we can bring back more 

compelling arguments. And I challenge all the organizations out 

there that have a desire to look at rail line as one of the options 

to transport goods and services out of your community, out of 

your region, that you take a very good look at what this bill 

does, a very good look at what this bill does. 

 

And while at the outset it appears that we’re all holding the 

multinational federal companies to task, that we also make sure 

that the Saskatchewan Party is also held to task and make sure 

that they put the proper resources, they put the proper supports, 

and above all else, they put their money where their mouth is 

when it comes to supporting and developing regional rail lines 

that many RMs and cities and towns and villages want.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, talk is cheap, so they’ve got to start 

producing. Otherwise the people of Saskatchewan, the rural 

people in particular out around the Meadow Lake area, Big 

River area are going to simply say, well these guys are busy 

blaming everybody. They’re not taking no responsibility 

whatsoever to address this problem, to help us build the system. 

And they’re the ones that we need to focus on. I think it’s a 

very important message that I give today. 

 

And today I was kind of smiling, Mr. Speaker, when we asked 

the Minister of Finance about their balanced budget. And we all 

smile over here when they mention that phrase. Well he got up 

and he blamed the banks. Oh those pesky banks, you know. 

They shouldn’t be creating a deficit for the Saskatchewan Party 

government. You know, that’s exactly what the minister said. 

We counted on the banks to make these predictions so it’s not 

us. It must be the banks that created this deficit. We’re still 

saying we have a balanced budget. Yes right, you have a 

balanced budget. We all know you don’t. 

 

So it’s the same, it’s the same principle with this bill, Mr. 

Speaker. Same principle with this bill, Mr. Speaker, is that 

they’re blaming the national rail-line transportation companies. 

We better go after those guys. We better go after those guys 

because they’re hurting our producer-owned co-operatives. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you in the meantime as a government, Sask 

Party government are not doing nothing to help the rail line, 

regional rail lines develop, Mr. Speaker. So again there’s a lot 

of bad faith referenced in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister alluded to bad faith. I suggest the bad faith’s right 

over there, Mr. Speaker, because they have not put their money 

where their mouth is to help regional rail lines develop, and 

they haven’t put the proper supports. They haven’t put the 

proper emphasis, and they haven’t put the proper respect by 

making sure that many of these regional rail lines have their 

support. If you want to help the local economy, if you want to 

help some of their own support base, so why don’t they do it, 

Mr. Speaker? Because they’re so busy blaming others. They 

want to deflect the attention, Mr. Speaker. They want to deflect 

the attention. 

 

And now today, the latest, the latest deflection, it wasn’t them 

that created the deficit; it was the banks. The Minister of 

Finance said it was the banks, the banks that give us this deficit. 

Well those banks . . . If I see one of them, I’m going to give 

them a talking to, Mr. Speaker, because they’re the ones to 

blame according to the Sask Party, you know. And we’re sitting 

here laughing our heads off in opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, 

you can’t keep blaming other organizations for your 

incompetence. You simply have to stand up and face the music. 

 

So Bill 61, Mr. Speaker, once again Bill 61, they’re looking and 

focusing on the big CNR [Canadian National Railways] and 

VIA Rail saying, these guys are doing bad things to us so we’ve 

got to straighten them out. But in the meantime, they’re not 

spending one red cent to help solve the problem that many of 

the producers and many of the communities and the cities and 

rural parts of our province have been asking for, and that’s to 

help fund a regional rail-line system to protect running rights 

for the local economies, to make sure that we don’t have these 

companies tear up land that would be so valuable. All in all, it 

makes good economic sense. Plus you’ve got the huge added 

benefit of saving our transportation system a lot of wear and 

tear because you haul all kinds of goods and all kinds of 

products on our road system. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And if you transfer some of that over to the rail-line system, it 

makes sense. It makes sense. So for our perspective, it’s 

common sense, and that’s what the people of these 

co-operatives are saying. It’s common sense. It’s economic 

sense. It’s good sense. Why don’t you do it? So what happens 

now? We get a bill like this and the minister says, well they’re 

going to give those big bad multinational corporations that are 

involved with rail-line transportation, we’re going to give them 

heck. We’re going to accuse them of bad faith. We’re going to 

really watch how they . . . what salvage value they get out of 

their lines or they’re going to tear them up. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we need a big mirror to put in front 

of that entire cabinet and Premier and caucus and say, we are 

the solution to the problem on rail lines. And here, have a look 

at this mirror. And that’s the point, Mr. Speaker, is that they’ve 

got to stop assessing blame, pointing fingers, and putting 

everything over there, Mr. Speaker, saying it’s all these other 

guys’ fault. Mr. Speaker, it’s not even close. The Saskatchewan 

Party failed to deliver. They continue failing to deliver, and 

they’re turning their back on the people of Saskatchewan. And 

they have betrayed the trust when you talk about issues of 

regional rail line, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think the people of Saskatchewan, people of Meadow 

Lake, people of Big River have had enough of this shell game, 

Mr. Speaker. The real problem is the Saskatchewan Party’s lack 

of commitment to support rail lines identified in Bill 61. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition is going to stand up, and we’re 

going to hold them to account. 

 

We have a lot more to say, Mr. Speaker. Like I said, we can go 

on for a long time here. I’m more than prepared to do that. The 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

effects downstream, whether it’s in North Battleford, whether 

it’s in Saskatoon, the effects downstream of stifling this 

opportunity is going to be . . . There’s a huge potential, but 

there’s also a huge problem if it’s not addressed right. 

 

So the best thing, Mr. Speaker, that I just love being in 

opposition, the thing that I love being in opposition is that I 

don’t have to market, I don’t have to market the so-called 

growth plan. Every one of them talk about a growth plan, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t have to use those words. Because it’s a 

fictional growth plan. We can get up here and we can speak 

about what the issues are. We don’t have to have a piece of 

paper handed to us and say, any time anybody gives you 

criticism say, the growth plan. That’s a fictional plan, and 

shame on them for saying “the growth plan” when they know 

there’s huge deficits in their plan, Mr. Speaker, that there’s no 

commitment to their plan. There’s no financial resources to the 

plan. It’s just a buzzword they like to use and market as much 

as they can. 

 

And once again evidence of that is very apparent through the 

lack of commitment financially through Bill 61 to show the 

regional rail lines and the co-operatives on how these regional 

rail lines, under their ownership . . . They could have put money 

in that and say, here’s some cash to help you out. We support 

that, Mr. Speaker. But guess what? It’s a two-page bill with no 

reference of cash. The only thing they do here is point to the big 

multinational rail-line companies saying, it’s all their fault; but 

we’ll fight them for you. In the meantime, no money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 61, we have a lot more we want to say 

about this, and we will say more. And we will come back. And 

we will encourage people to participate in this. So at this time, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn debate on Bill 61. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 61, the railroad amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I rise to speak about The Regional Parks Act, 2012. 

Regional parks are valuable contributors to Saskatchewan’s 

network of parks, offering a wide range of outdoor recreational 

services and facilities, which fulfill a need for local tourism and 

recreation opportunities. This new legislation is being proposed 

to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of regional parks 

governance and to provide additional clarity to the regional 

park authorities that rely on this legislation and the subsequent 

regulations to guide their operations. 

 

The Regional Parks Act, 2012 replaces The Regional Parks Act, 

1979 in order to address an array of administrative and 

operational changes that have impacted the regional parks 

program over the past 30 years. Mr. Speaker, this new Act 

improves upon the existing legislation in five critical areas and 

will send a signal to our municipal and non-profit partners that 

we are listening to and addressing their needs. 

 

The first area of improvement under the proposed legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, is to provide a much clearer description of the 

minister’s powers with regard to the regional parks program. 

The existing legislation describes powers of the department 

versus the minister and does not specifically describe the types 

of powers required to carry out the minister’s responsibilities. 

 

The second critical area of improvement, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce in the proposed legislation establishes the 

authority to delegate certain minister’s powers to the 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association via a formal 

administration agreement approved by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council. The Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association 

plays a pivotal role in the administration of the regional parks 

program across the entire province, serving not only as the 

voice for regional parks in the province but also providing 

important services like accreditation, marketing, and provision 

of advice to regional parks boards as well as adjudication of 

provincial capital grant funding. 

 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association’s role in 

administering the regional parks has grown significantly since 

the 1990s when capital and maintenance grants were provided 

directly to the regional parks. Today we have the benefit of 

working together with the association, allowing them to apply 

peer-developed and -reviewed criteria in order to distribute 

funding in a manner that maximizes the overall benefits. 

 

My ministry has worked closely with the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association to draft this proposed legislation in 

order that it can continue its pivotal role with the appropriate 

supporting legislation in place. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association has been asking for legislative and 

regulatory changes for over 10 years now and will be pleased to 

see a new Act and subsequent regulations move forward. 

 

The third area being addressed in the proposed legislation is 

formal recognition of community and non-profit organizations 

in the establishment and operation of regional park authorities, 

where previously only municipalities had this formal 

recognition. The ongoing role of municipalities in the 

establishment and operation of regional parks is also reinforced, 

as the connection between regional parks and municipal 

government is critical. Mr. Speaker, this new provision 

recognizes the reality of changing demographics in rural 

Saskatchewan and the critical role that community 

organizations have come to play in supporting municipal 

partners in the management and operation of regional park 

authorities. 

 

A fourth component of the proposed legislation is overall 

improved clarity throughout the legislation, including the 

removal of many out-of-date and redundant references. The 

existing Act, which was originally written in 1960, is quite 

detailed and many of the existing sections in the Act have been 

moved to regulations, policy, or simply deleted altogether. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this new proposed legislation clarifies the 

processes required for regional park boundary adjustments and 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

adds rigour and public accountability with regard to park 

dissolution and also with regard to financial and annual 

operating. Regarding park dissolutions, the proposed legislation 

allows me, as minister, to set certain conditions such as the 

completion of a public consultation process. Any set conditions 

would need to be met prior to my creating an order to dissolve a 

regional park. The proposed legislation clearly enables me to do 

this. Public accountability is also strengthened, Mr. Speaker, 

through clear requirements for regional park authorities to 

report back to their membership annually and to table reports 

with the Legislative Assembly if requested by the minister. 

 

My ministry has worked extensively with the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association in the development of this proposed 

legislation. Internally we have worked with provincial 

ministries including Justice and Attorney General, Government 

Relations, Municipal Affairs, Environment, Highways and 

Infrastructure, and externally with municipal organizations 

including Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 

 

To conclude, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second 

reading of Bill 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 63, the regional parks amendment Act, 2012. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m very pleased to stand up on this particular bill and speak 

about some of the challenges, the immediate challenges that we 

see on Bill 63, where the minister has indicated that he has the 

authority, along with the municipal government, to dedesignate 

or to not designate certain regional parks, at his whim and 

certainly at his mercy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the things I think we want to spend a little bit of 

time on, Mr. Speaker, is to highlight the incredible value of the 

regional park system that we enjoy in the province. There are 

many, many places that I’ve been in the province and, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that we don’t do enough is we don’t 

do enough to highlight and we don’t do enough to make sure 

that the regional park system is being bragged about and being 

used and being showcased, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think a lot of times the regional park system, they have a great 

amount of commitment. I remember attending a number of the 

regional parks when I was a minister and I was treated very 

well and the people that showed me their parks, they were very, 

very proud, very proud of the effort that they undertook as a 

volunteer board and certainly as a region and as a community or 

an RM. And as they began to develop these parks and support 

these parks and they of course formed the regional association 

and the provincial association, and I attended a number of their 

conventions, Mr. Speaker. And absolutely these are quality 

people. They’re very committed and dedicated to their 

communities. They volunteer a lot of their free time and they 

make beautiful parks out of nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve seen parks where they’ve had, you know, just very basic 

campsites, and once the volunteer board got involved and once 

the communities got involved, they developed some very, very 

special sites, Mr. Speaker. And I was actually struck and I was 

actually amazed and I was actually inspired at the value of the 

Regional Parks Association because, as I mentioned at the 

outset, they didn’t get a lot of support. They didn’t get a lot of 

recognition. And as a minister I tried my very darndest to make 

sure that they got recognized. I used some of their regional 

parks and at one time we even increased their funding, Mr. 

Speaker. It was a significant amount of increase as well. We 

could’ve done more and should’ve done more, but I think the 

people at that time understood that the Tories broke the bank 

when they left office in the early ’90s. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that’s really 

important is that that didn’t deter them. And I think they 

appreciated the challenges we face as a province, and they 

buckled down and they went to work. 

 

Now today now, the regional park systems is a beautiful 

system. I’m sure my colleague, who also served as the minister 

responsible for the regional parks, can attest to the incredible 

value and can certainly talk about the commitment that these 

groups have had to the regional park system. You go to a 

number of gas stations; you see the reminders on some of the 

billboards. You hear them being interviewed on the news. You 

see their advertisements in some of the weekly papers. It’s 

actually an amazing thing to see how they have marketed the 

regional parks. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as an opposition, we’re very, very proud of 

the work that the regional parks executives and the board of 

directors and their volunteers do. And we hope that that kind of 

effort continues for many, many years. Because that’s what 

makes Saskatchewan great, Mr. Speaker, is people of that sort, 

volunteers of that nature, and certainly people that are dedicated 

to making sure that Saskatchewan showcases its natural beauty. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, absolutely, there’s no question that the 

regional parks people do build our communities. They help our 

economies. They make people feel welcome because, as you 

know, when you have a regional park and you have a number of 

services at the park, whether it’s a swimming pool or whether 

it’s a serviced campsite or golfing, these are some of the things 

that they put in place. And it’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, that they 

not just look at the summer program, as my colleague pointed 

out. There’s cross-country skiing. There’s snowmobile trails. 

The list kind of goes on as to what could be happening in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I wanted to point out that the regional park system is a great 

system. It’s something that people should experience and that 

Saskatchewan and particularly the official opposition, the NDP 

caucus, want to thank them publicly for their great help and for 

their great supports, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to point out that we also want to be careful that we 

don’t do anything to hurt that process. We want to foster the 

development of our regional parks for many, many years to 

come. Now any time that the Sask Party starts meddling into 

some of these exciting organizations, then we become a bit 

concerned. Because we know that 99.99 per cent of the time, 

they want to blame somebody else for their actions. So they 

don’t stand on their own two feet, Mr. Speaker. And when they 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

get involved with regional parks, it begins to make me wonder 

and worry what their agenda is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the examples I would use is LeRoy. As you may 

have heard, Mr. Speaker, LeRoy is a great community. They’ve 

got a regional park there as well. I understand that there’s a golf 

course. I understand there’s some campsites. There’s a pool as 

well. And most recently LeRoy, being one of the Regional 

Parks Association members, they wanted to sell the park, the 

Sask Party did. And of course the bad thing about it is that, at 

the end of the day, the people of LeRoy, I think, agreed with the 

sale. After they had a meeting, they agreed. But what they 

didn’t agree with is that the consultation happened after the sale 

was announced. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now LeRoy people are very, very smart people. They want to 

be able to support and foster development. They know that 

there’s a great opportunity in the mining sector next door to 

their community. They know that they want to be part of the 

economy. They want to see things stimulated in the area. Like 

they know what’s going on, Mr. Speaker. And at the end of the 

day, the LeRoy people said, okay we’ve had a public meeting. 

We think what is being proposed . . . Well they weren’t 100 per 

cent in favour of how it was handled, Mr. Speaker. I think the 

people of LeRoy decided that it made a bit of sense to do what 

the private company wanted to do, to build a work camp near or 

in their regional park and that was to of course complement the 

growth of the potash industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what was disturbing, I think, was the 

manner in which the Sask Party dealt with the people of LeRoy 

on the regional parks issue. They didn’t consult them. They 

didn’t sit down with them. They didn’t draft up a plan together. 

And they simply announced this. Then the public meeting 

happened after the fact. And once the community had their 

meeting, and once everything was understood, the people of 

LeRoy decided that it was in their best interest to try and figure 

out how they could support this process, support the continued 

expansion of potash, of the potash mine there, and to support 

the workers that will be working at these mines. And that’s a 

credit to the people of LeRoy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what the people of LeRoy also asked, Mr. Speaker, was 

they asked that there be concessions given to protect the 

integrity and to protect the services that were at the regional 

park. They also asked that as well. And in good faith, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of LeRoy decided that yes, it wasn’t great 

that they didn’t let us know what was happening at the outset 

— and they came to a public meeting, the Sask Party came to a 

public meeting after the fact — we understand what’s going on 

a bit better and we want to support and accommodate the 

growth of the mining sector. So that’s exactly what they did. 

 

They ended up supporting this process. And certainly from our 

perspective as opposition, we support the people of LeRoy in 

their plans. We support the fact that they made this decision all 

the while knowing that that’s good for the economy and that’s 

basically how the people of LeRoy would certainly show their 

support. And the problem they had is that they weren’t told of 

this till after the fact. 

 

And the second problem, I think and we think they’re going to 

have, is that they asked for some concessions. And, Mr. 

Speaker, based on what the Sask Party has done time and time 

again is they’ve failed to deliver on a lot of concessions. And 

we see that from this particular government on a constant basis. 

And that’s what we would warn LeRoy people about, is if 

there’s concessions that you’re asking for, be very, very careful, 

Mr. Speaker, because the Saskatchewan Party is short on 

fulfilling the concessions they make to accommodate the sale of 

some land to their private corporate buddies. And the last thing 

that they’re going to worry about is the concession to the 

LeRoy people, in their bid to satisfy their large corporate 

friends. 

 

So to the people of LeRoy, we support and respect what you’re 

trying to do to support the economy. We understand that there’s 

a few people upset at how it was handled. We understand that 

particular aspect. But we also warn you that if the Sask Party’s 

giving you concessions, you better have four or five lawyers go 

through that agreement because if there’s ways they can get out 

of that agreement, Mr. Speaker, they’ll do it in a heartbeat. 

There’s no question about it in our mind. And that really, I 

think, is a threat to the integrity to our regional park system. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think LeRoy people are going to demand 

that. They’re going to want that, and they’re going to make sure 

they get that, Mr. Speaker. And we can’t blame them. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I would certainly point out that the regional park 

system in general, that they have to really . . . I think they’re 

going to pay very close attention to what happens to the LeRoy 

Regional Park. And the reason why they’re going to watch that 

is they don’t want to see this government selling off pieces of 

regional parks without people’s knowledge. That was the most 

awkward thing to do. And again today, the LeRoy people 

supported that because they’re great people there. They know 

what’s good for the economy so they’ll continue doing that. 

 

But the problem is, is that the Saskatchewan Party’s done it 

after the fact. You know, it’s almost as if they took them for 

granted. And that’s kind of . . . If they’re going to treat them 

like that at the early stages of this project, imagine what they’ll 

do later down the road when they try and guarantee 

concessions. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think, I don’t think in any 

way, shape, or form that they’re serious about getting those 

concessions in place. 

 

There’s a lot more that I want to say about this Act. There’s not 

a whole lot of different initiatives in this particular Act, and the 

minister alluded to them trying to work with the Regional Parks 

Association. And the only question I have is, what kind of 

intent do they have, the Saskatchewan Party government have, 

when it comes to working with the Regional Parks Association? 

Is it about more money? Now that’s not identified in this bill. Is 

it about a respect for a thorough process before they sell a 

regional park? Well it’s not in this bill, Mr. Speaker. Is it 

recognition? Is it opportunity to showcase what the regional 

parks are all about? Well it’s not in this bill, Mr. Speaker. 

What’s in this bill is the sale option that the minister spoke 

about when they dealt with LeRoy Regional Park, the fact that 

they sold it, then they consulted the people. And that’s what 

this bill is trying to correct, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So based on their action and their activities, we in the 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

opposition do not have a lot of faith and confidence in this 

minister or any other minister on that side of the House because 

quite frankly they have betrayed a lot of people on many fronts. 

And yet they turn around and blame others, or they do the 

consultation after the fact. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that my 

colleagues will have a lot more to say about this, and we’re 

going to be researching this. We’re going to advise the people 

of the Regional Parks Association, and we’d like their input. 

And we will certainly raise the issue, and we will defend the 

integrity of the Regional Parks Association. And we’ll learn a 

lot of valuable lessons from the people of LeRoy to make sure 

there’s follow-up and follow through and commitment, that it 

isn’t just words that the Sask Party use and then turn around 

and disappoint all these people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 63. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I so move. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 45 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

appreciate the applause from the member from Yorkton to take 

my feet here today. I do appreciate that. The new Opposition 

Whip, I believe, Mr. Speaker, here today. And certainly we do 

welcome the expansion of those benches. 

 

It’s always difficult to follow the eloquent member from 

Athabasca in speaking, who’s always succinct and to the point 

and whose words in many ways are difficult, as I say, to follow. 

But it is my pleasure to weigh in on Bill No. 45, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 

 

Now when I’m looking at this bill, and I’m looking as a 

practical nature . . . I’ve read through the minister’s comments 

as it relates to the changes that are being made and what the 

impact or the purpose of the changes are on Saskatchewan, on 

our SaskTel, Saskatchewan Telecommunications Corporation. 

What I recognize from the minister is that he’s put forward that 

these are generally housekeeping changes. That’s his message. 

And they speak to two different pieces, Mr. Speaker. They 

speak to borrowing limits and provisions, changes that will 

allow SaskTel to in fact borrow at 30-year terms, which is 

consistent with the Ministry of Finance, and allows them to 

access some of the financial tools that the bond market has put 

onto the marketplace here in Canada, and potentially allow 

some better borrowing rates in doing so. 

 

There’s also another practical change that’s highlighted here, 

that being a change for no order in council that’s required for 

oversight of expenditures over $100,000. I understand that’s 

being removed as it’s deemed impractical to be responsive to 

address and make the changes required for some of the 

purchase and acquisition of land for the satellite towers required 

for cell phone coverage in the province. 

 

So those are the minister’s contentions of this bill. I always 

believe that it is important for us, with any bill that’s put 

forward, to make sure that we’re not just reading the minister’s 

statement but also making sure that we’re doing a thoughtful 

consultation with Saskatchewan people and stakeholders as it 

relates to any bill, making sure that we understand what the 

goals of a bill are, what the purpose are, the intended 

consequences, if you will, Mr. Speaker. But it’s also important 

for us to make sure that we’re bringing the kind of scrutiny and 

oversight to this Assembly to make sure that we arrive at 

making sure that there’s not any unintended consequences as a 

result of the changes put forward by government. 

 

Now this has been an important role for the official opposition 

over the past few years and particularly the last year because 

what we have seen with the current government is an approach 

to drive legislation that has often not reflected the evidence put 

before them, often not reflected a consultive process in building 

that legislation. And that’s why we fulfill a very important role 

in not just speaking to these bills here in the Assembly but also 

engaging Saskatchewan stakeholders and Saskatchewan people 

in that analysis and making sure we’re providing the proper sort 

of scrutiny and oversight that Saskatchewan people deserve. 

Because we have learned, Mr. Speaker, that we can’t assume 

that that’s been done by this government. In fact it’s been a 

government that has often pushed aside consultation and often 

pushed aside common sense, Mr. Speaker, in the pursuit of an 

agenda that’s in their own best interests or an agenda that’s in 

line with their ideological interest but not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. So that’s sort of the purpose of why it’s 

important that we fulfill this role to the people of the province, 

and certainly we invite that consultation process moving 

forward. 

 

When I look at the two practical changes that the minister 

speaks of or housekeeping changes that the minister speaks of 

here, one of them speaks to specifically borrowing and the 

ability to utilize 30-year bond tools or products that are on the 

Canadian marketplace, and as I’ve said, to do so, to be able to 

come in line with the Ministry of Finance and the bond market 

that they’re accessing, and certainly do talk about some 

consequences of not doing so, of not having the preferred 

borrowing rates that we should. 

 

Now these are reasonable, very reasonable considerations, Mr. 

Speaker. And if it was just that, Mr. Speaker, I would have no 

trouble just simply supporting these changes as housekeeping 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

changes. But what’s problematic here, Mr. Speaker, is that 

when we’re talking about borrowing limits and monetary limits, 

what we’re recognizing is in fact we have a government that 

has relied very heavily on the Crown sector to cash flow the 

operations of government. And this has had an adverse 

consequence certainly on Saskatchewan customers, regions, 

and communities across this province, but also it has an impact 

on the public, on the taxpayer if you will, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

discussion we’ve had often in this Assembly. But this goes 

directly to the heart of the unsustainability of the financial 

management put forward by the government opposite, by the 

Sask Party government, a government that has relied on the 

Crown sector to produce the revenues to try to balance off 

budgets that were put forward in an unsustainable fashion by 

this government. 

 

And I would highlight again: so these would be practical 

changes and simple enough to support if this were about 

borrowing dollars and borrowing requirements that we’re 

investing back into the network that SaskTel supports across 

this province, about making sure that we were meeting the 

needs of communities, whether that’s cellphone users or 

Internet users, in all parts of this province. But in fact that 

hasn’t been where a lot of the Crown sector borrowing has 

occurred. It hasn’t been about borrowing to then be able to 

reinvest in Saskatchewan people and communities and in those 

networks. That’s something that we would urge. That’s 

something we would support, Mr. Speaker. But what a lot of 

the borrowing from the Crown sector represents, and we see a 

major increase again this year, Mr. Speaker, is simply 

producing the dollars to transfer across to cover off for 

unsustainable finances by the government opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And I go back just a couple of years on this, Mr. Speaker. And I 

look at the year of 2009, which stands out to me, and I know it 

stands out to many that watch the finances of this province 

closely. But we had this unprecedented circumstance where 

government reached into the Crown sector and actually took 

$755 million in one year, Mr. Speaker, from the Crown sector, 

an unprecedented and damaging dividend rate from the Crown 

sector, far surpassing any sort of an appropriate dividend 

coming from the Crown sector. And let me be frank, Mr. 

Speaker, there is an appropriate dividend from the Crown sector 

to be paid to the people of the province. But what this 

government has done and the way they’ve acted has denied any 

sort of economic balance and has denied the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people being present with the sort of exorbitant 

dividend stripping and raids done at the whim of government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I do believe we have to build out a structure that 

protects our Crown corporations from those sorts of reckless 

and damaging actions that we’ve seen of government and make 

sure that our Crowns are on a solid economic footing into the 

future. Because in many ways it was these Crowns that 

addressed the challenges and opportunities of yesterday in our 

history, and they were the innovations of Saskatchewan people 

coming together in a co-operative, common sense way to 

address those challenges. But just the same, Mr. Speaker, these 

are the same very institutions that should be able to give us 

some purpose to our future, some control of our future in 

making sure that we have some certainty of achieving a brighter 

future for many people and communities across Saskatchewan. 

 

The record of this government as it relates to the Crown sector 

is a disappointing one, Mr. Speaker. The facts speak for 

themselves, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s the over $2 billion in just 

over five years that this government has drained from the 

Crown sector . . . It’s reflected in the borrowing of the Crown 

sector, Mr. Speaker, as well, but has drained from the Crown 

sector. It’s also reflected in the inability of this government to 

meet the needs of Saskatchewan people and communities, 

whether it’s cellphone coverage, whether it’s rural Internet 

usage, Mr. Speaker — and I think that that’s one that’s top of 

mind for many here, Mr. Speaker. Because, as I say, the 

borrowing that this government often supports in the Crown 

sectors is not to support that investment that we’re speaking 

about. It’s about transferring those dollars across for 

unsustainable finances of the current government. And this is 

where I take exception to the plan and the record of the 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Even this year I know when I look at some of the challenges we 

face as a province, and as we had this once proud international 

telecommunications company for which we were all rightfully 

proud of and was a leader not just in Canada but a leader from a 

global perspective, it has now in many ways been limited by the 

actions of this government. And I look at a very sad state of that 

is the impact that right now and the uncertainty for over 8,000 

rural customers all across Saskatchewan as they’re facing being 

forced upon them an inferior product, a private product, and a 

more costly product. And when I say product, a different 

company as well, a private company where this government 

and the federal government have been complicit in I guess 

taking away market share and responsibility from SaskTel, 

where once SaskTel had a proud record in serving those 

customers in communities. 

 

I would urge that those rural customers are important 

customers. I would argue that those rural communities are 

important communities to our future and that they should be 

supported by SaskTel with exceptional service, exceptional 

product, and affordable rates. And the changes that are being 

brought forward by this government and the federal 

government have certainly not served that interest. 

 

I also recognize that there is this consistent sort of hollowing 

out of our Crown sector and contracting out in our Crown 

sector. And certainly SaskTel is like many of our other Crowns 

in its approach under this government, Mr. Speaker, where 

we’re seeing significant contracting out that we know, Mr. 

Speaker, could be done more effectively and more efficiently 

by the Crown corporations themselves and serve the best 

interests of all of Saskatchewan people and all Saskatchewan 

communities. 

 

So the Crown record, to be frank, Mr. Speaker, of this 

government is a disappointing one. It’s one that I’m more than 

willing to take this government to task on and simply lay the 

facts on the table: the unprecedented Crown sector dividend 

raids that we’ve seen; the contracting out in an ideological way 

without any evidence, without any common sense to support 

those choices, Mr. Speaker; the tying of the hands of those 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

Crown corporations, of governments into the future; and then 

those impacts subsequent to the people and communities who 

should expect something better from the Crown corporations 

for which they own and for which they’ve built, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we’re talking about borrowing in monetary limits and 

what’s described as simply housekeeping changes by the 

minister, we have to recognize the broader context. If that was 

simply the case, if this was simply borrowing tools, being able 

to access 30-year bond products, Mr. Speaker, that would allow 

this government to invest and meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

people through investments in our network and in our people, 

then that’s something we could support, and it would be a very 

practical matter and one of a housekeeping nature. But it’s the 

fact that this gets to this much bigger issue of the 

unsustainability of this government’s finances but, as 

importantly, to highlight the unprecedented way that this 

government has raided dollars from our Crown sector at a 

consequence to Saskatchewan people and communities and had 

a direct negative impact back onto those Crowns for which we 

depend on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m always proud to get up on this side of the floor and to 

weigh in on the importance of our Crown sector, to speak to the 

importance of being able leave it on an independent, solid 

economic footing, something that’s been prohibited by this 

government by way of, as I say, the cash grabs or the dividend 

raids that are going on or even some of the constraints and 

collaring that has occurred on that Crown sector, where they no 

longer can operate in an independent fashion as any other large 

business or organization where they’re able to go out and, in an 

economically sound way, divest risk and bring back the benefit 

to Saskatchewan people, where they’ve been collared on that 

front, and then of course the ideological contracting out, Mr. 

Speaker, the contracting out that’s denied, really, the common 

sense and the best interests of many throughout this province. 

 

So those are a couple pieces that I would highlight. When I 

speak to the importance of addressing this matter — and we’re 

talking about Crown sector borrowing — again this is 

something that we would support if it was about investing back 

into the network to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

You know, I find it interesting that the member from P.A. 

[Prince Albert] Carlton sort of heckles from his seat at the 

backbenches, furthest backbenches of that large caucus 

opposite, but we haven’t heard that member stand up and say 

much, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly. I wonder if he has a 

voice in caucus. I’m not sure. We know he doesn’t have a voice 

in cabinet. 

 

But we do know that there’s important needs in his community, 

Mr. Speaker, to be served by the very Crown corporations that 

we’re speaking about, Mr. Speaker, and about some of the other 

important investments, such as having infrastructure renewed to 

make sure that the economy and people of a community are 

protected. And in many ways I find it interesting that the 

member from P.A. Carlton shouts across in sort of a silly, 

foolish way from his seat, Mr. Speaker, but doesn’t then stand 

up to talk about making sure that the Crown corporations are 

serving his region, making sure that he’s speaking to the 

infrastructure needs of that region, Mr. Speaker, and making 

sure he’s speaking to the economic opportunities within that 

region. 

 

So anyways, he shouts from his seat, Mr. Speaker. This is the 

longest speech I’ve heard him give all session long so far, Mr. 

Speaker, in fact. And I think I’ve heard him say more here than 

I’ve heard him say about the best interests of Prince Albert 

residents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m glad to see that member animated. What I hope he does 

is takes that energy. I hope takes that energy. I hope he takes 

that passion. I hope he shares it with his caucus members. I 

hope he asks and begs one of those cabinet ministers to listen to 

him and then I hope he shares some of the needs that are 

important for P.A., such as some of that infrastructure and that 

bridge, Mr. Speaker, making sure that our Crowns are serving 

that region, or to make sure that economic development is 

occurring. And in many ways the member should know that 

there’s an awful lot of important needs for that region. 

 

And going directly back to the bill here, Mr. Speaker. When 

I’m speaking about what’s being changed here it’s, as I say, a 

provision for order in councils to not be required for land 

purchase of $100,000 for land by SaskTel. It sounds like a 

reasonable proposal so that they can acquire the land they need 

to operate in a competitive environment, to be able to make 

sure those cellphone towers can be constructed and serve 

Saskatchewan people, to make sure cellphone use is strong all 

across Saskatchewan, including in Prince Albert where they 

deserve strong cellphone coverage as well, Mr. Speaker, just 

like my constituents. 

 

And also when we look at the changes around the borrowing 

tools available to the Crown sector, it as well could be a very 

practical, it could be a very housekeeping sort of a change, Mr. 

Speaker. But the fact is it speaks to a much greater challenge of 

this government. It’s the unsustainability of their finances. It’s 

the continued drain and raid that we’ve seen on the Crown 

sector, the hollowing out of the Crown sector, not just . . . you 

know, certainly spoken to by the well over $2 billion that have 

been drained from the Crown sector and the rainy day fund, 

from the Crown sector. And it’s reflected in higher borrowing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll highlight the budget document of this year, the 2012-13 

budget summary, page 60 where it highlights the public debt of 

this province. And I notice that in 2009, reflected here by 

government documents, debt is $7.7 billion. And I see in 2013 

that it will have grown to $9.3 billion. That’s a $1.6 billion 

increase, Mr. Speaker, over just, you know, four, four years, 

Mr. Speaker. Four years under this government and a $1.6 

billion increase in borrowing of debt, A 25 per cent increase, 

Mr. Speaker, and a lot of that is reflected directly in our Crown 

corporations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to speak to this here today. As I 

say, if this was simply about enabling our Crown corporations 

to have the fiscal tools they require to borrow and to invest 

back into the needs of Saskatchewan people and back into those 

networks, this would be something easy for us to simply pass 

and support, Mr. Speaker. But it does highlight something 

greater — the structural imbalance of finances of government 

opposite, the unsustainability of their finances, and their 

treatment of the Crown sector, Mr. Speaker, a hollowing out, a 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

weakening of their financial position, a constraining and 

collaring them from being able to operate in an independent 

economic fashion, Mr. Speaker, an ideological contracting out 

that we’ve seen in this sector directed and driven by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. And I would say as it relates to our 

Crown sector, the facts are the facts, Mr. Speaker, and 

Saskatchewan people deserve better on this front. 

 

And I’m pleased to enter into discussion here today. I know 

there’ll be others that will want to speak to this bill, but I know 

I do look forward to asking further questions at the committee 

structure as well and fully understanding where the borrowing 

requirements are and making sure then that those borrowing 

requirements match the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

And the best interests of Saskatchewan people aren’t for our 

Crown sector to go and borrow billions of dollars only to be 

transferred across to a government that can’t control its finances 

in a sustainable fashion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ll be providing that sort of oversight, that kind of 

scrutiny in making sure that we represent all people, all 

communities across this province in doing so. It’s my pleasure 

to enter debate here today, Mr. Speaker, and at this point in 

time I will adjourn debate on, as it relates to Bill No. 45, the 

miscellaneous statutes amendment Act, 2012. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Regina Rosemont has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 45, 

the miscellaneous status Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 46 — The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s with great pleasure I rise to speak to this today. I’m happy 

to be here at this fall session having exactly one year ago today 

being elected for the first time to this Assembly, and I have 

quite a different perspective today than I did a year ago. So I’m 

looking forward to this fall session and, with enthusiasm, 

looking forward to entering into the debates on the bills that are 

being presented by this government. 

 

This particular bill, Bill No. 46 is An Act to amend The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Act. Now if I understand 

correctly, the municipal employees’ pension plan, or MEPP, is 

administered by a commission. And it’s a 10-member 

commission that is administering the plan, and this commission 

is responsible for all the plan’s administration, communication, 

and investment activities. And in fact it’s stated the mission of 

the commission is to oversee and direct the administration of 

the plan and to manage the assets in the best interests of the 

members. And I’m certain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is 

exactly what the commission is doing. And they’re doing good 

work. 

 

What we see here in this bill, based on the comments of the 

minister was . . . It’s difficult to speak with all the chattering 

going on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I’ll do my best. The minister 

that introduced it indicated there’s a couple of changes. It seems 

to be housekeeping changes. He didn’t give us a lot of detail in 

his speech, but he did indicate that one of the proposed 

amendments will be to allow the commission to extend the 

terms of the chairperson and the vice-chairperson at times when 

leadership continuity is vital and their original terms are nearing 

an end. So I believe that is the change to subsection (9) that’s 

being proposed. And it’s being amended to add a new section, 

subsection (9.1), which allows the commission to reappoint the 

chairperson for an additional year or they can reappoint the 

vice-chairperson for an additional year. 

 

I’m not sure why that’s felt to be necessary. In most cases, if a 

term is decided by legislation, that should be the term. And you 

don’t often see a clause like this where the government would 

choose to extend somebody’s term. Why not just make the term 

for one year longer then, if that’s the intent? So I’m not sure 

why the good folks who are proposing these amendments from 

within the public service have made that change. It’s not clear 

to me, but it seems a bit unusual. However, you know, 

obviously once it’s passed into law their term will likely be 

extended for another year if indeed the intent of the minister is 

to ensure that leadership continuity is available to the 

commission when the original terms are coming to an end. 

 

It also has a clarification in it, and the clause is, the proposed 

clause 7 is now being, there’s an additional section being added 

to describe how a majority decision is made and the restriction 

on liability of the commission members. 

 

This one’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It indicates clearly 

that the decision of the commission is by majority — so it’s a 

democratic decision — and that only a simple majority is 

required for decisions made. Then it goes on to indicate that if a 

member of the commission is either not there at the meeting or 

if they don’t vote for a decision or if they request that their 

dissent be entered into the minutes of the meeting, if they 

request that their dissent be entered into the minutes of the 

meeting, that somehow they are now exempt from liability. 

They’re no longer liable with respect to the decisions of the 

entire commission. 

 

That’s not something I’ve seen a lot, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

it would be concerning to me as a member of the commission if 

there is a contentious decision and the majority vote is by a 

difference of one. So there’s 10 people on the board. If the vote 

is say six to four, the four people who didn’t vote in favour are 

now exempt from liability of the decision of the commission, 

despite the fact that it’s the majority that is making the decision. 

And that’s how democracy works. 

 

So I’m not sure what would drive a change like that and we’ll 

be looking for more information, as we have time to look at this 

bill, to understand why it’s important to exempt people from 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

liability because usually it’s the responsibility of the 

commission of the whole or the board as a whole when 

decisions are made. Simply by not being present that day seems 

to be a pretty generous exemption from liability, and people 

may choose not to show up for meetings if there’s something 

contentious and they don’t want to be involved in the 

discussion. So it doesn’t seem to promote sort of a free and 

thorough discussion of issues that the commission is dealing 

with. 

 

We know that the trustees of this, the commission members are 

trustees. I wanted to take a little look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

about the makeup of this particular commission because as you 

know, yesterday my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale was 

questioning the Minister for the Status of Women to find out 

what progress has been made on representation of women in 

boards and commissions that are appointed by this government. 

And I have to report, sadly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that of the 10 

members of this commission, only two are women. So that’s 

nowhere near the representation of women in the Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Plan, in the government as a whole, and 

certainly in our province, and the citizenship of our province. 

 

So sadly, once again we see an example where there isn’t equal 

representation of women on a commission like this. And we 

really do want to see progress in this area and would hope that 

the minister and the member that’s been appointed to look into 

this take very serious steps to correct what is an imbalance in 

the representation of women in a commission like this. 

 

Certainly, you know, in many cases for municipal employees 

the spousal benefits are something that’s very important, and 

benefits for children of the employees, and if women’s voices 

aren’t being heard at this level it may result in injustices. So we 

are looking to this government to ensure that there is equal 

representation and the voices of women are heard at tables, 

boards, agencies, commissions — all the appointments that 

happen. Even as the minister yesterday pointed out, we’re very 

proud to note that our university presidents are women, but 

sadly that wasn’t an appointment by this government. Yes and 

of course we’re also very pleased to see that Moose Jaw elected 

a female mayor. That’s wonderful news. But again, it wasn’t 

appointment by this government. This government has to do 

better work in that area, and we look forward to the efforts that 

will be made in that area. 

 

There are a couple other changes that are being proposed in this 

amending Act, and in particular there’s a new subsection being 

added after subsection 20.1(2). And it goes on to say that if a 

member’s spouse has provided a waiver under the previous 

subsection, that they can revoke that waiver. What we 

understand is that this clause is just keeping this particular 

legislation in sync with The Pension Benefits Act of 1992. As 

you might know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this pension, the 

municipal employees’ pension plan, is administered by the 

public employment pension plan folks as well. So that’s the 

pension plan that all of us as members are members of, and we 

certainly applaud the work of the folks there as they administer 

these plans. 

 

So this amendment is, as indicated in the explanatory notes, 

simply trying to keep this pension plan in line with the public 

employees pension plan and its subsequent legislation, The 

Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 

 

There’s one more amendment that’s being proposed in this 

particular amending legislation. And in this one they’re 

suggesting to repeal subsection 21(3). And what this section is 

dealing with is that immediate monthly survivorship pension 

payable to the member’s spouse. What’s interesting in this 

particular portion of the explanatory notes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that if you read it, it says that: 

 

The amendment provides an immediate monthly 

survivorship pension payable to a member’s spouse in the 

amount deemed to be paid assuming the meme or former 

member had elected to commence a pension . . . 

 

Now I had to look into what a meme is. It may be a 

typographical error, because according to the Wikipedia, a 

meme is an idea that behaves like a virus, that moves through a 

population taking hold in each person it infects. And so I think 

pretty clearly that’s a typo in this particular explanation. But I 

know it’s a popular word in the Internet culture, and I hear my 

children talking about memes. But I don’t think in this case the 

explanatory note is meaning to refer to a meme. Indeed I think 

it’s intended to refer to a member or a former member. 

 

So again the amendment that’s being proposed in subsection 

21(3), the replacement of the existing provision is to allow for it 

to be in sync, again, with The Pension Benefits Act. So the 

original clause is fairly short, and the new clause allows for 

some adjustments upon the death of the employee, and it will 

allow the beneficiaries some further flexibility. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these changes appear to be in 

order, generally. I think we have some of our good folks over in 

the public service that are doing good work. And you’ve heard 

me speak before about the importance of the work of our public 

service. It’s disappointing to see this government choose an 

arbitrary number like 15 per cent and just reduce the number of 

public servants that are doing good work for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This kind of work is important. It may seem trivial or 

administrative, but it’s keeping our legislative agenda and our 

legislative suite in order, ensuring that laws are consistent with 

other laws, that pension plans, the public employees’ pension 

plan, is consistent with the municipal employees’ pension plan. 

That kind of work is difficult. It’s time consuming, and when 

you’re losing 15 per cent of your workforce, it’s demoralizing, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And as a former public servant, I need to 

speak out against this as much as I can, because plans like the 

municipal employees’ pension plan and the public employees’ 

pension plan and the administration of those are carried out by 

public servants. 

 

And as our leader spoke when he was mentioning, providing his 

comments to the Assembly in relation to this Act and the role of 

pension plans, we know how important pension plans are in 

Canada and in fact how good they are. And that’s certainly 

something that the minister’s mentioned as well. Canada 

pension plans have been ranked as some of the top sustainable 

pension plans in developing countries, and part of that is 

because of the good people that do the work in managing those 

plans. 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

It’s also part of that is because of the good people in the 

department of Justice and in the various ministries who are 

doing the good work of the government and of the people. And 

it’s always unfortunate, I think, when we see efforts to 

arbitrarily pick numbers and just say, we’re going to slash the 

public service by 15 per cent, and then taking programs like 

lean to squeeze into a square hole the round peg of numbers of 

public employees. That simply isn’t the way the workforce is. 

That isn’t the way the work evolves. It isn’t the way services to 

the public evolve, and important services to the public that are 

being lost or, through attrition, phased out. And the public, as a 

result, suffers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we will be looking very carefully at this bill. I think many of 

my colleagues are going to want to speak to this and others as 

well, and these kinds of changes. We’re going to be talking to 

people in the community, talking to people in the pension plans, 

trying to find out why it is that a simple majority is being 

chosen and why some of the members of the commission are 

exempt from liability with respect to decisions if they aren’t in 

favour of it or if they’re not present. 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not something you 

commonly see in the makeup and directors of commissions. 

And it may provide some instability in terms of the decision 

making that this commission is undertaking, particularly when 

there are difficult decisions to be made. And certainly, I think, 

by accepting to be a member of the commission that that person 

is accepting to be responsible for the decisions of the 

commission as the majority decides them. So we’re going to 

want to find out why it is that this government is . . . and the 

public servants that have drafted these changes and 

recommended them to the minister, why this is seen as a 

necessity. So that’s something we’ll be looking for, for sure. 

 

So I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, that will be probably the 

extent of the comments I want to make on this particular bill. 

I’m looking forward to having an opportunity to speak on the 

other bills. We see a number of again fairly technical 

administrative-type changes in the legislation that’s been 

introduced to date. We’re certainly looking forward to seeing 

more of this government’s plan and vision for the future in their 

legislative agenda. The administrative bills, like I say, are 

necessary, and it’s the good work of the public servants 

bringing these things forward to the Assembly. And certainly 

it’s our job as members to ensure that these are properly 

debated and vetted through the public and ensure that the 

legislative process is ticking along. 

 

But we certainly will want to look at the other bills to find out 

what the future of Saskatchewan holds when it comes to 

legislation. We know that there’s other bills being alluded to, 

particularly privatization of a Crown corporation and changes 

to the labour law. So those are other bills that I think will 

require a lot of intense scrutiny and discussions with members 

of the public, and certainly I look forward to the debate on 

those as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think at that point I’m going to conclude my comments on 

Bill 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 

2012. And at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 

adjourn debate on the bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has moved adjournment on Bill No. 46, The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 47 — The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand in the Assembly and speak on behalf of the good people 

of Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this afternoon in second reading, or in adjourned 

debates, we were touching on a number of pieces of legislation 

on a variety of topics as the speakers before me have remarked 

on them — the Saskatchewan Telecommunications amendment 

Act, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, and 

now, Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012 which was moved by the minister 

responsible. 

 

All the topics, Mr. Speaker, are important. And most certainly 

when we talk about water and look at water, what it means to 

our province, I would suggest that this piece of legislation is 

very important and something that all Saskatchewan people 

care about, that Saskatchewan people have a real interest in, 

and that Saskatchewan people want to have the proper decisions 

made when it comes to managing the supply of our water, and 

when it comes to ensuring that the regulations and the proper 

controls and checks are in place in order to ensure the steps that 

we take as a province are the right ones, the steps that we take 

from a perspective of industry, from the perspective of 

development, from the perspective of government and 

provincial activity or at the municipal level, Mr. Speaker, and 

as it relates also to the federal government. 

 

When we think of water, it’s something that we too often take 

for granted during our daily routines. We just assume that when 

we turn on the tap that the faucet will flow and there’ll be water 

there. We assume that when we head to the lake that the lake 

levels will be good and that we’ll have a good summer vacation 

with our families. And we assume that when we are engaged in 

economic activity, whether it be agriculture or whether it be 

mining, for example, we assume and trust that the water will be 

there. But too often when we make those sorts of assumptions, 

Mr. Speaker, and we don’t take the right steps from a legislative 

perspective and then from a perspective of regulation and 

enforcement, when we don’t take those proper steps, we can 

call into question the long-term viability and sustainability of 

the decisions that we make as they relate to water. 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

Water is something very important to all Saskatchewan people, 

and this actually goes back to the origins of our province. Of 

course the First Nations that were here before European settlers 

came, organized much of their lives around water, especially in 

the North but in the South as well, Mr. Speaker. When we think 

of patterns of activity throughout the year and how the activities 

that First Nations people pursued as it related to living and 

surviving in a climate that is harsh, of course considerations 

about water were very important. And it’s, Mr. Speaker, in the 

North and why European settlers moved west, Mr. Speaker, it 

was along the water routes. 

 

And we can think to some of the oldest communities that we 

have here in the province along the water systems. In the North, 

Cumberland House for example, where settlement and activity 

and fur trading have occurred for many, many years, for 

centuries, Mr. Speaker. And we think of historic spots, for 

example the church at Stanley Mission. We think how 

important that building is for the history of the people in the 

area, but how important it is also in telling Saskatchewan’s 

story, the story of First Nations people living here, voyageurs 

coming across the country to Saskatchewan, and the settlement 

and the development that has occurred since then. A history, 

Mr. Speaker, with high points and low points, but it’s a history 

that we have in common, a history that we share. And it goes 

back to the issue of water, believe it or not. 

 

We also think, Mr. Speaker, of how important water is in a 

historical context when we think of the settlement of the 

Prairies by pioneers, creating farms, settling homesteads, 

breaking the prairie soil, and how water was so important to 

those settlers. And there’s a huge generational difference now, 

Mr. Speaker, between those who grew up on the farm and grew 

up with a real, true appreciation for the scarcity of water and 

how precious water is when you are completely self-sustaining, 

in one spot, compared to now, Mr. Speaker, where I think 

sadly, too often, we take the provision of water and the security 

of our water for granted. 

 

And I can think of one example, Mr. Speaker, that I remember 

my wife’s family passing on to me. And they had a family 

friend from the area at the farm who had spent her whole life on 

the farm, and had actually a fairly difficult life and a number of 

challenges that she faced. But she grew up with a real pioneer 

mentality, that water matters and that you need to treat water 

with respect, use it sparingly, and not abuse it in the way that is 

wasteful. And, Mr. Speaker, there were stories how, even 

though once she had moved into Swift Current and was living 

in a very urban setting, she still maintained that approach. So 

whenever there was any sort of water, it was always used as 

many times as possible. It was never needlessly poured down 

the drain or needlessly used in a way that did not respect the 

resource. 

 

And that example, actually it’s one person, a widow who was 

living in Swift Current. But it symbolizes the kind of respect 

and the kind of approach we should take to the issue of water 

here in the province. And we haven’t always done a good job of 

maintaining or respecting our resources and I think we can do a 

much better job of that. 

 

We also think, Mr. Speaker, how important water is to us 

culturally. I talk a bit about the historical context in terms of 

First Nations people who lived in Saskatchewan and the 

settlement and the travelling here by Europeans. But we also 

know right now, culturally, that water is very important to us. 

And it’s often water that provides the sense of place that we 

speak to when we talk about why we love this province so 

much. 

 

For example, I use the example of my home city in Saskatoon. 

The presence of the South Saskatchewan River there really is 

culturally something very important to the entire city. It’s 

something that everyone in the city relates to. We have bridges 

crossing the river. We talk about the east and the west side of 

the river. The role and the presence of the South Saskatchewan 

River through Saskatoon has had a very huge influence on the 

development of the city and how we view ourselves as residents 

of Saskatoon, and if we look now at the development that is 

occurring with River Landing and all along the Meewasin and 

really the trail-blazing work that was done in setting up the 

Meewasin Valley Authority and ensuring that there is a 

integrated and a holistic and a smart approach to managing the 

Meewasin River Valley that passes through Saskatoon and 

stretches on on both sides of the city. 

 

So that’s a current and a modern-day example, Mr. Speaker, of 

how, when we’re talking about water, we have to get it right 

and we have to make sure that we’re taking the appropriate 

steps to preserve and respect that historical tradition we have on 

the Prairies through the First Nations people, through pioneers. 

But it also has huge relevance right now. So whether we’re 

living in Saskatoon or in another community in this fine 

province, we have to ensure when we’re taking steps to do with 

water that we’re making the right decisions and we’re making 

decisions that are sustainable and in the best interests of 

everyone. 

 

When I say everyone, Mr. Speaker, it means in the best 

interests of individuals in every corner of the province. But it 

also means everyone in terms of generations. And we need to 

be thinking not what is right just for the current generation and 

generations that are living here on the Prairies, but we have to 

have a forward view in looking at what is the best decision for 

our children, our great-grandchildren, and so on. And that’s the 

constant reminder that rivers provide us. 

 

Rivers existed hundreds, thousands of years before us — were 

present in a location. And it’s easy to forget that when we’re 

crossing Circle Drive bridge and not really paying attention to 

what’s going on. But it’s an important awareness to ensure that 

the actions that we take now are in fact respectful of how we’re 

part of something bigger and something more significant than 

the current years that we might have the pleasure of occupying 

and breathing air and drinking the water on the planet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know water is hugely important to our 

economy and we know that, as I said, through the historical 

experience of fur trading, as one example, of farming, of many 

different types of activity. But we know that there is a need now 

for the availability and the access in the provision of water in 

today’s economy. So there’s a number of avenues where water 

is important in today’s economy. 

 

We can think of irrigation, Mr. Speaker, as one example of how 

we need to manage our water resource in a way that supports 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

agriculture, that has the provision of irrigation for the locations 

where it is deemed appropriate. I think of Outlook, Mr. 

Speaker, as one example where irrigation has been very 

important for that area of the province. But, Mr. Speaker, we 

know that it’s also larger than simply irrigation and we know 

that for many of the activities involved with the development of 

our resources for mining, water also is hugely important for the 

operations that are occurring. And that is the challenge, Mr. 

Speaker, how we ensure that we take the proper steps with 

respect to our resource but also encourage the responsible and 

the sustainable development of our resources. 

 

We know water is also hugely important for our economy when 

it comes to tourism and when it comes to recreational pursuits. I 

know it’s the case for me, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure it’s the 

case for many other members in the House. But when I’m 

speaking with people from outside of Saskatchewan, having the 

chance to talk about home, there are many great things about 

the province — the people, the sky, our cities, our towns, all of 

those things — but of course I always emphasize our lakes and 

the many summer pursuits and winter pursuits we have around 

the bodies of water in Saskatchewan. 

 

And we know this is a huge benefit to the local economy in 

terms of the tourism from Saskatchewan people who are living 

in the province but also from out-of-province activity as well. 

So when we think of industries like fishing, for example, and 

people coming to Saskatchewan to engage in sport fishing, we 

need to have good, clean, and adequate supply of water for 

those activities to occur. We think of going to the cabin in 

developing areas where there are resorts and there are all sorts 

of recreational activities around water. We have to ensure that 

our lakes are being properly managed, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

their cleanliness and appropriate water levels when it comes to 

usage and as that may relate to industrial usage. 

 

So it’s important to have that sort of perspective in mind when 

we’re making decisions and when we’re talking about the 

future of water supply control and safety here in the province. 

We need to understand that we are in fact just stewards of the 

resource for a short period of time. We have to understand that 

the water resources that are in the province were here long 

before us and, God willing, they will be here long after us as 

well if we make the right decisions. 

 

And we have to also, Mr. Speaker, appreciate the need for 

water in the activities that occur in the province. So those are 

activities of a recreational nature but they’re also activities of 

an economic nature. And so whether we’re talking about 

agriculture, whether we’re talking about mining, whether we’re 

talking about tourism, it is so very important to ensure that we 

are making responsible decisions — decisions that are good for 

the long term and that are in fact in the best interest of not only 

our own generation but the generations to come after us. 

 

We know water is important, Mr. Speaker, because we also 

know that it’s something we hear about a lot in the Assembly 

and we have members of the community and of the province 

engage us as MLAs to talk about water issues, whether it is 

long-term protection of the South Saskatchewan River Basin or 

whether it is the good work of groups such as Ducks Unlimited, 

Mr. Speaker, who are working to protect and preserve our 

wetlands as a resource. You know, Ducks Unlimited has a great 

view of how we need to make the right steps in order to one, 

protect the resource to make sure that it is there, to protect the 

environment and the animals living in that resource, but then 

also to support the things that we like to do as Saskatchewan 

people, like hunting for example, and having access to 

waterways and being out in Saskatchewan enjoying everything 

that our good province has to offer. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So it’s very important in looking at Bill 47. While the actual 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is quite brief, it’s always 

important to look at the piece of legislation and see what is 

important. 

 

The member from P.A. Carlton is very animated, Mr. Speaker, 

and the member from P.A. Carlton has a river in his 

community, a river in need of a bridge across his community, 

Mr. Speaker. And I would think that the member opposite 

would like to spend a bit of time talking about the need for a 

bridge across the waterway in his city, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in looking at this piece of legislation, Bill No. 47, The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005, an Act to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts, there are a number of 

components here. At face value, when you look at the 

legislation just in a quick manner, it would appear that it is 

simply about a name change. And the name change is changing, 

within the legislation, the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

to the Water Security Agency . . . Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton is very anxious to get into this 

debate on water. I wish he was in cabinet, Mr. Speaker, to talk 

about the value and the importance of water, but sadly that’s 

not the case for himself or for the good people of Prince Albert. 

 

In looking at this legislation, it is more significant than simply 

the changing of a name. And I appreciate the minister’s second 

reading speech for providing some more detail and some more 

explanation for what is being asked of in Bill No. 47. And I 

compliment the officials working within the ministry who put 

together a fine second reading speech for the minister, and it 

provided more clarity and explanation with respect to what Bill 

No. 47 is doing. I don’t want to question the member from 

Silver Springs that he . . . I know that he may craft some of his 

speeches, but I don’t know if he crafted every single word of 

that speech. So I did want to give credit where credit is due. 

And I think some members from the ministry did provide a bit 

of input on that piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible can give a very fine 

speech in the House, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve been happy to hear 

him deliver speeches on different occasions. But on Bill No. 47, 

it does provide more meaning than simply the name change. 

And what we’re seeing here, Mr. Speaker, with the piece of 

legislation, is not simply the renaming of the Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority, but it is the changing of the organization 

in some fairly significant way, in ways that may not be apparent 

upon first reading of the legislation. 

 

There is the name change, the Water Security Agency. And the 

name, Mr. Speaker, that’s up to individuals’ personal opinion 

whether they think that is a good name or not. And so that’s not 

really . . . Water Security Agency. It’s a fine name in the words 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

itself, Mr. Speaker. But what is happening here with the piece 

of legislation, as described by the minister, is a one-window 

approach. So individuals or businesses or groups that have 

concerns about water and have concerns about the management 

of water have a one-window approach for having their matters 

dealt with in a way that is what I would assume the minister 

believes is a more efficient way of handling the case. 

 

It’s not simply renaming, Mr. Speaker, because it is also a 

realignment in the way that what was the authority will work, 

and not just the authority but also the other government 

ministries that have relevance to the work of the water 

authority. So it is, Mr. Speaker, more than simply a name 

change. And to remind all members of the Assembly what the 

minister said, if they haven’t committed his remarks to 

memory, in talking about how this changes the approach of the 

agency, quoting from Hansard on November 5th on page 1760, 

the minister stated: 

 

This has been accomplished by bringing together staff and 

programs from the Ministry of Environment, from the 

Ministry of Agriculture, from the Ministry of Health, 

along with all of the responsibilities and staff from the 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. 

 

So it is, Mr. Speaker, taking individuals from different 

ministries, combining them along with the Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority in order to fulfill what the minister would, 

I assume, describe as a new mandate or a new direction for the 

authority under the new name of the Water Security Agency. 

 

So it is, Mr. Speaker, important to ask ourselves questions 

about . . . When changes like that occur, when there is a 

realignment of roles and when there is a combination of 

individuals from different ministries who have been operating 

in a different way, it’s important to give some serious thought 

as to how this could affect the outcome and the situation and 

affect the good work that we need done when it comes to the 

protection and the promotion of the precious resource of water. 

 

So there’s a number of individuals, Mr. Speaker, who I assume 

would be involved with this change. As the minister said, it 

does involve individuals from a number of ministries such as 

the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Agriculture, from 

the Ministry of Health, and then the individuals from the 

Watershed Authority. 

 

And in the minister’s approach to a one-window approach as it 

was described in his speech, it’s also important to ask ourselves 

if this approach is the best approach for the protection of our 

resource here in the province. And it’s good and appropriate, 

Mr. Speaker, for government to be more responsive to the 

needs of its citizens and to make changes to the way that 

government operates in order to meet the needs of its citizens in 

a more effective manner, in a more timely manner, and a more 

efficient manner. That has been the orientation, Mr. Speaker, of 

a professional civil service for many years, and that should be 

the orientation for the professional civil service in the years to 

come — to always provide the best service possible to 

Saskatchewan people in carrying out the direction and the 

wishes that are provided by this legislature and through the 

executive branch. 

 

It’s important though, Mr. Speaker, when there is a changing of 

rules, when we have a one-window approach, it’s also 

important to ensure that the dual purposes that are included in 

that approach are both being served to the full extent that they 

need to be served, the full extent that they need to be responsive 

to the needs of Saskatchewan people. So when we’re 

combining the one aspect of usage and promotion of economic 

activity, whether that be through agriculture, whether that be 

through industry, whether that be through tourism, that’s 

important work, and that needs to be done. At the same time, 

Mr. Speaker, the enforcement and the determination of 

standards and controls and inspections needs to be strong. And 

those standards and those regulations, Mr. Speaker, can’t be 

watered down and can’t be weakened because of the 

one-window approach. 

 

So that’s the challenge, Mr. Speaker, as I see it. The challenge 

is to be a strong regulatory agency at the same time as allowing 

Saskatchewan people to be good stewards and utilize the 

resource of water that we need for our business and our 

recreational pursuits. 

 

It’s not clear to me, Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s second 

reading speech how, through the one-window approach, how 

that is going to be accomplished. And it’s also not clear to me, 

Mr. Speaker, if individuals in the broader community who have 

a real . . . We all have a stake when it comes to the conservation 

and protection of our water, but whether those that are highly, 

highly engaged on this issue and doing their utmost to promote 

this issue — water protection and conservation — whether 

those individuals are satisfied with this approach. And I think 

for that reason, Mr. Speaker, when we have a reorientation of 

civil servants and a new mandate for the office, it’s important to 

ensure that we’re getting both of those things right and that one 

of the mandates of the office is not subservient to the other; that 

one is not at the expense of the other. And I would like to have 

more explanation, Mr. Speaker, through the minister’s second 

reading speech, as to how that will occur, how that protection 

will occur to the level that it needs to be there at the same time 

as the promotional pursuits of the new agency will be 

conducted. It’s important to get both of those things right and 

that one is not performed at the expense of the other, whichever 

order that may be in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in simply looking at the words, the notion of a one-window 

approach, most people would admit that in ways that we can 

make government more efficient and more effective and have 

easier access for people to receive services, that is a positive 

thing. But the top concern I think that Saskatchewan people 

have when it comes to water is to ensure that the resource is 

there for the long run and that the resource is there for the 

generations that come after us because, as I said, it is so vitally 

important to what occurs in our economy, so vitally important 

in respecting our history as a province, and it’s so vitally 

important to what happens in the future. 

 

So I know, Mr. Speaker, in many of the comments that the 

minister made with respect to this piece of legislation, he talked 

about the different principles that will be guiding the 

legislation. And many of those principles in and of themselves 

sound fine, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure they do provide a good 

orientation for how the new agency will be operating. But the 

real question as I see it within this piece of legislation, Mr. 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

Speaker, is how to balance those two aspects which at times can 

be competing. And there may be a tension there at times. So 

when they’re under the same one-window roof, the question is 

how well both of the mandates can be served. 

 

Perhaps the minister has a very thorough and adequate response 

in answer to that question that I raise, but I would be looking 

for more information on that. And I think, having just received 

this bill not too long ago, there’s most certainly a lot of 

discussion that we need to have with other individuals in the 

community who care so much about water. And we need to 

ensure that they think this is a step in the right direction, not a 

step in the wrong direction. 

 

We have seen, Mr. Speaker, on a number of aspects, where the 

steps that the government have taken haven’t been in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that this 

would be one of them. I don’t doubt the personal intentions of 

the minister in bringing forward this legislation, but sometimes 

there can be unintended consequences for a new approach. And 

I am looking forward to receiving more input and feedback 

from Saskatchewan people on this piece of legislation. And I 

know my colleagues who sit in the official opposition will be 

keen to enter in on this debate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, judged by the noise in the Assembly right 

now, I think there is a number of government members who 

might like to comment on this. I would hope that if they do not 

have the opportunity to speak here in the Assembly that they 

would make their voices heard around the caucus table, and for 

those that are in cabinet would be vocal around the cabinet table 

as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important topic. Water is so very 

important to our past, our present, and our future. It has been an 

honour to have the opportunity to make a few remarks about the 

role of water and how we need to make the right decisions, 

having that long-term perspective, that generational perspective 

that what we do now, the actions that we take now, do in fact 

have to be in the best interests of all generations that will be 

coming after us, Mr. Speaker, the people that will be sitting in 

this Assembly many years from now when we are long and 

gone. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I’ve appreciated the opportunity to 

make a few remarks on this piece of legislation and I would like 

to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 47. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the wish of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 48 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to speak to Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. This bill 

is amending a bill that was introduced first in 2010. And the 

purpose of this bill, Mr. Speaker, is to allow the government to 

enter into an equivalency agreement with the federal 

government around coal-fired electricity regulations. 

 

So what was missing in this Act originally or what needs to be 

added to this Act now, Mr. Speaker? What needs to be added to 

this Act, Mr. Speaker, is in order to enter into the equivalency 

agreement, the Canadian Environmental Protection Act 

requires a citizen’s investigation power to exist in provincial 

legislation as a legal requirement. And that right now is 

missing, Mr. Speaker, so basically all these amendments deal 

with adding that legal requirement for a citizen’s investigation 

power, and all of the housekeeping that comes along with that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So some of the details in terms of being able to, in terms of that 

ability to have that investigation power, section 62.1(1), what 

this now includes, Mr. Speaker, is: 

 

Any resident of Saskatchewan who is at least 18 years old 

and who is of the opinion that a contravention against this 

Act, the regulations or the code has been committed may 

apply to the minister for an investigation of the alleged 

contravention. 

 

So what it also does, Mr. Speaker, as I said, it lays out the 

housekeeping around this necessary investigation to be able to 

have these equivalency agreements. So what is the 

responsibility here? So: 

 

A person applying for an investigation pursuant to this 

section shall ensure that the application is accompanied by 

a solemn or statutory declaration that: 

 

(a) states the name and address of the applicant; 

 

(b) states the nature of the alleged contravention and the 

name of each person alleged to be involved in the 

commission of the contravention; and 

 

(c) contains a concise statement of the evidence 

supporting the allegations of the applicant. 

 

Obviously those are all three very necessary things to be able to 

engage in an investigation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also lays out, Mr. Speaker, what happens in the investigation 

process. It allows for the opportunity that the applicant who’s 

applied for an investigation is updated of the receipt of his or 

her application in a timely manner and that the minister begin 

the investigation, that the investigation process is began. 

 

So any time we deal with government, Mr. Speaker, it’s always 

very good to know that if you’ve sent a letter or an email or 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

filed a complaint, that someone on the other end is listening. 

There’s nothing worse than not knowing if your letter has been 

received or if anybody cares or if there’s been any action taken 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. So this is a good, the fact that the 

government needs to ensure that the applicant who has a 

complaint is updated of the receipt of the application and 

knowing about the process is very good. 

 

What else? The provision 62.2(2) has also been added. And it 

deems that the applicant obtains a response from the minister 

with regards to the progress of the investigation within a 

reasonable time frame and any action that the minister has 

taken or attempts to take. 

 

So it’s not just about responding or getting that email at some 

point in time, or that letter in some time, but ensuring that it’s 

done in a timely manner. Again, any time that we deal with 

government, it’s nice to know that someone on the other end is 

listening and that someone is dealing with your issue or concern 

promptly. I know when people come into our constituency 

offices, it’s important that people know that they’re being 

heard, as we know that from our lived experience here as 

MLAs and possibly if we’ve ever had dealings on our own with 

government. So making sure that people are informed in a 

timely fashion, that’s very important as well. 

 

There’s also a new provision that helps meet the equivalent, the 

requirements for the equivalency agreement, Mr. Speaker, 

provision no. 62.2(3). And “This amendment ensures that the 

response from the minister will be contained in a report which 

will include a timeframe to complete the investigation or to 

implement an action.” And then the explanatory notes for the 

bill points out that “This is necessary to ensure that the minister 

is accountable to the applicant and that the investigation is 

again being addressed in a timely manner.” 

 

So on the occasion that an investigation is discontinued, section 

62.2(4) outlines . . . I’d like to read that actually, 62.2(4). So a 

minister or the ministry would not have to provide a report. So 

“A report pursuant to subsection (2) is not required if the 

investigation is discontinued before the end of the 90-day 

period mentioned in that subsection.”. So on the case that an 

investigation doesn’t go forward, that there’s not a need to 

report the outcome of the investigation because it’s 

discontinued. So that is what that point does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Subsection 62.2(5), the minister is given the opportunity here to 

“discontinue an investigation if . . . [he or she] is of the opinion 

that the alleged contravention does not require further 

investigation.” So that allows the opportunity . . . Obviously not 

every issue that comes before a government, if there isn’t 

sufficient evidence then an investigation shouldn’t go forward. 

And that outlines that, Mr. Speaker. So it provides the minister 

with the ability to discontinue an investigation. 

 

And there’s also a final provision here, 62.2(6), and it lays out 

the process, or this amendment is necessary . . . The notes on 

the bill outline that “This amendment is necessary because it 

lays out the process for what occurs when an investigation is 

discontinued.” So: 

 

If an investigation is discontinued, the minister shall: 

 

(a) prepare a written report describing the information 

obtained during the investigation and stating the reasons 

for its discontinuation; and 

 

(b) send a copy of the report to the applicant and to any 

person whose conduct was investigated. 

 

So this, Mr. Speaker, allows, as I said . . . The minister outlined 

a few days ago that this bill is to help us meet equivalency 

agreements with the federal government on coal-fired 

electricity regs, and the piece that was missing was the 

investigation piece. But I’d just like to refer to his comments of 

November 5th, 2012 in Hansard, page 1766. I’d like to just 

quote the minister, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Extensive consultation has been undertaken and, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when I mean extensive consultation, I 

mean extensive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this government talks about consultation, 

I’d be curious about their definition of extensive consultation. 

So I’m glad, Mr. Speaker, that he’s outlined, I’m glad, Mr. 

Speaker, that he’s outlined what extensive consultation . . . I’m 

glad he says that extensive consultation has been done. But we 

have some serious questions on this side of the House as to how 

this government defines extensive consultation. Would they say 

the 90-day period for which they were reviewing 15 pieces of 

labour legislation — 100 years of labour legislation? Would 

they say 90 days, which also happened to fall over the summer, 

is that extensive consultation, Mr. Speaker? That triggers for 

me some very, very serious concerns when this government 

starts talking about consultation. I think they have some very 

different ideas about what consultation is, compared to the rest 

of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So while I hear the minister responsible saying that they were 

good on consultation on this one, well perhaps some of his 

ministers, his fellow colleagues should take some advice then 

from the Environment minister if he is stating that they’re good 

on consultation for this one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What else have they failed to consult on? Three more MLAs, 

Mr. Speaker. Last year in the Throne Speech there was nothing, 

nothing in the election platform of 2011, Mr. Speaker. A year 

ago, a year ago today, Mr. Speaker, this government was 

re-elected. Mr. Speaker, this government did not outline once, 

did not outline once the need, in either the election platform or 

the Throne Speech, the three more MLAs, Mr. Speaker. There 

was no consultation on this. 

 

And from what we heard loud and clear from many people, 

people I know throughout Saskatoon Riversdale, I didn’t hear 

one person, not a single person told me that they felt we needed 

to add three more politicians. They would rather priorize other 

more pressing issues — housing, health care, the film tax credit. 

I met with folks who firmly believed that this government could 

be spending money on far more important things than adding 

three more politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again let’s talk about their lack of consultation, some policy 

making that happens on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. In 

this last budget, Mr. Speaker, this government cut a program 

that was key to the creative industries, not just the film industry, 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

Mr. Speaker. But that program, the film employment tax credit, 

you talk to anybody across any of the creative sectors, Mr. 

Speaker, and you know what they would say to me, Mr. 

Speaker? They would say . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 

member from Martensville is asking me if I’ve got thoughts on 

the bill. And in fact I do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This minister has talked about consultation. This minister has 

talked about extensive consultation, and this government has 

failed abysmally when it comes to consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

So they cut a key program to an entire sector, Mr. Speaker, that 

had ripple effects and ramifications for so many people. They 

cut a program when I don’t think they had any idea what was 

involved. So they cut a program. They cut a program and then 

decided, after it was clear that this was not a popular decision, 

then they decided they were going to do some consultations 

across all creative industries, Mr. Speaker. So when this 

government talks about consultation and extensive 

consultations, we question whether or not they fully understand 

what consultation, really meaningful consultation looks like. 

 

And I know the Minister Responsible for Culture has gotten up 

and talked about the creative industries consultations, which 

people have participated in. And you ask anybody from any of 

the creative sectors how they feel about those consultations, and 

they’re participating in them because they know they have to 

try and have their voices heard. But I’ve spoken to people 

across those creative industries who have said they have some 

serious concerns. And they feel like it’s a done deal, that there’s 

already a plan written, Mr. Speaker. So when this government 

talks about consultation, we have some very serious concerns. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to, with respect to Bill 

No. 48, An Act to amend The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate for Bill No. 48, The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 49 — The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today and speak to Bill No. 49, An Act to amend 

The Forestry Professions Act. 

 

And I think this is a very serious Act, but I just do want to say a 

couple of things before I start. It reminded me of a cartoon I 

saw, and I think it was in The Globe and Mail, about the fall is 

the time when we see lots of professional foresters out trying to 

sell wet wood under the guise of saying, this wood is much 

better because it burns much slower. 

 

But I was struck, I was struck by the minister’s speech. I was 

struck by the minister’s speech. He was leading us to believe 

that he crafts every one of his, every one of his speeches that he 

has ever put into words. Well, every word, he thinks about 

every word. And I was struck by this when he says and I quote, 

in his speech of November 5th, just a few, couple of days ago, 

and I quote, “Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments are a 

concrete demonstration of our government’s confidence in the 

Saskatchewan Forestry Professionals and their association.”  

 

These folks are foresters. They deal in wood, not concrete. So I 

would think, I’m not sure the minister really knows what he’s 

talking about here. And I think he should think about better 

ways of describing his relationships with these professionals 

other than concrete or pavement or whatever. I think, really I 

think we really need to think more carefully about every word 

and especially a minister who takes a lot of pride, a lot of pride 

on every word he says — a concrete relationship. 

 

Now I would think, I would think when we talk about our desks 

here, we consider them a solid wood desk, a solid relationship, 

or maybe if we’re talking about a beam, you think about a clear 

beam, one without knots. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would think 

that, that the minister when he’s talking about as important 

things as relationships with professionals, that he really should 

think of words that are more appropriate. But to describe them 

as concrete certainly reminds of the Joni Mitchell, the Joni 

Mitchell song when you cut down all the trees and you pave the 

parking lot with concrete. That’s what he’s talking about. 

That’s how he views the world of forestry. It’s good to cut them 

all down. Cut them all down and pave it with concrete. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have some questions about this 

bill. We’ll certainly have questions for the minister when we 

get into estimates or into committee to talk about these bills. So 

I really, I do have a lot of questions about this. And I think that 

we’ll have to talk extensively about this because clearly, and 

the minister did allude to it, that the people have a lot of 

questions about what’s happening in our forests these days, 

particularly since the downturn in the world markets. And the 

minister alluded to that. 

 

You know, our forestry sector was doing so well, doing so well. 

And of course so many reasons, particularly dealing with global 

markets, have seen pressures in our forestry sector. But still this 

government has made some commitments, and they seem to be 

unable to carry through those commitments to restart that 

sector. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And so we’ll have a lot of questions about that because forestry 

here, particularly in the northern part of the province, but, you 

know, in the parkland, but also when we talk about Moose 

Mountain and Cypress Hills, there is some really interesting 

areas around forestry that the public is very interested in. And 

so when we talk about The Forestry Professions Amendment 

Act we want to make sure we’re having the very best people 

doing the kind of work, the kind of work that our public 

expects. 

 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2012 

And particularly now, when we see, when we see as well the 

minister, who is talking about the environmental code. And, 

you know, it is interesting because he talks a lot about 

consultation in that one. We compare what happened with the 

environmental code, say, to the labour, this new labour code 

that they’re talking about where there’s a 90 day mail-in ballot. 

This environmental code, we see, will come into effect 

sometime this fall. 

 

And so if you’re outsourcing some of the work to folks who 

have the qualifications that . . . We have a fair number of 

questions about what their work will be doing. As he said: 

 

The code will be a cornerstone of our ministry’s 

continuing shift to a results-based regulatory framework 

that will provide client-centred service and foster 

innovation while enhancing the protection we offer our 

environment. 

 

And I think that’s really critical, and I know people in 

Saskatchewan will have a lot of questions about that. We have a 

lot of expectations. People in Saskatchewan have high 

expectations when it comes to forestry. And so this is 

important, and this is not some small matter that we’re talking 

about here. 

 

And so we will be interested to know who were the people that 

the ministry consulted on, and what is the impact and how this 

will all play out. And he talks about, particularly the New West 

Partnership provinces, how does that all relate. And how does 

this strengthen our communities where the forestry sector 

provided jobs and provided, as we talked today even, just the 

recreation parks. And parks, the ability to enjoy our natural 

environments and protection of biodiversity, and this will be an 

important part of that. And so when you have this type of thing, 

this is really critical. 

 

And so there’s a real public interest when we have 

organizations like this that will self-regulate and have certain 

abilities and powers that we’re leaving up to the professional 

organizations. In many ways it’s the right thing to do, but we 

have to make sure we protect the public interest, particularly 

when we know that there’s so much potential here in 

Saskatchewan when it comes to forestry, on so many different 

levels. 

 

Clearly of course when we talk about the economic 

contributions that forestry can provide to our communities, 

particularly the ones who are in the rural areas who are looking 

for opportunities to diversify, this is hugely, hugely important. 

But it’s also hugely important in terms of environmental 

protection. And it’s hugely important when we talk about 

protecting our water sources, the watershed, that type of thing. 

 

So this is one that we’ll have to make sure that we follow up 

with and we talk to the people in the different sectors to say, so 

what do you think about this? I think it’s interesting that the 

minister talked about some of the reasons that he raised around 

public safety. We would have liked to have more information 

about that because we get . . . You know, it’s seems apparent 

right off the bat when we . . . the connection between forestry 

professionals and the environment. And of course there is a 

clear connection, too, with public safety, particularly when 

you’re talking about fire management, road construction, that 

type of thing. 

 

But some of the language in the bill, particularly when we talk 

about the new section 23.01(2)(d) when it talks about limiting 

liability around loss of life, harm, or damage to safety and 

health or welfare of people, we’d be curious to know what that 

is all about. As well the issue around members of Canadian 

Forces performing his or her duties in the Forces, that’s one that 

we need a little bit more clarity about why that has to be 

enunciated in the legislation. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we often talk about unintended 

consequences, so when there’s certain things that are alluded to, 

it’s only reasonable that we actually ask for more details about 

why that particular issue is part of the question. Of course the 

minister did give some examples about what kind of things 

these folks do, whether he talks about significant safety 

environmental risks where they’re designing a resource road, 

developing or building a water course crossing, or handling 

hazardous material such as herbicides and pesticides. And some 

of these carry financial and legal risks as well. So we will ask 

for more specific information on this. 

 

And of course, he did talk a little bit about the First Nations and 

Métis communities, making sure obligations are met to them. 

And I’m sure hoping that they have spent time working with the 

First Nations and Métis communities to make sure that there is 

capacity for understanding what this means. They may be 

looking for what typically in the past worked, and I’m not sure 

because I need to ask these questions. Maybe work was done by 

a conservation officer but will now be done by these folks as a 

private company. And we’re not sure if that’s the scenario that 

we’re reading here, but if that’s the case . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . What’s that? 

 

An Hon. Member: — It could be a concrete company. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — It could be a concrete company, yes. 

 

So we’ve got questions about this because if this is outsourcing 

work that would normally be done by the public sector, and 

people know and understand the folks that are working through 

this, that all of a sudden you see somebody from a private 

company, the confidence may not be there. And they wonder, 

how do we have recourse? How do we make complaints about 

whether they’re coming onto your land and doing things that 

maybe they have the right-of-way to do. Maybe they have the 

clear passage to do that, but people don’t really understand why 

they do as a private company. I don’t know. I’m just drawing 

out scenarios because what we do on our side is make sure we 

think this completely all the way through, think about the 

different scenarios that may happen that may cause some 

concerns. And we want to make sure that we understand this 

completely. 

 

And then as well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be curious to know whether 

The Forestry Professions Act and the amendment Act allows 

some sort of advocacy aspect to their organization. Are they a 

professional group that will come to the legislature to meet with 

us as the real estate folks did today, meet with certain 

government officials? Can we hold them accountable? What are 

the processes for holding them accountable? So these are 



November 7, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

questions that we have. 

 

As I said before, clearly it’s one that’s very, very important. 

And of course, you know, when we . . . I think about this a lot 

as the Labour critic, the role of safety, particularly within 

forestry. You know, we think about tree planting, all of that 

kind of thing, what this all means for that. We have a lot of 

questions about how does that play out into that and, of course, 

what are the specific requirements that will allow people into 

the practice. 

 

It seems pretty thorough on some sections. It talks about their 

stamp. They get a stamp so that when they can give the seal of 

approval to a plan, that it’s recognized and has a stamp of 

approval, I guess, is what we’re looking for. And when they’re 

not doing the work that they should be doing, whether they’ve 

been suspended or for whatever reasons they cannot use that 

seal, they have to return it. So that’s relatively straightforward. 

 

But we need to go through this so that we completely, 

completely understand this. And I think that as well, in terms of 

the public interest, again I go back to what is the public’s 

obligation to be using these folks? And that’s very important. 

When we think of . . . We take a lot of pride in our natural 

forests, as I said, in the North or in the South around Moose 

Mountain or Cypress Hills, but also our urban forests. Urban 

forests are critically important, and we’ve seen weather now 

where I know our own trees in Saskatoon took quite a beating 

last weekend through the wind storms. So how this plays out 

. . . And what are the cost implications for ordinary citizens and 

the obligations to do that? 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I think that we do have some concerns 

about this, but it seems relatively straightforward. I would think 

that on our side of the House, we would describe our 

relationship with many of these folks as a clear relationship, 

one that is a solid relationship, not so much a concrete 

relationship. I think we should ask the minister to rethink his 

standing with the folks. 

 

With that though, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to now move 

adjournment of reading Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that the House do now adjourn, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The House Leader has moved that the House 

do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to now adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. 

Thursday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1805 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1806 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1806 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1806 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1806 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1806 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1806 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1806 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Day of Remembrance 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1807 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1807 

 Film Industry Workers 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1807 

 Skin Cancer Screening 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1808 

 Quality of Life Day Program 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1808 

 Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1808 

 Rams Defeat Huskies for Place in Canada West Finals 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1808 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for the Film Industry and Other Creative Industries 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1809 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1809 

 Status of Budget 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1810 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1810 

 Potential for Small Nuclear Reactors 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1811 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1811 

 Funding for Health Sciences Building 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1812 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1812 

 Physician Locum Programs 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1813 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1813 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Safety for Late-Night Workers 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1814 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1814 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1815 

 Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1815 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1815 

 Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012/ 

 Loi de 2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1815 

 Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1816 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1816 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1816 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1821 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1822 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1824 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1827 

 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1829 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1833 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1835 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


