




















































Hansard: March 28, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 23A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 28, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 841 

 March 28, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I would like to introduce my friend Kristin Anderson. 

Kristin is the vice-president of western operations with Global 

Public Affairs out of Calgary. 

 

We met in the Conservative war room in Ottawa in 2004. And 

despite all of her very many misgivings about me, we’ve 

become friends, and I certainly appreciate that. And she’s also 

befriended some of my colleagues over the years as well. So I 

would like to have all of my colleagues welcome Kristin to this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce a person in your gallery who’s very 

close to me. It’s one of my sisters, one of my four sisters, seated 

up in the gallery. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know you’ll be in good hands today. My 

sister Maureen is an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

officer stationed in Wadena. And so I’ve warned her about the 

Social Services minister, who’s the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] for that area, who likes to get to 

meetings in a hurry from time to time — and to keep an eye out. 

So Maureen’s in town for some training at the RCMP depot and 

I just wanted to welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’m 

pleased to give a general introduction to all the folks from the 

film and television industry who are in all three galleries here 

today. 

 

I know that they’ve got some concerns about the film 

employment tax credit and need a little bit more from this 

government. But with that I would ask all members to join me 

in welcoming these folks, the face of the film and television 

industry, to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the government side of the House, I too would like to 

welcome the members of the film industry. They’re welcome in 

their Legislative Assembly and we certainly look forward to 

working with them in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, 

seated in your gallery, much like the member from Northeast, I 

also have my sister that’s here today, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure 

to introduce Chantel LaHaye to the Assembly, and here with 

our incredible nephews, her boys, Nicholas — can you give us a 

wave? — Elijah, and Dominic. I think he was making a little 

noise during the prayer, Mr. Speaker. So anyways, very pleased 

to have Chantel and her boys come here. Of course they’re very 

important to Stephanie and I. 

 

Chantel’s husband Brian and her both live in Regina. Chantel is 

a community health nurse. And she’s incredibly special to me 

as a friend from a personal perspective, but also an incredible 

political ally and supporter. I’ve been pretty lucky, Mr. Speaker. 

My sister has timed . . . And I know she hasn’t timed these 

things. For me it’s been convenient she had a mat leave, Mr. 

Speaker, in 2007. She had a mat leave in 2011, and it was . . . 

We’ve spent a lot of good time out there on the campaign trail 

this summer. In fact, that little Dominic was bouncing along 

door to door, door knocking with Uncle Trent. Anyways, I’d 

like to introduce my family to the Assembly. Chantel, so good 

to see you and boys. Nice to see you. I’d ask all members to 

join with me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it gives me a lot of pleasure today to introduce 23 

public service employees who are seated in your gallery. 

They’re here today to take part in the parliamentary program for 

the public service. And with us today, we have employees from 

the following ministries: Agriculture, Energy and Resources, 

Environment, Finance, First Nations and Métis Relations, 

Intergovernmental Affairs, and Municipal Affairs, Public 

Service Commission, and Social Services. And we have staff 

from Elections Saskatchewan. 

 

The program that they’re in part of today is an in-depth tour of 

our Legislative Building. They’re going to have briefings by the 

Legislative Library, the Office of the Clerk, and Executive 

Council. And they’re sitting in the Chamber to observe the 

House proceedings. And they’re going to meet with members 

on both sides of the House. Mr. Speaker, we all know that we 

can’t do our work in the legislature without the important 

people that work with us in the public service. So I’d like to 

welcome you to your legislature today. 

 

And while I’m standing, I’d also like to welcome the RCMP 

member from Wadena, my favourite RCMP member, especially 

when I’m on the road. Welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to join with the minister in welcoming the public 

servants that are here for the parliamentary program to their 

Legislative Assembly. Certainly public service is of course 

about service of the people, and we in this Assembly benefit 

greatly from the work that they do on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the official opposition, I’ll be 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

participating later on. I look forward to that exchange but, most 

importantly, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce my constituency assistant, Heather 

Howell-Shiplack. She joined me shortly after the election and 

like my colleague, Gene . . . sorry, my colleague from Regina 

Dewdney said the other day, CAs [constituency assistant] are 

very important to us. They do good work for us when we’re 

sitting here in the House, and make sure that we know what our 

constituents are saying. And I just want to welcome her to our 

Legislative Assembly, and say, thank you for all your hard 

work so far. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. 

 

And we know that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 

2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot two times and died from his 

injuries. He was working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and 

unprotected from intruders. And we know that armed robberies 

such as the ones that took place in Regina in late January and 

also the one in Saskatoon just a few weeks ago show that 

Jimmy’s law is needed more than ever to give workers added 

protection in the workplace. 

 

We know that British Columbia and other provinces have 

brought several safety precautions through law, including a 

requirement that workers cannot be alone during late-night, 

early morning hours. And if they are required to work, there 

must be protective barriers such as locked doors and protective 

glass. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Glenavon, Balcarres, Lumsden, and the city of Regina. I do so 

present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the management and 

accounting of our finances. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the Provincial 

Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin to provide 

responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy financial 

management as deserved by Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Saskatoon and Swift Current. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 

petition today calling on the Sask Party government to support 

the seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which 

provides Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a 

petition concerned with the future of the film and television 

industry in Saskatchewan. It runs parallel to an online petition 

that was presented today which included 7,637 signatures, just 

being up online since last Friday. 

 

The undersigned residents call attention to the fact that previous 

support for film, video, and television sectors created thousands 

of jobs. They state that in 14 years the film, video, and 

television industry has used $100 million of public investment 

to bring $623 million of revenue to the province. They call 

attention to the fact that the industry has created thousands of 

jobs, including over 1,200 jobs in the 2009-10 season alone, and 

that the film employment tax credit is money in rather than 

money out. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan continue to 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

provide a tax incentive for film, video, and television 

employment to leverage investment, employment, and 

growth in the province’s film, video, and television 

sector. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens from Regina, Shellbrook, 

Wolseley, and Kindersley. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern for our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many trappers of northern Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Housing Availability and Affordability 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last week 

the Finance minister delivered a strong and balanced budget, a 

budget that expands the plan for affordable housing and 

introduced a new corporate income tax rebate on new rental 

housing to address the housing availability and affordability for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The tax incentive has been widely acclaimed across the 

province. Saskatoon Mayor Don Atchison called it wonderful. 

Moose Jaw Mayor Glenn Hagel celebrated the initiative as 

removing the biggest deterrent to building new rental units. 

Prince Albert’s mayor, Jim Scarrow, said, and I quote, “The 

province is clearly listening to its stakeholders and taking 

action to lead the nation in provincial approaches to housing 

incentives.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t just municipal officials who were 

excited. Bill Madder of the Association of Saskatchewan 

Realtors noted on budget day that this lowers the key barrier 

that has kept private dollars from flowing into the rental market. 

And as Mr. Madder put it, “This initiative puts Saskatchewan in 

a national leadership role.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the direction of the Minister of Social 

Services, this budget investment will develop 12,600 new 

homes and over 10,000 new rental units, helping to keep the 

Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday the 

minister told this Assembly that the preservation of our film and 

television industry was not a real issue. I’m happy to rise today 

to help my colleague from Regina South understand how real 

this issue is. 

 

This industry is one which has invested more than $600 million 

in our province since the introduction of the tax credit. It is one 

with a 6 to 1 return on every dollar invested. The film and 

television industry has been told by this government that it’s not 

that it hasn’t made money; it’s just that it hasn’t made enough 

money — a ridiculous contention. 

 

It is also a creative industry which brings Saskatchewan stories 

to audiences around the world. Saskatchewan films have been 

screened at the Toronto International Film Festival, Cannes, and 

Sundance and are honoured with Gemini and Emmy awards. It 

offers us the chance to build pride of place when we see our 

friends and neighbours, our landscapes, our province on the 

screen, but it also allows us to share our province with the 

world. 

 

Most importantly, film and television may be an industry, but 

that industry is made up of real people — moms, dads, brothers, 

sisters, aunts, uncles, grandmas, grandpas — many people who 

pay taxes, buy homes, spend their money here, volunteer in 

their communities, and enrich our province with their work. 

 

We see children in the gallery today because they too are 

affected by the short-sighted decision to axe the film tax credit. 

This government talks about the need to attract and keep 

skilled, creative, entrepreneurial people within our borders; this 

is why the decision to kill the tax credit makes no sense. These 

are exactly the people who make a living in this industry. Mr. 

Speaker, I can assure the minister that the preservation of our 

film and television industry is a real issue. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Tender Awarded for New Hospital 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 

was good news this morning about the new regional hospital in 

Moose Jaw moving forward. 

 

Today the Five Hills Health Region announced the awarding of 

a combined tender for both the design and construction of the 

hospital. An innovative team of world-class engineering, 

architectural, and construction professionals will work 

collaboratively on the design and construction of the new 

facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the consortium that won the 

tender, made up of: the Devenney Group Architects, an 

award-winning health care architectural firm; Boldt Company, a 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

leading lean construction firm; Black & McDonald, the national 

leader in the health sector; as well as local leaders, Graham 

Construction, Stantec Architecture Ltd., and Stantec Consulting 

Ltd. This project team will listen to the health care needs of the 

patients and design a facility with those needs as the focus. 

 

Unlike a traditional construction project, we will see a team of 

designers, builders, health providers, and government working 

with patients, families, communities, and staff to create a new 

kind of facility that emphasizes safety, comfort, convenience, 

and quality service. Our government is committed to putting the 

patient first in the health care system. We look forward to more 

progress in Moose Jaw as this project gains momentum. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Western Development Museum 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Western 

Development Museum operates in North Battleford, Yorkton, 

Moose Jaw and, luckily for me, in my constituency of 

Saskatoon Nutana. These museums are the pride of the province 

as they tell our story to as many as 200,000 visitors every year. 

Some come from away, and many are our children and friends 

and neighbours. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to take a class in blacksmithing at the 

museum, and have spent time in the blacksmith shop right there 

in Boomtown. I’ve also performed and attended at many events 

and celebrations at the museum, like the annual Festival of 

Trees and the Heritage Festival. 

 

Despite requests to help them with increased costs and salaries 

and utilities, the museums did not receive any additional 

funding in last week’s provincial budget. As a result, the 

Western Development Museum must now close its branches on 

Mondays. Museum officials say little or no increase in funding 

during the past several years has led to a $400,000 operating 

deficit. 

 

A teacher in my constituency who taught my son a few years 

ago sent me the following message this morning: 

 

It seems ironic that Boomtown doesn’t get any extra 

support to keep up with inflation costs during our current 

boom and growth in our city. As you know, I’ve taken my 

students to the museum for a hands-on look at our history 

every year I’ve been teaching in Saskatoon. It’s one of 

their favourite trips. It’s so much easier to teach about our 

unique heritage with the wonderful displays and exhibits. 

They deserve to be supported when times are good in our 

province. 

 

The Western Development Museum does us proud. Our 

history deserves to be told in the best light we can shine 

on it. This government should keep the boom in 

Boomtown. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Celebration of Cultures 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Sunday, March 25th, I had the privilege of attending the 

Celebration of Cultures community event along with my 

colleague the MLA for Regina Dewdney. The celebration took 

place at the Glencairn Neighbourhood Recreation Centre, 

located in the Regina Northeast constituency. The event was a 

combined effort by the Glen Elm Public Library, Regina Open 

Door Society, the Dewdney East Community Association, and 

ward 5 city councillor, John Findura, and they did a fantastic 

job. 

 

The goal of this project was to involve community leaders in 

the Dewdney East community to develop and implement a 

cultural arts program that allows for interaction between new 

community members, helping to increase the social engagement 

and participation of immigrants in the community. It was an 

afternoon of celebrating the many different cultures that make 

up our communities, our city, and our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The afternoon saw over 400 members of the community come 

out to participate and take in the array of festivities. Families 

were introduced to a variety of cultures through kiosk displays, 

ethnic foods, and performances. Visitors were treated to 

performances from the Regina Chinese Phoenix Dancers, 

Spanish performers Arodi Blanco and the Amigos, Irish 

dancers, Filipino singers, Bhutanese folk singers, and a grade 1 

and 2 class, Mr. Speaker, from St. Catherine School. 

 

It was great to be a part of an event that embraces our 

differences and brings the community together. Mr. Speaker, I 

ask all members to join me in recognizing all of the event 

organizers for putting on such a very successful event. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Three Inducted to Saskatchewan 4-H Hall of Fame 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to recognize the 4-H clubs of Saskatchewan and to 

congratulate the 2012 4-H Hall of Fame inductees, Carol 

Masecar, Eileen Peters, and Claude Wasden. The inductees 

have made outstanding contributions to the 4-H program in a 

volunteer capacity. I was honoured to bring greetings to this 

annual event on behalf of the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

I have a special affinity and passion for this organization, 

having served as a youth member in the Silver Spurs Lighthorse 

Club as a district 32 rep and as a 4-H leader for 15 years. 

Participants in the 4-H club take on a responsibility and are able 

to make decisions that affect end results. Our members have 

become better citizens and learn the value of contributing to 

their community and mentoring others by following the ideas of 

the 4-H pledge: I pledge my head to clearer thinking, my heart 

to greater loyalty, my hands to larger service, and my health to 

better living, for my club, my community, and my country. 

 

I recognize the value of 4-H personally and, as a result, our four 

children were members of the West P.A. [Prince Albert] Beef 

Club. 4-H provides service to community and country, 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

operating thanks to enormous volunteer and sponsor support. 

Please join me in applauding hard work, dedication, the 

development of great citizens, and our 2012 Saskatchewan 4-H 

Hall of Fame inductees. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Winning Coach, Winning Team 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, this last weekend the city of 

Regina hosted Hoopla, which features the top high school 

basketball teams from across the province competing for the 

gold medal in their respective categories. I would like to 

congratulate the Hudson Bay Riders senior boys’ basketball 

team for bringing home the gold medal to the Carrot River 

Valley constituency. The boys represented the North East 

School Division in the 3A division and showed tremendous 

skill, heart, and determination, defeating Caronport and 

Dalmeny on the way to a hard-fought final game against 

Moosomin where they came out on the winning side of a very 

close final game, 71-70. 

 

Nine of the players, including coach Gene Hauta, won 

provincial gold in six-man football this year as well. Gene has 

taught for 34 years, coached football for 30 years — four gold 

medals and six silver medals in football; basketball for 25, and 

this, his first time attending Hoopla, he is successful in bringing 

home the gold. I should mention that this is Gene’s last year of 

teaching, as he retires this June. What a way to go out. Once 

again, congratulations to the Hudson Bay Riders and their 

coaches, Gene Hauta and Trent Salmond, provincial champions 

in 3A senior boys’ basketball. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

announced yesterday the film tax credit will remain alive until 

the end of June. He left the impression that this allowed for 

some breathing room. Some would say this gives breathing 

room for the industry, but many think the government’s real 

goal was to give itself some breathing room to distance itself 

from the public backlash for this bad budget day decision. 

 

Unfortunately for the people of Saskatchewan, this isn’t a new 

movie for the government. This is a rerun. We saw the same 

movie when the government sold SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network]. After the public outcry, the 

government created a task force to help take the heat off. 

Important recommendations from this task force sat on a shelf 

for 18 months. In yesterday’s news release, the government yet 

again said it would work with the industry in solving the 

problem created by the government. 

 

To the Premier: can he explain what steps have been put in 

place to ensure the industry is not only heard, but that 

meaningful and prompt action is taken by the government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — We thank the member for her 

question. As mentioned before, we did in fact have a very 

productive meeting with the representatives of Saskatchewan’s 

film industry on Monday. And once again, our sincere thanks to 

Mr. Goetz and his colleagues for their time and their insight. 

 

At the meeting, the Premier confirmed our government’s 

decision to move away from the old model of direct grants that 

reward companies whether they pay income tax in 

Saskatchewan or not, and our decision not to enter into a 

bidding war with other jurisdictions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we fully understand that this sets us apart 

from other provinces in Canada. Here’s something else that sets 

us apart: we delivered a balanced budget. We also extended the 

old FETC [film employment tax credit] program deadline to 

June 30th, exactly as requested. And we’re looking forward to 

working with the industry representatives to find creative 

solutions within our balanced budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s 

announcement yesterday may have bought him some time and it 

may have given those in the film industry three months of hope, 

but what happens on July 1st? 

 

Clearly people are still concerned about their future here in our 

province. We can see by the number of people who are here in 

our galleries today and are in the building today. Many were not 

able to come to the legislature, but they have voiced their 

concerns and told their very personal stories in letters, email, 

and other communication with the Premier, including a petition 

that has more than 7,000 signatures on it. Clearly there is still 

too much up in the air when it comes to what this government 

plans to do at the end of June. 

 

To the Premier: what assurances does he have for the many 

families who make their livelihood in the film and television 

industry that they will have a job beyond June 30th and will be 

able to continue building their careers here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

we’ve been reminding the opposition that our promise to the 

people of Saskatchewan was to provide sustainable spending 

for programs and important infrastructure investments within a 

balanced budget. Mr. Speaker, we kept that promise. 

 

We also recognize that priorities often are different in other 

provinces. We’re told that New Brunswick has found more 

money for film, and their new budget was tabled with a deficit 

approaching $200 million. We know Manitoba has actually 

entered the bidding war for film production, and their 

third-quarter results show a deficit of over $600 million. And 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

Alberta, which is working to maintain its current share of film 

activity, just tabled a budget with a deficit of $900 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our priorities are different, and our solutions are 

too. We have honoured the industry’s request for time to 

complete this season’s business cycle and welcome the 

opportunity to work together to find creative new options within 

our balanced budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure if 

anyone on the government side has been paying attention to the 

outpouring of support to keep the tax credit. I would hope so. 

It’s not just the people who directly work in this industry but 

it’s people right across Saskatchewan who know the value of 

the film and television industry and the fact that it creates jobs, 

stimulates the economy, and puts Saskatchewan on the map. 

 

Even owners of small businesses and mayors are weighing in 

on the benefits of the tax credit. For example, in Dundurn 

people are concerned about the government’s action. The 

community was looking forward to Karma Films setting up an 

animation studio. Clothing store owner Tammy Beltrani, who 

has seen $8,000 purchases for one production alone, says it’s a 

good day when a costume designer walks into your store. Now 

mayors and small-business people are left wondering what’s in 

store for them without a vibrant film and television industry. 

 

To the Premier: he and his minister haven’t offered any 

specifics about the future for those who work in the industry. 

What does he have to say to the many communities and 

small-business owners who benefit from the job creation and 

economic spinoff generated by Saskatchewan’s film and 

television industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No one is 

denying the fact that the film industry creates economic 

activity, and no one is denying the fact that it also creates 

employment as well. And certainly no one is denying that the 

film industry matters. The real question, Mr. Speaker, is this: 

how much public money should be invested in an industry in 

which economic activity has dropped almost 70 per cent and 

employment is down almost 55 per cent in the last five years 

alone? 

 

Mr. Speaker, do we put more tax dollars into this industry and 

subsidize it at an even higher rate as requested when we are also 

being asked to deal with issues like affordable housing, child 

care spaces, autism funding, cancer treatment, surgical wait 

times, and building schools and hospitals and highways? Mr. 

Speaker, we determined that we couldn’t get it all done within 

our balanced budget. That’s why we’re winding down the 

program and that’s why we’re working with industry members 

to identify creative alternatives. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to quote an 

excerpt from a letter to the Premier regarding the government’s 

decision to kill the tax credit: “This news caught us all off 

guard. It is particularly disappointing as we were previously 

given solid assurances by your government that the tax credit 

would remain intact.” This is not a letter from someone working 

in the industry here, a mayor, or a small-business person 

working in Saskatchewan. This letter comes from Paul 

Bronfman Jr., a man who would generally seem to have the 

Premier’s ear. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan and those who do business here 

did not hear a word about the cuts to the tax credit leading up to 

the election. In fact they were assured of the exact opposite: the 

Premier and his government gave assurances that the film tax 

credit would remain in place and business people like Paul 

Bronfman invested accordingly. Now that commitment has 

obviously been broken.  

 

To the Premier: what message does the decision to kill the tax 

credit send to people like Mr. Bronfman and others who want to 

do business here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 

an excerpt. Here’s what they’ve said about us in the Winnipeg 

Sun, Friday, March 23rd of this year. 

 

Under the headline “Sask. kicking our butts with budget,” the 

article states: 

 

In Manitoba the NDP government has plunged taxpayers 

into a deep, structural deficit with no end in sight to the 

red ink our elected officials have us swimming in . . . So 

why are they doing so much better in Saskatchewan . . . 

The truth is, Manitoba hasn’t taken the steps over the 

years that Saskatchewan has in transforming itself into a 

lean, competitive province that has done a bang-up job 

attracting industry, skilled labour and capital . . . But 

that’s not the only reason the Wall government has its 

financial house in order . . . The Saskatchewan 

government has maintained a level of discipline in its 

spending even during relatively good economic times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t have said it better ourselves. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Security of Health Information 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We learned yesterday 

that the government released 44 computers with highly 

confidential personal health information. Thirty-two of those 

computers have been relocated, but 12 of those hard drives, Mr. 

Speaker, are still missing. My question to the minister: when 

was he notified of this issue, and did he notify the public at the 

earliest opportunity? 

 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we take the privacy of all health care information 

very, very seriously. I’ll update the member opposite that there 

have been 37 of the hard drives now located out of the 44. 

Having said that, there’s still seven missing that we’ll be 

certainly working hard to track down. 

 

I was informed of this on March the 12th. We immediately 

went to eHealth and made sure those officials were notified 

which then in turn went straight to the Privacy Commissioner to 

make sure that he was notified, Mr. Speaker. The Privacy 

Commissioner has since come out and said all the proper steps 

were followed once we learned of the breach, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a serious, absolutely serious situation, but when you 

listen to Susan Antosh the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

new eHealth, Mr. Speaker, she states that she feels that most of 

the hard drives had no personal information. Mr. Speaker, 

having said that though, we are still looking into this to see 

what else we can do to secure those hard drives, Mr. Speaker, 

and make sure this never happens again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I agree with the minister. This is a very serious 

issue. And whether it’s an issue of eHealth losing hard drives or 

whether it’s an issue of medical records being found in a 

dumpster, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people really care about 

this issue because it’s about personal, private information; 

information that people want to know is being kept with the 

highest amount of security as possible. 

 

Now my question to the minister, he spoke some about this in 

his comment: does he have an idea, Mr. Speaker, about how 

many individuals may have been put at risk of their personal 

information being out in the public? And will he be notifying 

individuals if their personal information has been put at risk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, to again quote Susan 

Antosh, the CEO of eHealth. Mr. Speaker, she says, our 

investigation is not complete yet, but we’re pretty confident 

knowing that these computers were not used for . . . and that we 

believe the risk is minimal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only take the word of the CEO, and we’re 

certainly looking into them. What they are doing is looking at 

the hard drives that we have brought back into the eHealth to 

see what type of information was on that. We are quite sure, 

and I should say the CEO is quite sure, that there was no 

personal information that has been let out. But having said that, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re taking all the steps that we need to take to 

make sure that this never happens again. We have strong 

policies in place. I would say that this was a human error, not 

certainly an intentional human error, but a human error where 

computers were let out. The policy is, no computer is to be let 

out without the hard drive taken out of the computer and 

destroyed, Mr. Speaker. This was a situation where some were 

let and it’s unacceptable. And as I say, we’re still investigating. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was 

specifically about informing the public if in fact their 

information has been put at risk. 

 

So my question to the minister: if individual patient’s 

information has been put at risk, does the minister pledge today 

to inform the individuals and the public that information has 

been put at risk? And how soon could individuals in the public 

expect that notice once the answer is determined as to whether 

or not individuals’ information has been put at risk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Privacy 

Commissioner Gary Dickson has weighed in on this as well. As 

I said, we notified him through eHealth as soon as we were 

aware. And this is his quote, Mr. Speaker:  

 

I think at this stage I’m satisfied that they’re taking the 

appropriate steps to investigate. They’re going to be 

putting together an internal investigation report. They have 

offered to review that with us and then at that stage my 

office will determine if there’s any further investigation 

we need to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re following through with the proper steps to 

ensure that these will be secured if we possibly can. The 

investigation is under way, Mr. Speaker. We have a very good 

idea of what happened here. The corrective measures have been 

taken. 

 

As there is more information learned, Mr. Speaker, as with this 

government on many, many other issues, unlike the members 

opposite when they were government, we are very transparent 

on this. We notified the right authorities as soon as possible, 

Mr. Speaker. We take these issues very seriously. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t hear a clear pledge in the 

minister’s response that the public would in fact be notified if 

individuals’ information was put at risk. 

 

In 2003, Mr. Speaker, the previous NDP [New Democratic 

Party] government introduced the health information privacy 

Act in order to enhance the protection of individuals’ private 

information. Past incidents when there has been a breach of 

information, Mr. Speaker, and there’s been a violation of the 

HIPA [The Health Information Protection Act] legislation, it’s 

been often due to a couple of factors. One, perhaps it’s an 

absence of policies or procedures to ensure that information is 

taken care of properly. Or, Mr. Speaker, it could be a lack of a 

culture of security, an organizational culture, to ensure that 

information is kept secret in a very intentional way. 

 

My question to the minster: as the investigation continues and 

the cause is determined by officials, does the minister pledge 

today to fully make the findings of that investigation open to the 

public? 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, 

the legislation came into effect under their watch. And I 

remember at different times under their watch, there was 

breaches of the legislation at that time where personal 

information was let that shouldn’t have been let. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as recently as about a year ago — no I guess, yes 

about a year ago, Mr. Speaker — there was some information 

found. We acted swiftly and decisively, Mr. Speaker. I 

remember seeing, I think, the former member from Dewdney 

kind of going through a dumpster, pulling out boxes, Mr. 

Speaker. At that time, we took it very seriously, and we sent a 

letter to all the medical, all the trustees of medical records, 

especially physicians, to make sure they knew how important 

this was. In fact at that time, shortly after that letter was sent, 

the former leader of the opposition, who no one has seen since, 

Mr. Speaker, had very, very positive things to say that we have 

taken it seriously, and he was glad to see the steps this 

government took. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Employment and Education for Northerners 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, there is a large sector of people 

in northern Saskatchewan that feel abandoned by the Premier 

and the government. They hear the Premier talk about his trip to 

Ireland, and they listen to him talk about how he was saddened 

and humbled by the unemployment. Mr. Speaker, they wonder 

why he isn’t saddened by the unemployment in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the minister: with all of the need for jobs and 

economic development in the North, why is the Sask Party 

slashing the northern economic development fund by over 38 

per cent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much 

to the member opposite for the question. And let me assure the 

member that First Nations and Métis people from across 

Saskatchewan, people in northern Saskatchewan are a top 

priority for this government, Mr. Speaker. Time and time again, 

budget after budget, the money is there, the programs are 

increasing. But, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, the results are 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an increase of 5,900 people working in northern 

Saskatchewan, First Nations and Métis, a 17.4 per cent increase. 

And, Mr. Speaker, something that we should all be proud of, an 

increase of 1,400 in aboriginal youth employment, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s more work to do. We’re ready to do the work, Mr. 

Speaker, but members in this House should be proud of what 

has already been accomplished. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, northern economic 

development fund plays an important role in helping bring jobs 

to a region of our province that is in such need of them. This 

government is taking more than $1 million out of the fund at a 

time when jobs and northern economic development is needed 

more than ever. My question to the minister: why is the 

government spending millions on three more politicians while 

they are cutting the northern economic development fund by 38 

per cent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

knows that the premise to his question is absolutely wrong. 

There will not be one more dollar spent in that regard. Where 

there will be more money spent and where there has been more 

spent is in First Nations and Métis funding, Mr. Speaker. It has 

gone up to $172.4 million, an increase of $4.7 million or 2.8 per 

cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, members opposite may not feel that 

$4.7 million increase is large enough. We know that today they 

have $5 billion of reckless spending on their website that they 

promised, and evidently by keeping it up there, they want to 

continue that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, First Nations and Métis people across the 

province, people in northern Saskatchewan know that when this 

government makes a commitment, it’s sustainable and it’s there 

for their long-term benefit, unlike members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, that’s interesting because northern 

Saskatchewan First Nations, Métis know the cuts that this 

government has made in this budget. Mr. Speaker, northern 

unemployment rate is currently 18.5 per cent, more than three 

times that of the province. The North needs economic 

development and jobs, not cuts to the economic development 

fund. When people talk to me back home, the last thing they 

mention to me is that we need more politicians. Will the 

Premier commit to restoring the funding to the northern 

economic development fund in this budget and bring jobs in 

hand to the North? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already laid out 

the facts. There’s more people working in Saskatchewan than 

ever before, more people of First Nations descent that are 

working in Saskatchewan than ever before. Mr. Speaker, this 

government has made it clear that we will put the training 

programs in place, Mr. Speaker, that are necessary. We will 

ensure that the education and employment outcomes are funded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity on Monday morning to join 

with ministerial colleagues and the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] to talk about the task force on 

education and employment, Mr. Speaker. And this indeed is a 

fruitful endeavour, not because it came from government, Mr. 

Speaker, because it came from talking to First Nations leaders. 

And together, working together with people like Gary Merasty 

and Rita Bouvier and Don Hoium, we will come forward with 

the ideas. Mr. Speaker, there is in fact more work to do. We are 

collaborating with leaders across Saskatchewan to make sure 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

that we have more people employed, more people educated, 

whether they’re First Nations or not in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Emergency Shelters 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on March 29th last year, the Minister of Social 

Services was questioned in this House here regarding the 

funding crisis at the Battlefords Indian and Métis Friendship 

Centre emergency shelter for the homeless. The shelter was 

forced to close early and when questioned last year, the minister 

responded, and I quote, “I’m well aware that there is an issue in 

North Battleford at this time, and all of us know that everybody 

needs a roof over their head.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister may have been aware, but 

unfortunately this did not help the emergency shelter when 

again this year, they announced that they would have to close 

even earlier, in the dead of winter. 

 

To the minister: why did this government choose to ignore the 

warning signs and abandon those needing shelter in North 

Battleford? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m well aware of the issue 

that’s going on in North Battleford and the issue with the shelter 

rates. And I think the member opposite knows that we have 

increased the per diems to shelters. And we have contingency 

plans to make sure that if there isn’t shelters, that people can go 

to hotels. 

 

But right in North Battleford, the per diems provided to people 

staying at the shelter are still there. The member opposite is 

aware of that. We’re working with community partners right 

across Saskatchewan to make sure that there is emergency 

shelters and maintaining it. And to the member opposite, there 

is funding until March 31st for this shelter in North Battleford. 

We’re aware of that, and we will continue to ensure that people 

who need a space in our province will have one. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — So, Mr. Speaker, the minister did know about 

the funding crisis facing the Battlefords Indian Métis Friendship 

Centre last year, and she let it happen again this year, only 

earlier. Mr. Speaker, it’s only because the city of North 

Battleford and a prominent citizen, the retired Senator Herb 

Sparrow, stepped in to keep the emergency shelter open for 

February and March. And we know on some nights there’s as 

many as 16 people needing that shelter in that city. Now she 

promised action, and she failed to deliver. How could she let 

this happen? Is she saying she’s having the proper amount of 

funding this year on April 1st? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — The members opposite know very well, 

the members opposite know very well that our government has 

spent an incredible amount of money ensuring that there is 

emergency shelters. And we’ve looked at it right across our 

province. We’ve got new shelter spaces in Saskatoon and 

Regina and Prince Albert. We’ve doubled the number of . . . 

We’ve increased the emergency shelter rates by up to 85 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, North Battleford is well aware that we have per 

diems for them. That’s the kind of money that we provide for 

people who need emergency shelters if they haven’t been 

asking for money for their shelter except for the per diem. 

That’s what we are doing, Mr. Speaker. There is individuals 

right across this province are aware that if there isn’t a shelter 

space for them, we will go to hotels. But the member opposite 

should know the hotel uses in this province has gone down 

considerably since they left government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, she talks about her looking at the 

issue, looking at the issue. But people in North Battleford need 

action. And this is cold comfort for the people, the ones who are 

homeless in North Battleford. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this speaks to a larger issue of homelessness 

right across this province. And since this government took 

power in 2007, the homelessness crisis has steadily grown. 

Housing First, or the rapid rehousing, is a relatively new 

approach to housing that aims to find people a permanent 

residence rather than providing people a succession of shelter 

and transitional housing before addressing other issues such as 

mental health, addictions, or employment. Now proponents say 

it saves taxpayers money compared to the jumble of social 

services, shelter, and other emergency responder resources used 

to help the homeless. 

 

Will the minister commit to fully embracing the Housing First 

strategy and show real leadership in our communities to ensure 

that all people have a safe place to call home every night? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I went to Alberta a few 

weeks ago and talked to members in Calgary and in Edmonton 

about the Housing First initiative. We actually went to some of 

the shelters and looked at the work they were doing. And then I 

came back to Saskatchewan and talked to people like the 

Salvation Army. And you know what they said? Housing also 

needs supports. They said you can’t just talk about housing 

without ensuring their supports. So that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I 

was very pleased just a couple of weeks ago to go to Downtown 

Browne and support the very first youth emergency shelter in 

this province, Mr. Speaker.  

 

The members over there were absolutely delighted that we are 

taking an initiative of ensuring that youth in this province have 

something new to look at and that we are spending money on 

the opportunities for people to have a home . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

The Speaker: — Order. Will the member from Saskatoon 

Centre come to order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I think if the members opposite want to 

talk about records, I would love to talk about some of the 

records that they have. The children that are living in 

low-income, single-parent homes doubled under the NDP. 

Today we have 2,000 fewer children living in low-income 

homes in the province. Seniors living in poverty more than 

doubled under the NDP. In 10 years, Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Question period has ended. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 

privilege and an honour for me to resume my remarks regarding 

the budget. The applause I just heard, I’m not sure whether 

that’s for the excitement that they’re anticipating in so much as 

I . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I was going to debate whether I 

should start from the beginning again. However I rethought 

that, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll begin where I left off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our guiding principles speak to a high-quality 

health care system for all Saskatchewan people regardless of 

where they live in the province. Mr. Speaker, regional health 

authority funding increases of $98 million, $60.5 million for 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative, $2.5 million increase to reduce 

costs for those with diabetes, expanding the children’s insulin 

pump program, $4 million to expand the colorectal cancer 

screening program, and go-ahead planning for hospitals in 

Moose Jaw and North Battleford, as we already heard today in 

member’s statements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard comments from across the floor about 

common sense priorities. Mr. Speaker, if improving health care 

for all of our citizens, for all of our citizens no matter where 

they live isn’t a common sense priority, I’m not sure what is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, creating a strong social safety net which protects 

those who truly need support, another one of our guiding 

principles, is evidenced in this budget. Since taking office in 

2007, government funding for disabilities programming has 

increased by $308.8 million. 

 

The Saskatchewan assured income for disabilities program, 

SAID, is most important. This program truly allows people with 

disabilities to live independently and live with pride and live 

with dignity. Couples with disabilities living independently will 

receive $230 a month increase. 

 

One million dollars for the enhancement of autism spectrum 

disorder therapies, bringing the total funding for autism to $7.6 

million. Six hundred thousand dollar increase for FASD [fetal 

alcohol spectrum disorder] prevention services. Five hundred 

thousand dollars to maintain literacy camps for underprivileged 

youth. And, Mr. Speaker, literacy, in my mind, if we’re ever 

going to close the gaps in outcomes for the marginalized, the 

answer lies in literacy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I accompanied the Minister of Social 

Services to one of Saskatchewan’s approved private service 

homes serving people with intellectual disabilities. The Minister 

of Social Services announced an 11.6 per cent funding increase 

effective May the 1st. This investment, Mr. Speaker, this 

investment builds on the government’s four-year commitment 

to eliminate the wait-list of 440 Saskatchewan people with 

intellectual disabilities who require programs and services by 

2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is truly a common sense approach to service 

for people who are disadvantaged. Mr. Speaker, what I 

witnessed yesterday was a warm and caring family environment 

for three young men with challenging disabilities. 

 

You know, in my background, Mr. Speaker, I was sitting in my 

office with an elder, and we were talking about report cards. 

And the elder said to me, you know, sir, sometimes we don’t 

really need to have a report card. When my child comes home 

from school and I see a smile on his face, Mr. Speaker, I know 

that good things are happening. Well yesterday when I was in 

Bev Duncan’s living room and I saw the smiles on the three 

boys that were in her care, Mr. Speaker, the warmth and 

genuineness in that living room was obvious. Good things are 

happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget introduces a new education funding 

formula and increases K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

funding to help with the transition to the new formula. As a 

result of the new funding formula and education funding 

increase, all school divisions will see an increase in funding, 

ranging anywhere from 1.7 to 14.4 per cent. 

 

I’d be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t mention two new schools 

going up in Regina Douglas Park: Arcola Community School 

and Douglas Park elementary school — state-of-the-art 

facilities that we’ve been waiting for a long, long time for that 

kind of infrastructure and investment in our future. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to commend our Minister of Education and her 

ministry officials for a job well done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been around education for a couple of years 

now, and I have the first-hand experience with a couple of 

versions of the old foundation operating grant. And I could go 

on ad nauseam about the inequities that those tools created. I 

have to say that this new model addresses those inequities. And 

what is equally important, Mr. Speaker, is that our Minister of 

Education has provided opportunities for more input as we 

move forward should there be a need to address any 

fundamental flaws should they appear, Mr. Speaker — common 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

sense and consultation exemplified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past, and prior to this government coming 

into office, the provincial government’s share of education 

expenses was 40 per cent and local ratepayers were responsible 

for 60 per cent. Under this government, that dynamic is 

reversed with government’s share at 65 per cent and local 

ratepayers the remaining 35 per cent. Mr. Speaker, public 

education is exactly that — public. And I can report, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s alive and well in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, parents send us the absolute best children they 

have, and they expect us to give them the very best we have. 

What we have in this budget allows for school divisions to do 

that, to make decisions that are unique to them without having 

to worry about burdening a very supportive local community. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, if the education of our children is not a 

priority, I don’t know what is. In fact, Mr. Speaker, and I quote 

from a news release by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, 

headline, “STF Welcomes Priority Placed on Education in the 

Provincial Budget.” 

 

“The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation welcomed the 

provincial government’s pledge that PreK-12 education is a 

priority in this year’s provincial budget.” Further, Mr. Speaker, 

from the president of the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation], Mr. Steve Allen: 

 

The increase to funding is welcome in the fact that 

education is placed as a priority by this government. We 

think education is an investment. It is an investment in not 

just the infrastructure; it is an investment in children, in 

the people in this province, and to the future. That is very 

important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this government is addressing the 

common sense priorities I keep hearing about: health care, 

education, people with disabilities, highways, municipal 

revenue sharing, affordable housing, seniors, and we go on. 

And, Mr. Speaker, above all, program sustainability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2012-13 provincial budget is about keeping 

the Saskatchewan advantage — balanced budget, a growing 

economy, and government services that are affordable and 

sustainable in the long run. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many examples around the country and 

around the world where governments are in trouble because of 

economic and financial decision making that was based on 

populist thinking. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy and 

Saskatchewan finances are in great shape. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is how we will maintain the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you. And, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 

the budget and I will not be supporting the amendment. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With pleasure to 

join in on the debate of the budget and make some comments, 

and I guess . . . But before I start out with making comments on 

why northern people are very concerned about the budget and 

areas that affect them, I want to make it . . . I want to put out a 

thank you to my staff, CAs, and the wonderful job that they do. 

They truly are front-line dealing with issues that affect all of our 

constituents. So I just want to acknowledge the CAs that are out 

there, and it’s a good job that they do. 

 

But before I go into that, I want to thank my wife and family for 

their support, and all those individuals that are out there that 

give us the support. And some days when the job is tough, 

you’re frustrated with some of the issues, and you hear some of 

the challenges that people are going through. And I think about 

a lot of the young people in northern Saskatchewan. You know, 

I get a chance to visit lots with them, and go to workshops and 

conferences for northern Aboriginal people, young people. And 

you know, truly, they want to have hope. They want to make 

sure that their government is taking care of them, that their 

government hears their concerns. And unfortunately the 

frustration’s there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, we talk about a budget and it’s over $11 billion 

being spent. But unfortunately for northern Saskatchewan, some 

of the conditions . . . And I’ll get into that very clearly. We see 

nothing but a bunch of cuts. And been talking to a lot of people 

and if it was Aboriginal programs, if it’s northern 

Saskatchewan, there were cuts to it. Pretty frustrating for a 

population that has such a high unemployment rate. For a 

province that is supposed to be the advantage, they’re not 

feeling the advantage. 

 

And yes, some people have good paying jobs in the mines and 

that’s fine, you know. They’re happy, we’re happy, and it’s 

good. It’s good that people are working for Cameco, Areva. 

There are some big companies out there making sure people 

make a good living in northern Saskatchewan. But in the rest of 

the province, there are many people who work in the mining 

industry in northern Saskatchewan and they come from the 

South and they work in the mining industry. 

 

[14:30] 

 

There are jobs that are special jobs that are needed and special 

talents and I guess training that individual . . . [inaudible] . . . 

and they’re okay with that. But they want to make sure that they 

get a chance first and that dollars are put there, Mr. Speaker, 

that the dollars are put into education, that the dollars are put 

into training to make sure that Aboriginal people, First Nations 

have a chance at those jobs. They want to make sure that 

they’re getting a level playing field. That’s all they ask. They 

want no special deal. They just want to have a level playing 

field with funding. 

 

And we see in the cuts that this government has made to 

northern Saskatchewan, whether it’s, you know, training, 

employment . . . And there are wonderful and excellent 

institutes out there — GDI [Gabriel Dumont Institute], SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies]. They do 

excellent job of training. We have Northlands College. They do 

a lot of good work out there. And we know that, in partnerships, 

they do a good job. 

 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, you know, we see the cuts and 

how they affect . . . And you want to talk about roads in 

northern Saskatchewan. Some of our roads are in such bad 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

shape. I mean some of the companies that are transporting 

goods to mines, you hear them, the truck drivers, complaining 

constantly on the dangerous roads and that they have to travel 

on. And that’s not wrong. And it’s not just the transport 

companies that have to travel these roads. There are many 

community members in the North that have to travel these 

roads. 

 

And they know, in northern Saskatchewan, they know the Sask 

Party. And I think clearly that’s why they rejected them in the 

two northern ridings very clearly. They know the Sask Party 

will not support, will not take care of them. They’ve seen every 

time it’s a Conservative government or a Sask Party 

government or whatever they want to rename themselves, it’s 

just been cuts, cuts, cuts, because they do. We have our elders. 

We have our community members who do believe in a party 

and know what the NDP Party has done, the New Democratic 

Party has done for northern Saskatchewan, and will continue to 

do. And we will have to fight for those individuals in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But I just, you know, I look at some of the areas of concern in 

housing. And in this budget — I have to be honest with you — 

there is not going to be an opportunity for northern people, 

people in our province to have the home ownership program. 

This government has abandoned that. It was a program that 

allowed many northern people, people in our province, to 

purchase their home, to own something to call their home. And 

they’re very proud of that, and they worked hard to do that. 

 

This government is making cuts and we see that. We look at 

long-term care in northern Saskatchewan. We look at La Ronge. 

And we have served petitions. We’ve had announcements and 

everything else in other communities, photo ops, but 

unfortunately for northern people they just want to be treated 

fair. 

 

And when you look at some of the roads they have to travel on, 

when you look at the long-term care facilities, the neglect by 

this Sask Party government to our elders, our seniors . . . When 

it comes to long-term care in the North, so many of them have 

to be taken away. And there’s such a long waiting list to get 

into a long-term care. So we see some of these areas. 

 

You know, we look at addictions. And you know, the front-line 

workers out there are doing an excellent job. But we’re burning 

them out. There’s more resources. There’s got to be a better 

plan, and we don’t see that. And you look at the cuts. And I go 

into that area and I say . . . You watch some of the communities 

that I go to and you talk to the young people and they say, for 

instance some of the leaders told me mental health workers are 

supposed to be in there dealing with community members. And 

when you have some communities have a large population of 

young people and they lose hope. There’s no jobs. They may 

graduate, but they stay in the community. And it doesn’t take 

them long to be pulled into the gangs, to be pulled into 

activities, whether it’s alcohol, drugs; they get pulled into that. 

And they need supports. And we see some of the communities 

have been without mental health workers for 18 months. 

 

And it’s unfortunate to see that, to see these young people all 

over, and they’re struggling. They just want a level playing 

field. That’s all they ask from the government. But this 

government doesn’t seem to want to do that. In northern 

Saskatchewan they feel that. The First Nations communities, 

they know that. You can have . . . I mean all members of this 

House, we have a responsibility to work on behalf of all 

citizens. They may not support the Sask Party. That’s fine. They 

may not support the NDP Party. They may support another 

party. But we don’t turn our backs on them. We don’t just go 

after them and say, well we’re going to cut — we’re going to 

show you; we’re going to play hardball. 

 

And you can sit in here and talk about all the numbers you 

want, Mr. Speaker. They can say how good thing, and you can 

cheerlead all you want. But when you go back home to northern 

Saskatchewan and some of the First Nations communities and 

you see what’s truly going on in there . . . When they announce 

their numbers and they want to cheerlead around the numbers 

that they’re doing so good, I say this very clearly to the 

members, the backbenchers, the Aboriginal individuals: make 

sure you’re fighting, make sure you’re . . . Make a fight for the 

Aboriginal people. They are part of this province. Have that 

backbone. You’re a backbencher. You have a lot of say. I 

encourage you, speak up. 

 

That’s a way we can get the message across that times have to 

change. Times have to change. We have a population that is 

being left behind. And Eric Howe, the professor, he talks about 

the economic disaster going on, that we have such a potential if 

we will just put the investment into training, education of our 

young Aboriginal population, to make sure we reach out to the 

industry, to make sure we see what they’re going through in 

their homes. 

 

Some of the young people in northern Saskatchewan, they’re 

put in an environment that’s not been so easy for them. But 

sometimes, you know, I talk to them and I listen, and it’s pretty 

sad. And you know, in northern Saskatchewan we have such a 

large youth, but unfortunately we have so many committing 

suicide because they’ve lost hope. You know, and we try to 

encourage them, whether it’s a conference that they put on. 

There’s different things that go on, activities. They try to work 

with them to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that they understand there 

is hope and never lose hope, that there is opportunities and 

maybe through training. But when we lose a young person or 

we lose anyone to suicide . . . And in northern Saskatchewan, 

suicide is . . . It’s just overwhelming sometimes when you have 

to go see the family, the mushom and the kohkom. You pay 

your respects as a leader of the community. And they don’t 

know why. They’re hurt; they’re angry, confused. But they’re 

in the reality. That’s what they have to deal with, and they wish 

they could do more. 

 

But the government has to do more. This government has to do 

more. Can’t put your head in the sand and say, oh no, it’s not 

our responsibility. It is your responsibility. And they need the 

government, those 49 members of the government to stand up 

and say, we can do better. We have a right to the young people. 

We have a right to make sure northern people in northern 

Saskatchewan get treated fair — not special — make sure they 

get treated fair. 

 

So when I look at the different cuts that are going on, and we 

look at the forest fire, you know, protection unit, we see the cuts 

that went on there, over $3 million. A time when . . . And 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

people are concerned up north that it’s going to be a dry season. 

So we’re having cuts, Mr. Speaker. And if you’re going to cut, 

a time when there is concern, we wonder why. Is it again 

northern Saskatchewan didn’t support a certain political party? 

They didn’t support the Sask Party, so they’re going to be cut, 

cut, cut. There’s a lot of frustration going on out there. 

 

You look at our seniors, look at some of their homes that 

they’re living in. Look at some of the First Nations 

communities. The leadership are doing all they can to work 

with them, the community members, the agencies that are 

around there. There’s a lot of individuals out there trying to do 

. . . They’re not asking anyone just to come in and fix. They 

understand. They have solutions and ideas. But when they come 

up with a solution and an idea, they need resources. 

 

And when you have $11 billion a year spending, and we hear 

them cheerleading out $11 billion, well spend some money on 

individuals who truly have the highest unemployment rate, the 

highest youth suicide, highest addictions, unemployment, the 

list goes on, the worst housing conditions. If you look at the 

Conference Board of Canada, they make it very clear. Northern 

Saskatchewan is not doing good under this Sask Party 

government for the last five years. It’s getting worse. It’s not 

getting better. More programs being cut. 

 

When you look at the trappers, they don’t even support the 

trappers. They don’t support the trappers. They had a big 

convention. Not one government official showed up. So you 

look at that. You look at the fishing industry. The freight 

subsidy has been totally gone, wiped out, 450,000 wiped out. 

Fishermen used that money to get their fish to the marketplace. 

It was helpful. Why would a government cut something? Why 

would you not consult with the individuals, with the fishermen? 

Why would you not consult with trappers? Why would you not 

consult with individuals who you impact when you make these 

cuts? This government doesn’t believe in consulting. 

 

And people have said that time and time again, that I have sat 

here for just about five years watching it. Very little talking 

with the industry that they affect when they’re making their 

cuts. They do very little consultation, whether it’s First Nations, 

Métis. I don’t know why that is, but yet they want to some days 

come in the House and make it sound like everything’s going 

good. 

 

And there are things that are going good in our province. That’s 

right. Nobody will deny. We have over $11 billion to spend. 

Nobody’s denying that. Our province is doing wonderful. It is a 

beautiful province. It’s a province to be proud of. But 

unfortunately we have a lot of issues that we’re not dealing 

with, and it may not be the government’s priority. But let me 

make it very clear to the members, the 49 members over there. 

Speak up very clear. Speak up. Yes, yes they can say 49, and I 

know how humble you guys are. Forty-nine; we’ve got nine. 

That’s okay. We’re very clear. We’re going to make sure . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, yes, yes. Thank you for that, 

yes. 

 

But I’ll make it very clear that the nine of us are speaking for 

community members that are suffering. Our seniors are being 

asked to pay more for their prescriptions. The children are being 

asked to pay more for their prescriptions. For an ambulance, for 

an ambulance service, seniors are going to be asked to pay 

more, have families that are struggling. And affordability, and 

they talk about affordability. 

 

This government has money and millions of dollars for more 

politicians, but not to help the seniors to make sure they don’t 

have added costs. They’re struggling already. And we’ve heard 

our colleagues say already and very clearly that some of the 

seniors are not getting the medications that they need because 

they can’t afford to balance it. It just isn’t enough. 

 

Why, when we know that stuff, would we actually put any more 

costs to our seniors, children who are . . . Parents cannot afford 

the extra $5 prescription. It is, it’s tough for some of them out 

there. They’re barely making ends meet. I don’t see anyone 

else, I don’t see politicians having to suffer that way. So it’s 

amazing to watch how we expect some parts of society and 

some parts and groups to pay for this government’s cuts for 

whatever. 

 

And I mean we look at the different areas. And I want to go 

back to our commercial fishermen. They had hope that this 

government would support them with a building and a facility, 

and it sounded all good. And they walked away from it. I was 

hoping maybe in this budget they would announce that they had 

found the money because they had so much money. We keep 

hearing of how good everything’s going. They have their 

pompoms, and they constantly cheerlead around here. I’ve 

never seen it like it. They want to bring out stats and they want 

to read members’ statements and they want to talk about 

numbers and they want to say, oh, how great everything’s 

going. But they truly forget about some of the First Nations and 

northern communities, how bad things are. 

 

Have a tour. Go and look. Look for yourselves and see what’s 

going on. Go for yourselves and have a look. See if I’m making 

it up. Go out there and check it out and see if I’m telling you 

something that’s not right. They are struggling. I’ve seen 

seniors who have . . . Their homes are falling apart. They have 

no programs to get renovations, windows. There’s so much 

going on out there, how people are being treated in a province 

that goes around saying it’s doing so good. It’s just 

unbelievable. 

 

There’s the advantage. Well you know, go and look at some of 

those individuals that are struggling and see how an advantage 

they think, and see if they think the pompoms and all the great 

numbers are just wonderful. You will see the frustration, the 

hope that they are losing. 

 

But I tell you this. The leaders are getting tired of being not 

listened to. Community members are tired of not being 

respected by this government. You are making them angry. You 

are making them feel like they are not important. You are 

making our young people feel like it doesn’t matter. It isn’t 

right to do that to anyone. But I say this to the member, the 

backbenchers — speak up. Speak up for the individuals that are 

out there. You are our government. Do the right thing. And 

when individuals have issues and they’re raised, speak up for 

them. 

 

I want to make it very clear. Back home people are struggling, 

every community I go to. Yes, some people have good jobs, 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

some of them. Yes, don’t get me wrong. Some of them are 

doing good things. We have community members, leaders who 

are doing excellent in economics. When they need it the most, 

you cut programs and you cut the funding from different 

programs. And I can’t understand, when you’re hearing about 

all the needs in northern Saskatchewan, the First Nations 

communities, why you even consider cutting any programs. If 

you want to cut things, why don’t you go and consult them and 

ask them, is there better ways we could do with this money? If 

you would go and talk to them . . . But you don’t consult them. 

You just cut and then you tell people after the fact what’s going 

on. 

 

[14:45] 

 

That’s why the people in northern Saskatchewan on First 

Nations, Métis communities are frustrated. They are not feeling 

the big boom. And I want to make it clear. Some of them are 

doing an excellent job, whether it’s GDI, SIIT, there is a lot of 

good things going on. We know that. individuals who run 

business, who are doing an excellent job. But there are so many 

people left behind. They don’t see the advantage. And our 

young people, again I want to make it clear, are losing hope. 

And when a young person loses hope, it’s unfortunate. It’s 

suicide, and that’s pretty sad. Like I said earlier, when you have 

to go and see a family, mother and father, a mushom, a 

kohkom, and pay your respects as a leader because their young 

one’s gone, because they feel that lost hope, wasn’t any hope 

for them and they leave this world, it’s pretty sad. 

 

So government has a responsibility to do better. And they can 

do better if they will just listen and go out to the communities. 

I’ve invited the minister to come, and I hope the Premier and 

some of his colleagues will come to visit the North and have a 

look at what’s going on and see if it’s . . . why, why it’s 

happening. And not just to . . . And I mean look at education — 

and I know they have a task force that they’re going to put out 

there and they’re going to look at it. It’s supposed to be eight 

months ago, but it’s finally going. Let’s see what 

recommendations come from that and what action comes. 

That’s what I’m curious to see. Because we’ve seen other 

reports that government has gone out and actually gotten groups 

to go out and do a report, and in the end it sits on a shelf and 

never does anything. 

 

So I want to make it very clear. If they have an opportunity to 

join the minister when he comes to northern Saskatchewan — 

any of their colleagues — to see what’s going on, I’d encourage 

them to come. See some of the challenges. Talk to some of the 

community members and see what they’re going through. And 

see maybe when you’re around the cabinet table and you’re 

around your caucus table, you don’t say, hey it isn’t all good 

out there. It isn’t right. We’ve got a group of people who are not 

being treated right. They don’t have a level playing field. That’s 

all they want. They don’t want a handout. They just want to be 

treated with respect and a level playing field. 

 

And if you give them that opportunity, they will take it, and 

they will move forward, and we will have a better province for 

it. We will have a province that is truly balanced and a province 

where we can all say we enjoy the affordability. But for right 

now affordability is something that northern communities are 

struggling with. The cost to live in northern Saskatchewan is so 

much higher. And they struggle, but they stay there with their 

roots, with their families. They want to stay in their 

communities. Some people say, oh well, you should move, 

move, move. And some do. They get a better education and 

they get a job and they have maybe a trapper’s cabin or they 

have a home in the North that they keep. 

 

There are so many things . . . And we talk about, you know, the 

advantage and, you know, you hear that, and I hear the 

advantage, the advantage. And truly if you go to northern 

Saskatchewan to some of our First Nations and Métis 

communities, they sure don’t see the advantage. You know, not 

one of them has mentioned to me, you know, Doyle, what we 

really need to help us here is three more politicians. They don’t 

say that. I haven’t had one person contact my office or anything 

else and say we need more politicians. I’ve had people asking, 

how come they want to raise prescription drugs with seniors, 

children? Why do they want more politicians? And we say to 

them, that’s the Sask Party’s push. Their priority is three more 

politicians. 

 

So the frustration out there, when they’re hearing the cuts and 

they see what’s going, they wonder. So maybe we can do a 

better job in northern Saskatchewan with a housing plan, 

making sure that northern people can purchase a home. There 

was a program, worked really well. Why this government had 

to cut it, I don’t know. And I don’t know what else they’re 

going to cut, if all of a sudden we’re going to lose the RRAP 

[residential rehabilitation assistance program] program. Who 

knows what this government will cut? It’s amazing. 

 

But for northern Saskatchewan, make it very clear. They just 

want a level playing field. They want their government to take 

care of them. There’s a boom, the advantage if that’s what you 

want to use. I don’t care what you call it. At the end of the day, 

they just wanted to be treated with respect, and make sure of 

that funding. Our municipal leaders, our First Nations leaders, 

our Métis leaders, our youth, our elders, our community 

members want to have a fair chance, want to be respected. 

 

There’s a lot of resources coming out of northern 

Saskatchewan, and some of the leaders are frustrated and 

they’re saying, enough’s enough. When we see conservation 

officers leaving the area who did so much for those 

communities, and we’ve got a couple of communities where the 

. . . You decided to shut down an office that did so much to help 

those communities, whether it’s their fur licence, fish licence. 

There were so many things that those officers did, the offices 

did, conservation officers did in the community of Pelican 

Narrows, Cumberland House. But in this budget, you slashed 

them. They’re gone. Now those communities will have to be 

serviced out of Creighton and Nipawin. 

 

So it’s pretty sad to see cuts when we talk about the boom and 

you talk about so much money; there’s so much wealth; our 

province is doing so much. There is a group of citizens that are 

totally neglected by the government for whatever reason. I 

don’t know. But, Mr. Speaker, all the different cuts I’ve been 

talking about are affecting people in northern Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s roads, whether it’s the training, education dollars, 

whether it’s long-term care, whether it’s more prescription costs 

to our seniors, housing. There are so many issues affecting 

northern Saskatchewan, whether it’s our addiction services and 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

the lack of. 

 

And I say this again: the front-line workers are doing an 

excellent job, but we need more. We are losing the battle, and 

it’s time that the government . . . If they were serious, serious 

about this, they would say, this can’t go on; we have to do 

something better. 

 

Northern people — First Nations, Métis — deserve better. They 

deserve to be a part of this province. They don’t want no special 

deal. They just want to be treated fair. This government has 

turned their back on northern Saskatchewan, on Aboriginal 

people. And that’s clear if you talk to the leadership, and 

they’re getting frustrated. And I think if there isn’t a change and 

this government doesn’t start to respond to some of the needs in 

northern Saskatchewan, whether it’s our roads that are falling 

apart and are not getting fixed. If you look at Highway 2 going 

to north of La Ronge, half of one lane, it’s just about, half of it’s 

gone. The culvert and everything else, it’s still been like that for 

a year. 

 

We have the bridge where there’s concrete and everything else. 

The pavement is out of the bridge and people are travelling over 

that. They’re trying to fix it. The local workers do what they 

can do to patch it up, but there’s so much more needs to be 

done. The northern roads, they’re so heavily impacted by 

transportation trucks, by the big trucks. They’re pounded, the 

roads. 

 

So we see all these different things. We see the unemployment 

rate. We see all the different things I’ve talked about and 

challenges that northern Saskatchewan has. And they’re 

frustrated. The leaders are frustrated that this government isn’t 

responding. And again, I’ll say this, these are the reasons why 

northern people, First Nations and Métis people, are frustrated. 

They’re tired. They don’t believe this government supports 

them. 

 

And if you look at the legislation that’s coming forward to rule 

out a certain age group, 18 and under we don’t want to use in 

the boundaries, we can see what’s going on. People are talking; 

they’re figuring that out. There’s a group of young people — 

and it’s a large Aboriginal population of First Nations and 

Métis — that you don’t want to use in the formula. We 

understand that, what you’re up to. So the frustration out there, 

it’s a trust thing. You talk about trust.  

 

And I’m going to, before I finish, I want to make one last . . . 

To the individuals, we have a number of Aboriginal MLAs in 

this House. Aboriginal MLAs, they have an obligation, and they 

should be honoured to fight, honoured to take the fight on for 

First Nations and Métis individuals. They should speak up 

when they see areas that are being attacked and cut by a 

government, whether it’s this side of the House or it’s that side. 

The Aboriginal members should make sure that they’re fighting 

for the Aboriginal people to make sure they’re getting their fair 

share — just their fair share, nothing else. But what we’ve seen 

by this government has been nothing but cuts, cuts, cuts, and it 

can’t continue. 

 

As I’ve said, our young people, they’re losing hope. Our leaders 

are getting frustrated. I know that there’s northern people who 

are tired. They want to take more aggressive action. They’re 

angry. They’re tired. They feel like they’re not being heard. 

They’re not being respected and they’re just tired of it. They’re 

tired. So I see some of them very frustrated, and it concerns me 

how frustrated they are. Again some of them are angry. 

 

And you know, I was with the trappers. And the frustration, 

they’re hoping to get support. And we’ll see what happens. I’m 

still hopeful that the government will respond with them. I 

know they’re putting in a proposal. I’m hoping it’ll be very 

positive. That’s something then I could say yes, you guys did 

the right thing. They asked for some funding. You gave it to 

them. 

 

I have no problem with saying to somebody when it’s 

something good and done right, that it’s the right thing to do. I 

have no problem with saying, way to go. If it’s a new long-term 

care in La Ronge, which we need, wonderful. If that’s what a 

government wants, to have the people say thank you very much 

for doing this for us, we can do that. And we will. We’d be 

honoured to say that. 

 

But you have to make sure we get some of the announcements. 

You have to make sure we get some of the $11 billion you’re 

spending so that northern peoples feel a part of our province. 

They just want to be treated with respect. And I just encourage 

those members to remember that when they’re around the tables 

and you’re hearing the issues, make sure you fight for all 

Saskatchewan people, so we all have a level playing field. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, this is clearly why northern people 

do not support the budget, and I cannot support the budget. I 

will be voting on the amendment and not the budget at this 

time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 

pleasure that I rise in the House today to talk about the 2012-13 

budget. However first I’d like to thank my constituents of 

Saskatoon Fairview for entrusting me of this position to 

represent them in this Chamber. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Doyle, don’t go away. You’d better 

listen to this one. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Yes, please stay. 

 

I would also like to thank my team once again who took many 

hours out of their family and work time to have an effective 

campaign, no matter what challenges we faced. And 

unfortunately the member opposite left, but I’d like to have this 

on record. I do have a backbone, and that’s why I’m sitting on 

this side of the House. I want to remind the members opposite 

that I am the only First Nation in this Chamber, and none of 

them represent me or my views. They do not speak for me . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Can I? Okay. 

 

I would like to thank my daughter, who has sacrificed time with 

myself, the only parent in her life, and has been patient 

throughout this whole process. She has been my little rock from 

when she was a toddler when we would travel across country to 

moving to new places, which have been a little scary as I’ve 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

been a prairie girl most of my life, and some of that has been as 

a rez girl. She has been a great navigator in our travels, and can 

remember her holding a map that was five times her size while I 

was driving from Houston to Fort St. John, BC [British 

Columbia] to visit my mother. And she was eight at the time 

and she was already an experienced little traveller.  

 

I am so very blessed to have this child in my life and she’s 

never complained. She’s very resilient and has friends from all 

the places we have lived in, which ranged from Georgia to 

Texas to Saskatchewan to Alberta, and of course our journey 

back home to Saskatchewan where we belong, where I am very 

honoured to sit in this seat representing my constituents. 

 

This government has integrity and it is reflected in the balanced 

budget, and not to sound redundant, fiscal probity is quite 

important in this day and age of global economic uncertainty. 

The global economic crisis should not be taken lightly and 

perhaps the miscommunication that seems to be happening 

from members opposite when examining the Saskatchewan 

provincial budget of 2012-13 is just that — miscommunication. 

Whatever it is, either way it puzzles me. 

 

Prior to my role as the MLA for Saskatoon Fairview, I had the 

opportunity to work as a sessional lecturer, and I quite enjoyed 

the role and process. I am a life-long learner and it has been 

quite a few years since I have taken economics courses, but I 

remember that they were the ones that I looked forward to 

going when pursuing my undergraduate degree. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And taking the cue from the member opposite who reviewed 

basic accounting a few days ago — revenue minus expenses, 

etc. — and, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank him for that, it’s 

a good exercise. And the six years in business school, both 

undergraduate work as well as graduate work in the M.B.A. 

[Master of Business Administration] program, I spent, was 

summed up in one sentence, thank you. Also the years I spent in 

administrative positions in both the private sector and public 

sector. 

 

So on that note, I believe that it would be beneficial to review 

some economic terms and why fiscal responsibility is so 

important. Scarcity is a pervasive condition . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Please listen . . . is a pervasive condition of 

human existence that exists because society has unlimited wants 

and needs but limited resources used for their satisfaction. In 

other words, while we all want a bunch of stuff, we can’t have 

everything we want. In slightly different words, the scarcity 

problem means there’s never enough resources to produce 

everything that everyone would like produced, and that some 

people will have to do without some of the stuff they want or 

need. That doing one thing, producing one good, performing 

one activity, forces society to give up something else and that 

the same resources cannot be used to produce two different 

goods at the same time. 

 

We live in a big bad world of scarcity. This big, bad world of 

scarcity is what the study of economics is all about. That’s why 

we usually subtitle scarcity the economic problem. Opportunity 

cost . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The seven years in 

post-secondary school I think gave me some time for some 

critical thinking and I think I . . . Opportunity cost is one of the 

most frequently used tools for modern economic analysis, 

deriving many important economic theories and models. It is 

also a powerful tool in analyzing individual decision-making 

processes. Whoever you are — an individual, a company, or a 

nation — you face opportunity cost when making decisions.  

 

Nearly all decisions involve trade-offs. When we are choosing, 

we are also giving up. Every action and choice is associated 

with advantages and disadvantages, costs and gains. A key 

concept that recurs again and again in analyzing the 

decision-making process is the notion of opportunity cost. The 

full cost of making a specific choice is what we give up by not 

taking the alternative. That what we forego in making a choice 

or decision is called opportunity cost of the decision. More 

precisely, opportunity cost is not all that we are not choosing 

added up, instead it is the most valued one among all that we let 

go. Sometimes opportunity cost can be measured in terms of 

money, although money is not usually part of it, the only part of 

it. 

 

Economic policy and the four criteria for judging. Theories and 

models are positive statements, helping us understand the 

mechanism of the world, but the formulation of economic 

policy requires a second step, the step to further these theories 

and models into practice to get what we think it should be. 

What are the objectives? How to define better, this is what 

changes to our situation are positive. Do we . . . better off or 

worse off? 

 

Four criteria are frequently applied in making these judgments. 

Efficiency, in economics efficiency means allocated efficiency. 

An efficient economy is one that produces what people want 

and does so at the lowest possible cost. More technically, an 

efficient change in the allocation of resources is one that at least 

potentially makes some people better off without making 

people, without making others worse off. Since most changes in 

an economy will leave some people better off and others worse 

off, we have to devise a way of comparing gains and losses 

from a given change. So a change is considered at least 

potentially efficient if the value of resulting gains exceeds that 

of resulting losses. 

 

So I think you’d all appreciate equity, fairness. Few people 

agree on what is fair and what is unfair. For thousands of years, 

philosophers wrestled with the principles of justice to guide 

social decisions despite the impossibility of defining equity or 

fairness universally. Public policy makers judge and regulate 

the fairness of economic outcomes all the time. 

 

Growth. Economic growth is an increase in the total output of 

an economy. This is what happens when we invent new and 

better ways of producing what we use now and develop new 

products and services. However, all economic policies do not 

encourage economic growth. Some discourage it. The members 

opposite would be familiar with that. 

 

Stability. Economic stability refers to the condition in which 

national output is steady or growing with low inflation and full 

employment of resources. An economy may at times be 

unstable, characterized by high unemployment and severe 

inflation. The causes of instability and attempts to stabilize the 

economy by government regulation are the subject matter of 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

macroeconomics. 

 

So why I’m talking about this. And why I thought we would 

need a brief lesson, shortly after the budget was released, an 

article from Tom Brodbeck of the Winnipeg Sun was released. 

It was titled, “Sask. kicking our butts with the budget.” He then 

stated we were teaching a “hard lesson in Economics 101.” This 

was the reasoning for my little review of economics. He then 

goes on to state, “The Saskatchewan government has 

maintained a level of discipline in its spending, even during 

relatively good economic times.” This discipline is going to be 

the bubble that shields us from the global economic uncertainty. 

 

Tom then goes on to mention, “Saskatchewan generates 86% of 

its own revenue and relies on only 14 per cent from the federal 

government.” I also have a little bit of teaching experience for a 

few classes that deal with comprehensive budgeting. And to me 

this is amazing — a province that generates 86 per cent of its 

own revenue and only 14 per cent in federal transfers. 

 

I wanted to talk a little bit about the positives of this budget. I 

would, however, like to reiterate the vision of the Saskatchewan 

government that Saskatchewan will be the best place in Canada 

to live, to work, to start a business, to get an education, to raise 

a family and build a life. Our government has identified four 

new goals to set the direction for the province: to sustain growth 

and opportunities for Saskatchewan people, improving our 

quality of life, making life more affordable, and lastly, 

delivering a responsive and responsible government. 

 

I want to repeat again, to drive the message home, that our 

government has been rewarded with its careful fiscal 

management, receiving a AAA credit rating from Standard and 

Poor’s in 2011, which is a big deal. 

 

It would be remiss for me to not discuss the education and 

training aspects of it as that is where my heart lies, and it is my 

belief that we need a strong mandate in education and training 

to mitigate the challenges of growth. As a student, the number 

of initiatives to encourage students to further their education in 

Saskatchewan is clear: this budget providing 12 million, which 

is a 2 per cent increase to support operating costs of our 

post-secondary institutions.  

 

The 4.6 million which will be invested in a new Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship program that we’ll provide to every high 

school graduate from 2012 on, with up to 500 per year to a 

maximum of 2,000 per individual, resonates with me because I 

have an 18-year-old daughter who will be graduating from high 

school this year. Like a lot of parents, this will lighten the load 

financially when she goes off to post-secondary studies. 

 

This budget provides an increase of 6.7 million for an increased 

access to the Student Aid Fund, total program funding of 36.5 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and take up a lot of time, but 

I wanted to reiterate once again that I am the only First Nations 

person in this Chamber, and none of the members opposite 

speak for me here. So, Mr. Speaker, I do not support the 

amendment, and I do support this budget. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

Mr. Phillips: — Now that is a tough act to follow. I am very 

pleased to enter into the debate on the 2012 balanced budget, 

Keeping the Saskatchewan Advantage. 

 

I would like to thank the minister, Hon. Minister of Finance, for 

delivering a budget that will continue to move this province 

forward. I would also like to thank a few people back home. 

First of all, I would like to thank my wife, April, for her 

confidence and her encouragement. Most of all, thanks for 

accepting our new life together. My CAs back at the home 

office in the constituency, for a rookie MLA to have 

experienced CAs is a godsend. Thanks to Laurie and Peggy for 

all the work that they do back home. 

 

I would also like to thank the members on the government side 

of the House for helping me find my footing. And that could be 

a while. I would also like to thank the members opposite for 

being every bit as effective in opposition as they were in 

government. 

 

Across Canada and around the world, these are tough economic 

times. And this budget will be one of two budgets across the 

country that will be balanced. The budget will allow 

Saskatchewan to keep growing, keep programs sustainable, and 

keep our election promises. 

 

Monday night I listened — and it may have been unfortunate — 

but I listened to the member from Athabasca talk about 

revisionist history. After 43 years in government over the past 

six decades, he suggests that they were just starting to get things 

right when they were unfortunately rejected by the voters. 

 

I think of their record when I look at the map back home in my 

office, of the oil production in the ’90s, and how the oil 

production stopped at the Saskatchewan-Alberta border — and 

I think that’s awful strange — and how fortunate that the 

Saskatchewan Party was that oil developed in Saskatchewan 

after the NDP left office. In those 27 years of government, there 

were no new potash mines. Not one in 27 years — from the 

time 1971 to 2007 — 27 years that they were in power. Now, 

incredible development, Mr. Speaker. We have $12 billion in 

expansions and at least another $12 billion in new mines. 

 

Now what I find really fascinating, and the Saskatchewan Party 

has said this before, that this is actually a policy that was 

brought in by the last NDP government. And yet what’s really, 

really strange about this and really has my, I’m scratching my 

head, is the fact that in this past election they wanted to rip up 

that agreement. They wanted to . . . It was working. So even 

when they get things right, they decide to rip it up. 

 

Revisionist history, I don’t think so. I think more like selective 

memory on the member’s part. But revisionist history — you 

know, highways crumbling, 52 hospitals closing, skyrocketing 

education taxes, depopulation — no. No, we remember. And 

obviously looking at the opposite side of the House, the citizens 

of Saskatchewan remember. Only the members opposite have 

chosen to forget. But I’m sure, if they listen carefully, we will 

remind them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This budget makes a number of key investments, including a 

$98 million increase or a 3.5 per cent increase to the regional 

health authorities. And I pinpoint that one because that is an 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

investment in every man, woman, and child in this province. 

There are investments for the Saskatchewan surgical initiative, 

the Cancer Agency, the colorectal screening, STARS [Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society], the SAID program. And contrary 

to the Leader of the Opposition, we have decided to also invest 

in our towns, cities, and RMs [rural municipality], the 

municipalities, and also in agriculture. Plus we have funding for 

the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, increased active 

families benefit program, new housing initiatives. And as well, 

the 2012-13 budget also makes available $788 million of capital 

funding across government including long-term care, health 

care, education, highways, and food security, as well as others. 

 

But there is one feature of the budget that I would like to 

discuss in-depth, and that is the responsibility of this 

government in a budget that keeps the momentum of this 

province going and also protects the next generation and the 

generations after that. This budget has taken a serious approach, 

a responsible approach, to keeping our social programs not only 

in place but also enhanced. 

 

Our senior citizen population is very important to me as it is to 

all members on both sides of the House. I’ve learned a great 

deal from these people in the past. I still learn today, and I look 

forward to learning tomorrow. This is a growing demographic 

that is going to strain programs in the days ahead. And we want 

these programs safe, and we want them there. 

 

A Russian proverb that I read the other night that I thought was 

a very fitting proverb is a person is judged by his deeds, not his 

words. Now the opposition likes to be all, all — what’s the 

word? — all sanctimonious when they’re asking questions 

about this budget. And they come up with lines like, do the 

right thing. Because they know what the right thing is. None of 

us do apparently. We don’t understand. On this side of the 

House, they’re telling us, we just don’t understand because they 

know. But we don’t understand. The people of Saskatchewan 

don’t understand. 

 

[15:15] 

 

They do try to make the public believe that they are the friends 

of senior citizens. Yet in their last year of government, they 

decided to take $700 more in income tax from a senior citizen 

living on a $25,000 income — $700 more in taxes. That doesn’t 

include education taxes and other benefits that every person in 

Saskatchewan has benefited from. 

 

And for the low-income seniors, the seniors’ income plan has 

been increased or will be increased this year by up to $1,800 

over the last year when they were in power. I’m particularly 

proud of this because, you know, we made an election promise, 

and we made a promise that this would happen — $80 increase 

over four years. Now it seems to me the logical way of going 

about it, the way some people would have gone about it, would 

have been $20 a year or $20 a month per year for four years. 

And you know, some people maybe in the past might have gone 

through it that we’ll have zero increase this year, zero increase 

next year, Mr. Speaker, but then in the last two years we’ll build 

it in. No, this program under this government put it in $50 this 

year — $50 per month, each and every month this year — and 

$10 increase again next year, the year after, and the year after 

that, Mr. Speaker. That’s the way people do better in this, in 

this society. 

 

The friends of the seniors across the House, they’re in . . . The 

friends of the seniors across the House would be the . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, yes, you guys. What they did 

was they had zero increase for the first year, zero increase for 

their second year, third year, fourth year. I know, it just goes on 

and on and on. Sixteen years that they had, 16 years without an 

increase. With friends like that, who needs enemies? 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, in today’s Saskatchewan, we look after our 

seniors. We look ahead, and we make sure that these programs 

are there and they’re going to be there tomorrow and they’re 

going to be there in five years and in ten years and for many, 

many years to come. And because of those reasons and so, so 

many more, I will be supporting the budget, and I will be voting 

against the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to stand today to join in this budget debate. And first I 

must thank the constituents of Regina Walsh Acres. It is 

because of them that I’m able to stand here today and reply to 

our first budget on our second term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my first five months as an MLA, I have been 

able to meet many new constituents, whether being in our 

constituency office, they came in and chatted, or being at 

events, the Spring Free From Racism where I attended it with 

my colleagues from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley and Regina 

Dewdney and, from across the way, Regina Rosemont. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been able to attend the Luther invitational 

basketball tournament and bring greetings and meet some 

constituents there as well. And it’s just people have been . . . a 

pleasure to meet many people within our area. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, before I begin, I’d like to say my thanks to 

some very important people in my life. And first and foremost 

that would be my wife, Larissa. She’s an amazing person, and 

she is the reason I am able to stand here today. Her support 

means the world to me, and, Mr. Speaker, she is the person 

most in this world that keeps me grounded and I will be forever 

thankful to have her in my life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank my brothers and sisters for 

all of their support. Although we live a far ways away from 

each other, they always remind me that if I ever need advice, 

they’re just a phone call away. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I forgot to mention these people during my 

Speech to the Throne, and I heard about it a little bit, so I have 

to thank my in-laws: my in-laws, Larry and Loretta Kopan and 

my brother-in-laws, Lance and Lonny. They have been there 

from the very beginning, and they’re very supportive. When 

Larissa and I told them that I was going to run in politics, and I 

think little did they know what they were going to get in for. 

They were all there for us during the election, whether it was 

dropping literature or driving to polls on election day and for 

this . . . Mr. Speaker, I am certain that our volunteers were the 

best fed during election day. They had homemade soups and 

sandwiches for lunch and homemade perogies and sausage for 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

supper. And everyone was very pleased with that, and I have to 

thank my mother-in-law and wife for that. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my campaign volunteers 

once more. These people worked tirelessly to support us and 

our bid to win Regina Walsh Acres and put . . . on this side of 

the House. If it wasn’t for their effort, Mr. Speaker, I would not 

be here today. 

 

Finally, to the budget. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

Premier, the Minister of Finance, the Treasury Board, and all 

the ministers and staff that have worked tirelessly to help keep 

the Saskatchewan advantage in this budget. The message that I 

took from the budget was to allow sustained economic growth 

while living within our means. And I think we’ve accomplished 

this. This is an important point, Mr. Speaker, because no 

decisions in this budget were taken lightly. Overall spending 

was held to 4.7 per cent increase this year — 3.9 of that is 

increases in operating spending, the rest in capital investment. 

Mr. Speaker, overall spending will be $11.2 billion, and this is 

virtually identical to the spending promise that we made in our 

campaign platform last November. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while on this topic, this seems like something the 

NDP are a little sheepish talking about. I would be remiss not to 

bring up the fact that the current Finance critic and front-runner 

for the leadership of the NDP was the architect of the campaign 

platform, and that platform would’ve plunged our province in a 

deficit budget for the next four years. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 

had the opportunity to get to know the member from Rosemont, 

and he seems, he seems like a nice enough guy. He seems like a 

good guy. And you know, he seems like a good guy, but with 

budgeting skills like his, I would not let this man be the 

treasurer of my beer league hockey team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our budget ensures the programs are sustainable 

and our government is focused both on the short-term and 

long-term financial sustainability of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is in a unique situation. Last 

Wednesday our Finance minister was able to stand and present 

a budget that was balanced both on a GRF [General Revenue 

Fund] and summary financial basis. Mr. Speaker, he was the 

only Finance minister in Canada that had that honour. 

 

This budget is about keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. And, 

Mr. Speaker, people have asked me, what exactly do you think 

is the Saskatchewan advantage? To me, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan advantage is seeing the opportunity for youth in 

our province to stay right here and work, the opportunity for 

new Saskatchewanians to build a better future here in our 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan advantage is a 

promise of a better tomorrow. 

 

As always, when I was writing my speech, my wife was there 

and helping me out, and I . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did she write it for you? 

 

Mr. Steinley: — No, and I . . . She didn’t write it for me, Mr. 

Speaker, but I said, honey, what do you think the Saskatchewan 

advantage is? And she put it the best. She said, the 

Saskatchewan advantage can be seen in people’s eyes. There is 

a sense of pride you see in people’s eyes in Saskatchewan now, 

and that has only happened in the new Saskatchewan. She’s a 

very smart lady, very smart lady. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, the Saskatchewan advantage is seen 

in lower taxes, less debt, in sustainable spending, and programs 

now and into the future. And as a government, we’ve made 

great strides in this province. And you may have heard the 

phrase — and I know the opposition says this lots — you may 

have heard the phrase that we used, there’s more work to do. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I see that that’s true, because people of 

Saskatchewan, they understand that we have a lot of work 

ahead of us, so that’s why they sent 14 members more on this 

side of the House during the last election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our population is at an all-time high. Just last 

week StatsCan released its population estimates, putting 

Saskatchewan at an all-time high of 1,067,612 people. And we 

haven’t seen this increase since 1953, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, while the rest of the country’s experiencing net losses 

of residents, Saskatchewan is one of the only two provinces in 

Canada to maintain a net migration. Basically what this means, 

Mr. Speaker, is there’s more people coming than going. And 

that’s something that we didn’t see in the 16 years of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember the days when our young people were 

fleeing our province in droves in search of greener pastures. 

Well every young family was faced with this question, and I 

remember this word: do we move away or do we stay here and 

persevere? Persevere — that’s such a strange word to me. See, 

it’s an interesting word. But it’s a word that fit perfect with that 

NDP government of the past. The words prosper or grow just 

never entered their vocabulary. The people within the NDP and 

their followers were just happy to be. And, Mr. Speaker, don’t 

take my words for this. It was summed up best by a former 

minister of economic development — get this, Eldon 

Lautermilch — who summed up their position the best. When 

asked about our province’s declining population, he said it was 

okay because the more people that left just meant there was 

more people from the ones that stayed. Really? An economic 

development minister that approved of people leaving the 

province so that there’s more for the people that stayed? That, I 

don’t know, for me that . . . I don’t get that philosophical 

ideology, so maybe that’s why I’m over here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was thinking what attracts our people to this 

province and I keep coming back to one thing — quality of life. 

This budget maintains our quality of life here in Saskatchewan 

by keeping our economy strong, sustainable, and growing to 

continue to attract people from other provinces and other 

countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is also about keeping our promise. In 

the last election, just a few short months ago, we promised a 

first-time homeowners’ tax credit. We are keeping this promise 

by delivering the 1,100 non-refundable tax credit. Mr. Speaker, 

and I’m in the same boat. My wife and I just bought a new 

house and we were moving in. And it’s pretty overwhelming 

with all the costs, the down payment, the lawyer fees, the 

moving expenses the property tax. And lawyers’ fees, they do 

get up there you know, and I guess they get paid what they 

think they’re worth. 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

But, Mr. Speaker, I found the ranting and raving speech of the 

always entertaining, although sometimes mostly grossly 

inaccurate, member from Athabasca interesting. And as we all 

know, we just went through an election and I had the ability to 

go and walk around Walsh Acres and meet many new residents. 

And for me I was very fortunate because I saw a lot of young, 

new homeowners in Walsh Acres. They’re young people. 

Walsh Acres is a great place for people to get started in the 

housing industry. And I’m opening these doors and really, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s young families, and they’re in their first home and 

they’re happy, they’re smiling, and they’re very optimistic to 

the future. And I believe that our government is able to support 

more young people moving into homes for the first time. And 

that’s something that is very close to my heart, and I think it’s 

really helping for us to attract more young people to this 

province when we can give them a homeowner . . . a foot in the 

door to home ownership. So that’s one of our promise we kept 

over our platform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re keeping our promise to provide up to 

$2,000 more over four years to new high school graduates. And 

that’s the new Saskatchewan advantage scholarship. This 2,000 

will help new post-secondary students with their tuition 

payments right here in our province. 

 

And I’m going out on a limb here, Mrs. Deputy Speaker, but I 

think I may be the most recent high school graduate in this 

Assembly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Madam Speaker, I am 

sorry. I think I was the most recent high school graduate on our 

side for sure; I’m not sure about that side. But I remember when 

I graduated high school and I go around and I was thinking of 

what I was going to do after high school and, Mr. Speaker, I 

know that these questions are pretty difficult for young people 

aged 18 and 19 to decide what they’re going to do, or in some 

people’s cases 21, 22. But after this, after these decisions are 

made, it’s nice to know that a government’s there to support 

them. 

 

And I just have to say a few things on behalf of the member 

from Greystone, that I don’t think there’s been a post-secondary 

minister that has put more time and effort into promoting our 

post-secondary schools in the history of our province. He’s 

done a great job to promote the U of R [University of Regina] 

and U of S [University of Saskatchewan] and SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

campuses. And the money he put in there, the money he’s put in 

there to help build on their reputations and help build their 

facilities make . . . There’s a top-notch kinesiology facility right 

here in the U of R. There’s a top-notch business school here in 

the U of R, U of S. And I’m just proud, and he’s done a heck of 

a job, and I just wanted to make sure that he knew that. So 

congratulations to the Minister of AEEI [Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration]. Mr. Speaker, that being said, 

our minister is second to none. 

 

I attended university under the NDP actually, Madam Speaker. 

And I just want to say that, you know, I attended university 

when the NDP were in power, and it’s something that . . . The 

people at the U of R, they were very happy when they rolled out 

these ad hoc tuition freeze programs. And you know, the one 

thing about tuition freeze programs is, you know, it’s kind of, 

it’s a short-term gain for long-term pain because that offloads 

costs onto future students going there, which makes it 10 times 

harder for someone that’s going to graduate four or five years 

down the road to go to school because those tuition increases 

are exorbitant. They’re at 10, 15 per cent. We’ve seen this all 

across, all across the country about these tuition freezes. And, 

Mr. Speaker, our minister made sure that there’s not more than 

a 3 or 4 per cent tuition increase, and that means a lot towards 

the people and the students of this province. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say our government is committed to 

the SAID program. It’s a program and it’s a commitment that 

we made in our campaign and it’s another promise we kept 

during this budget, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the benefit of the 

Saskatchewan assured income disability benefit . . . [inaudible] 

. . . $17.8 million to enhance this program. What this means, 

Mr. Speaker, is that individuals enrolled in the SAID program 

will be receiving more money every month to improve their 

quality of life. And in June 2012, couples living independently 

will receive $230 more a month, and single individuals living 

independently will receive $200 a month. Mr. Speaker, these 

increases will make a huge difference in the lives of people 

within the SAID program. We’ve also increased the numbers of 

individuals eligible for the program through a new assessment 

process. This will open up the door for 7,000 new people living 

independently to become eligible for the SAID program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this says is . . . That’s a lot of numbers, and I 

know the Finance critic doesn’t like numbers. But what this 

means basically, Mr. Speaker, is that I’m so proud to see our 

government standing up for those most vulnerable in our 

society. And that’s what this budget does. 

 

We promised to increase the seniors’ income plan, a 

supplement that helps low-income seniors in Saskatchewan. 

And just to be clear, those people across the floor never once 

thought it necessary to increase the senior income plan in 16 

years — not once. And that’s how they feel about seniors. And 

you can see it in their record, not their rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2009-10 our budget, our government raised the 

maximum monthly benefit from 90 to $190 for single seniors, 

more than doubling the amount set under the previous 

government. I don’t have to go into that again. Mr. Speaker. In 

this budget we’ve committed an additional $50 per month with 

another $10 a month every year for the next three years. This 

means by the end of this term our government will have tripled 

our benefits to low-income seniors that they receive every 

month. Again, Mr. Speaker, we are standing up for our 

society’s most vulnerable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most important components of this 

budget is the investment in affordable housing. This will have a 

very positive impact on Regina. Because of the diverse 

demographics in Regina, finding an affordable housing, I know, 

can be a challenge. As it crosses the province, we have 

committed to addressing this issue. And I can think of no better 

way than through the initiatives announced in this budget. 

 

We’ve introduced a new corporate income tax rebate on new 

rental housing in the province. This means that more people 

will be building rental units, increasing the supply of affordable 

housing. This income tax rebate removes a huge barrier of 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

development of the rental housing. This project also includes a 

$2 million funding increase for the rental construction 

initiatives in affordable home ownership program and 9.2 

million for the rental development program to develop an 

additional 200 rental units in a community with a long-term 

housing need. This will result in — remember this number — 

this will result in 12,600 new affordable homes, of which 

10,000 units will be of the rental kind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by taking this responsible route, we ensure the 

sustainable . . . Sorry. By taking this route, we ensure the 

sustainability of the construction of affordable housing in our 

province. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, Bill Madder of the Association of 

Saskatchewan Realtors had this to say about these initiatives: 

 

Over many years, we’ve had a real shortage on the rental 

side, so I think this is a big help. I think it’s a potential 

home run for the provincial government. 

 

Bill Madder of the Saskatchewan housing . . . Madam Deputy 

Speaker, Steve McLellan, president of the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce, said that this housing move was a 

positive one, stating, and I quote: 

 

One of the biggest challenges to our growth is a lack of 

housing from the new people, immigrant, and new people 

moving home. But overall they’ve struck a good balance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve all experienced the pain of watching 

someone that we love waiting for surgery. I know I have. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s something that this budget moves forward 

with innovative health care initiatives. Mr. Speaker, it’s a hard 

thing to watch when a loved one’s suffering and waiting for 

surgery. That is why our government has increased the health 

budget: we are putting patients first. And we want to ensure that 

no Saskatchewan resident waits more than three months for 

surgery by 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency was given an 

additional $16.9 million in this year’s budget. Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think I have to tell people about cancer. It’s hit each and 

every one of us in this Assembly and it’s something that . . . It’s 

a terrible disease. And I think when people from across the 

floor talk about misplaced priorities, I don’t think they include 

this in it. I think having a priority of dealing with cancer as best 

as we can is something that we over here take great pride in. 

And I hope people over on the other side will support us in this 

initiative for sure. Mr. Speaker, Scott Livingstone the CEO 

says, and I quote, “It will allow us to maintain and improve 

access to cancer services over the next year.” And, Mr. Speaker, 

I think that going forward, that’s just another thing we can build 

on. 

 

One thing that Regina Walsh Acres constituents should be 

aware of is that the amount of provincial income tax they will 

pay in 2012 is substantially less than just five short years ago. 

For example a family of four with an annual income of $50,000 

will save $2,638 per year in 2012 as compared to 2007. Mr. 

Speaker, this works out to about $220 per month, which for a 

family of four means a lot. For example, Mr. Speaker, it means 

that people that didn’t really have the ability to go and play 

sports, take a piano lesson, you know, do some things, it’s 

really about improving the quality of life for people, which we 

talk about, which is part of the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. 

Speaker. And this side will always believe that people 

themselves will know what best to do with their money and 

government will not, Mr. Speaker. So the more money that we 

can put into people’s pockets, we always will. And we always 

will think that that’s a good thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, keeping the Saskatchewan advantage is exactly 

what this budget does, Mr. Speaker. And this is a balanced 

budget that keeps our promises and ensures that spending is 

sustainable, and it keeps our economy growing. And all of the 

Saskatchewan citizens, whether they’ve been here their entire 

lives or are just new to this province, know that they can enjoy 

a quality of life in Saskatchewan second to none. 

 

Madam Deputy Speaker, just a few more comments. First and 

foremost I see that my wife is here now, so I guess I want to say 

hi and thank her very much for making it. And she reminds me 

of one thing, and the one thing is that, Mr. Speaker, our people, 

our people are our greatest strength. They all share a distinctive 

spirit — one of hard work, dedication, and pride in where we 

live and where we come from. And together, Mr. Speaker, we 

can keep Saskatchewan’s momentum going as we continue to 

lead the country in the coming years. After years of being a 

have-not province, Saskatchewan citizens deserve to be where 

they are right now. And it’s through their hard work — not 

government — through the people’s hard work. And that’s why 

we’re here and where we are right now, and we’re leading the 

country in many economic indicators, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I am so very humble to be able to speak to this balanced 

budget, this sustainable budget. And on behalf of the great 

constituency of Walsh Acres, I will be supporting this budget, 

and I will not be supporting the amendment put forward by my 

friend from Regina Rosemont. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to rise today to speak to the budget. I’m the 

last in the lineup for our group except for our leader, who will 

be speaking tomorrow. And I’ve been listening to a lot of 

speeches, Madam Deputy Speaker, and finding out a lot of 

things about the views of our colleagues opposite. And certainly 

I’ve enjoyed hearing the comments of our colleagues here in the 

loyal opposition. 

 

To begin with, I think the first point I want to talk about is that 

budgets are about choices. And my learned colleague here from 

Regina Rosemont has indicated that in his comments as well. 

There are a lot of choices to be made here in Saskatchewan in 

this budget; in fact there’s 11 billion choices to be made. So 

that’s the revenues that are coming in as projected by the 

government. 
 

Other comments that have come from across the way was that, 

you know, is there anything good? Do we see anything good in 

this budget? And I do, and I’m going to talk about those first. 

So there are some good things about what’s going on in our 

economy right now. Maybe it’s about time. Crops are good. The 

price of wheat is good. We see that cattle and hog prices are 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

doing really well. We know that potash prices are doing really 

well. Oil is doing well. Uranium is doing well. 

 

We have abundant renewable resources in our province, and we 

also have abundant non-renewable resources. And thank 

goodness for that, Madam Deputy Speaker, because those 

non-renewable resources contribute 28 per cent to the income of 

this province. That’s just the resource royalties themselves. So 

that’s $3.1 billion. Almost a third of the revenues that are 

coming in are coming in from our non-renewable resources, and 

that’s a large part of the revenues that this government has to do 

programming with. 

 

The good points about the budget, what I did is I’ve highlighted 

a few that I think are fine additions to the province’s 

programming. And I’ll start in health. Two of the things in 

health that I think are particularly good additions to the 

programming of health, and one is the children’s insulin pump 

program. And that in particular is because of my son’s friend 

Jordan. And Jordan is a juvenile diabetic, and he has struggled 

with it his whole life. He’s 18 now. And part of it as being a 

young fellow is just having the insulin with him when he needs 

it. And he gets into sports and he goes around and hangs out 

with his friends, and often he doesn’t have his insulin with him 

when he needs it. And he’s been severely in danger with his 

diabetes because he’s an active kid and just sometimes forgets. 

So I think the children’s insulin pump program is going to 

really help folks like Jordan. 

 

The other increase that I’m pleased with and think is a good 

addition to our budget is the 16.9 million increase in the Cancer 

Agency. Obviously as the previous speaker indicated, cancer 

affects families. Every family in Saskatchewan’s affected by it, 

and it’s an important thing to make sure our Cancer Agency is 

strong and helping people. I’ve had friends go through chemo in 

the past year, and certainly I know the good folks at the Cancer 

Agency have been very supportive for them. And it’s good to 

know that they’ll have more support through this item in the 

budget, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

Another item that I’m glad to see is the increase of 4.4 million 

to deal with increasing costs in court services and prosecutions. 

Unfortunately in this case, Madam Deputy Speaker, it might be 

a bit short-sighted because we know there’s a new crime Bill 

that’s been introduced by the federal government, and I don’t 

see any plans in this part of the budget under Justice to deal 

with the additional costs that are going to be imposed upon 

Saskatchewan as a result of that particular Bill. 

 

Now we found out, I just heard today that in British Columbia, 

their courts are so backlogged right now that they’re actually 

having to cancel trials, that potential criminals are not being 

found guilty because their courts are too clogged. And we see 

that there’s a 50 per cent increase in court appearances in 

Saskatchewan since 2000. So given the crime Bill, and it’s on 

it’s way, I’m worried that this particular increase in Justice is 

simply not going to cut it. So although I’m glad to see it’s 4.4 

million, I’m worried that the Justice department hasn’t been 

able to do the accurate projections to determine what the impact 

of the new crime Bill will be, and we know it will be great, 

Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think the one single most important item in this new budget is 

the 113 million to provide expanded SAID or Saskatchewan 

assured income for disability eligibility. That was the single 

most important issue in my riding when I was going door to 

door during the election was those people that are living on 

social assistance that have disabilities. And they are struggling, 

Madam Deputy Speaker, and their quality of life is traumatic. 

For me it was a shock to know that these . . . to meet people that 

were living in my community that were suffering so much and 

struggling so hard with not only their disability but all the 

realities of life that they had to cope with: finding a place to 

live, making sure that they had access to their meds, and trying 

to work when they can. But when work didn’t pan out, and they 

got sick again, then they were on and off social assistance. And 

it was really difficult, it’s very, very difficult for those people. 

 

So I think that’s the one thing, and I commend the government 

for that particular program. We know that there are, I think, a 

number of people on the list, and hopefully as this program 

grows, it will also be extended to other people who are just 

simply not able to cope with the demands of life and are 

disabled in various ways. So I do commend the government for 

that particular program. 

 

I’d also like to commend them for the support for the crop 

insurance, AgriStability, and AgriInvest. And I’ll talk a little bit 

more about that later when I talk about my family. 

 

And finally I think there’s a couple more I’d like to address. 

The support and continued support for reforestation under the 

environment budget, we see $3.8 million being added there, and 

that’s just to meet the government’s current obligations. The 

only unfortunate thing about that particular addition is that the 

rules of engagement have changed for tree planting, Madam 

Deputy Speaker. And the government has now changed the 

application process, so a number of the forestry companies that 

have been doing a fine job of reforestation in Saskatchewan 

since the 1980s when the program began are no longer able to 

compete in the market, the reforestation market, because there 

are much larger companies from out of province that are being 

given a preferential treatment for those contracts. So although 

it’s good to see that the government is still meeting its 

obligations in the forestry sector, I’m sad to say that 

Saskatchewan companies are being excluded from that work, 

and they will have to look for work elsewhere as well. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Innovation Saskatchewan has introduced money to support 

research and development for a cyclotron. That’s one of my 

critic areas, is Innovation Saskatchewan. And I think that’s a 

noble enterprise. Again however — and I’ve spoken to the 

minister about this — I would like to see more balance in this 

kind of funding because these types of the research that’s being 

done is based on the use of a non-renewable resource. And I 

think that we can be very innovative in a number of other areas. 

And Innovation Saskatchewan, it would be great to see research 

and development being extended to renewable resource 

research and development, particularly in the area of energy 

production. So I’ve expressed that concern to the minister, and I 

hope that we see more of that type of innovation in the future. 

 

I guess that’s some of the positive notes I will make about the 

budget. However I need to fill my role as a member of the loyal 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

opposition, and our job here is to propose alternative solutions 

and constructive criticism to ensure that our citizens are 

protected by good laws. And the minister of state for the United 

Kingdom has indicated that MLAs have to ensure the 

fundamental principles of accountability and transparency are 

upheld. And what he said is, transparency is the foundation of 

accountability. 

 

So we know that our job on this side of the Chamber, Madam 

Deputy Speaker, is to hold the government to account. And we 

wouldn’t be doing our job if we didn’t examine the budget very, 

very closely and look closely for areas that maybe the 

government’s missed the mark. They have $11 billion to spend, 

and our job is to sift through it. And I think our Finance critic 

has done a fine job of that, and he’s given us some guidance in 

that as well. 

 

It’s not an easy document to read. I’ve read balance sheets for 

my own company, and I’ve also read balance sheets for a 

number of non-profit corporations, and my first experience with 

the provincial budget is a little different than those. So it’s a 

complicated document. 

 

And I know my colleague, the Finance critic, has pointed out 

that there is some manipulation of numbers here that makes the 

picture look maybe a little more rosy than it really is, Madam 

Deputy Speaker. And surely we’ll know that once the numbers 

come down the pipe at the end of the year in terms of the 

estimates. And also, just the way the numbers are being 

presented to the good people of Saskatchewan, we want to 

make sure that the people understand that the way the books are 

being presented are one way of presenting them, and that there 

are other provinces who present them differently. And certainly 

the petitions that we bring in here every day indicate that. 

 

So this is what I will now try and talk to a little bit is some of 

those other areas that maybe aren’t as rosy as we would like 

them to be. My critic areas, there’s three areas I want to speak 

to right now in terms of what my role as a member of the loyal 

opposition is, and that’s in the areas of agriculture and 

government services and then energy and resources. 

 

And in agriculture we see increased spending. And in fact we 

are hearing lots about how this is probably the richest 

agricultural budget in history, and that’s a good thing. However 

we do see there are some cuts in agriculture, and one is the cut 

to shortline rails. I’ve risen in the House before, Madam Deputy 

Speaker, curious about why this government hasn’t made any 

plans for the transition for farmers from the Canadian Wheat 

Board single-desk monopoly to the destruction of that 

monopoly and concerns about the availability of transportation, 

how transportation is going to happen for our grain farmers now 

that the Canadian Wheat Board’s influence, great influence and 

powerful presence in the grain transportation process . . . And 

we haven’t seen anything yet. And I was really hoping we’d see 

something in this budget for farmers to make that transition. 

 

Certainly the cut to the shortline rails is going to have a serious 

impact not only on the bottom line for those farmers but also on 

highways. And I know we have funding for highways, but I’m 

not sure that they’ve taken into account the incredible pounding 

that a lot of our highways are going to experience because of 

the loss of the shortline rails and again the incredible cost that 

farmers are going to have to incur because of the loss of the 

shortline rails. 

 

So we see nothing in terms of a transition for farmers that are 

experiencing the loss of the single desk in their grain marketing. 

We see new companies coming in, large multinational 

companies coming in to pick up companies like Viterra, our 

own prairie-grown company, and we have to ask why. Why are 

they here? Well the pundits have said it’s because they can 

make money. So if they’re making money, we know whose 

pockets it’s coming out of. It’s coming out the farmers’ pockets, 

Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

In terms of government services, I’ve raised this earlier in terms 

of the funding that’s being provided to judges, but we see quite 

a bit of investment now in — I just want to find the page, 

Madam Deputy Speaker — in construction for correctional 

services. We see that 9.6 million is going to be provided to 

expand Pine Grove and another 3 million for an expansion to 

the Prince Albert Provincial Correctional Centre. 

 

Given what I said earlier about the caseload increases that 

we’ve seen since 2000, a 50 per cent increase in caseloads, with 

the introduction of the crime Bill, again, although this money is 

absolutely necessary to provide the right levels of 

accommodation for people that are incarcerated, I just wonder if 

there’s been any foresight looking into the impact of the crime 

Bill on the future incarcerees — I don’t know if that’s a word or 

not — the people who will be put in jail as a result of the crime 

Bill. So I’m hoping and I’m sure that the Minister for 

Government Services and the Minister for Corrections and the 

Minister for Justice are closely examining this and look forward 

to the thoughtful analysis in the near future as to the impact of 

the crime Bill and how these facilities are going to manage 

those types of large increases. 

 

And in energy resources and innovation — again I mentioned it 

earlier — there’s a lot of funds going into interesting research 

and development projects. And that’s all good and fine, 

however, none of them are looking into research and 

development for renewable energy and renewable resources. 

And you know, I might throw in that I see people as renewable 

resources in many ways. And the film industry is a good 

example of the type of industry that maybe could use some 

research and development support in terms of how to grow the 

industry given that, if we’re not going to have the tax credit 

which is being proposed, are there other ways to grow the 

industry. 

 

So innovation to me goes beyond research and development, 

although that’s the phrase and that’s the way the word’s being 

used nowadays. To me it goes much further than research and 

development into pure science. I think there are other ways to 

apply it. And certainly in terms of renewable resources, there is 

pure science applications that could be explored. 

 

And they’re being done throughout the world, and I just worry 

that we’re falling behind in that area. So although I applaud the 

investments in those types of research and development, I 

would encourage the Minister of Innovation, and Energy and 

Resources, to further research and development in 

non-renewable, or pardon me, Madam Deputy Speaker, in 

renewable energy and resources. So those are a few of my 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

comments on the critic areas. 

 

I’d like to talk just a little bit now about my view of the world 

from this side of the bench and this side, being in opposition. 

My constituency is Saskatoon Nutana, and they supported me 

and elected me in the last election. And I have to say that — 

with no offence to my other colleagues from Saskatoon — that I 

think that Saskatoon is, or pardon me, Saskatoon Nutana is 

really the cultural heart of our city. 

 

Right down the middle of my riding is the Broadway area in 

Saskatoon. It’s a very popular area that’s filled with good eating 

establishments and live music. There’s several places where 

you can get live music. There’s bookstores. There’s art stores. 

And there’s the Saskatchewan Craft Council, which is the pride 

of the craft community in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have many, many, many artists and musicians that live in 

my riding. Some of the world’s best jewellers, like Megan 

Broner. We have Craig Campbell who’s a brilliant blacksmith 

artist. Dagen Linder, Paul Jacoby, Grant McConnell, Greg 

Hardy — all famous and world renowned painters. We have 

Lyle Gustin who lived in my riding and his house is still a 

heritage house in Saskatoon Nutana. And he was one of the 

foremost piano instructors, really, in Canada when he was alive, 

and they still have concerts at his house. I have many players 

from the symphony that live in my riding. Saskatoon Chamber 

Singer members, archivists, professors. I even have, you know, 

The Sheepdogs. I have a sheep dad and mom that live in my 

riding; Sheldon Corbett, Margie Corbett. And Sheldon is also 

an acclaimed studio musician. 

 

So you just need to walk around Broadway and you will find all 

these people. And it’s a joy for me to walk down Broadway 

Avenue and meet people and chat with them all the time. It’s a 

very vibrant, vibrant community and I love living there. And I 

think everybody who is living there is there because it’s one of 

the best places in the world to live. 

 

However, when I was out walking around during the election 

and going door to door, I did meet people who were struggling. 

And the one group I think that touched me the most, in addition 

to those struggling with disabilities, are the seniors that live in 

Saskatoon Nutana. A lot of them are making ends meet. 

They’re living in their own home and that’s incredibly 

important to them. They are proud to be living on their own. 

And many of them are widows and widowers, and they are 

literally alone. They’re living in their house by themselves, but 

they’ve managed without their spouse, and they’re very proud 

to be living there. 

 

We have a seniors’ income plan that can help people like that 

when they’re short on money, but so many of them told me they 

just can’t make ends meet. They’re struggling with their 

property taxes. They’re on fixed income. And once illness hits 

and they have to start taking prescriptions, things get really, 

really tough for them. And they’re scared and terrified to leave 

their homes. They’re comfortable in their own home. They may 

not have family supports. Lots of them do. But once the squeeze 

on the margin gets tighter and tighter and tighter, they get 

scared and terrified and realize that, you know, they might be in 

trouble. So unfortunately I think the new cost for prescriptions 

that are being proposed in this budget are going to have a very 

serious impact on those seniors, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the seniors’ income plan, that’s $3 million. So on that side 

of the equation, we have give. But on the other side of the 

equation, the new cost for the prescriptions could be as high as 

$10 million. So then we see take. And then we see take on the 

ambulance bills, and we see take. So the equation doesn’t quite 

add up despite the economics lesson that we got from the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Students — same story for students. 

 

And I guess for seniors, I haven’t talked about this either. If 

they live, own their own home, then they’re all right. They have 

problems with property taxes, but they’re managing. For those 

who don’t own their own home, it’s even worse. And in my 

riding, rental costs go up and up and up. 

 

I have Yvonne who’s a lovely lady that I’ve met since I got 

elected. She’s not 65 yet, so she’s not quite on pension. And she 

had an apartment, and she was thrilled to be living in Saskatoon 

Nutana. And she’s helping in her church. She’s a very active 

and a very vibrant lady, although she is disabled with arthritis. 

So she can’t work, but she has some income. And she came and 

saw me, I think probably late January, said, Cathy, I’ve got to 

move; I just got a $200 rent increase. That was $800 she was 

paying. It went up $200. And now she has found another place, 

but she’s had to move out of the area. So I’m going to miss 

having her pop into the office. That’s a problem with rental. 

 

And the same problem applies for students. Again rent. My area 

is really, really close to the university, and there’s a number of 

apartment buildings in the area where students live, and that’s 

the same problem they’re facing. Their income, if . . . Well they 

don’t have income. They’re working off student loans, or they 

may have some income from their summer jobs or working 

while they’re students. But the rents are going up so much in 

my area that they’re having to go farther and farther to find 

accommodation. And even then, I think, across Saskatoon the 

rents are really, really high. 

 

So we have the rents going up for students and then the tuition 

increases. We’re expecting that we’ll see tuition increases 

because of the off-loading that this government has now passed 

on to the universities. So there’s no way the universities can 

absorb that. It will be off-loaded on to the students. So that’s 

another burden that they’re going to have to deal with as well. 

 

We know that the government has introduced a tax credit for 

people to construct new units and there’s a lot of new units that 

are going to be constructed, and that’s important. Saskatoon’s 

growing and we have definitely a shortage of spots. The 

problem is whether these students and these seniors are going to 

be able to afford the rent on those units. So although there’s a 

tax credit and an incentive for people to build, we still don’t 

have enough low-income, affordable housing for students and 

seniors in Saskatoon, and I suspect that’s similar for a lot of 

areas in the province, including Regina. So that’s of concern. 

 

And it just seems that the focus on creating programs where 

people put in effort and get a tax credit is useful and helpful, but 

it’s leaving people out. And as a member of the loyal 

opposition, looking for concerns in this particular budget, that’s 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

where I’m focusing, is on the fact that people are being left out. 

And I’ve met them. They’re in my constituency. I met them on 

the doorsteps. And I worry about particularly the ones that are 

in their 60s and 70s. They’re still living a good life but, you 

know, their health is starting to decline and they have to take 

prescriptions. They may have emergencies that they have to go 

the hospital. They aren’t able to own their own homes, so 

they’re renting and all those things squeeze and squeeze and 

squeeze. And one lady told me, it’s often a choice of food. So I 

just think that’s not a good way for our seniors to have to live 

and I look to this government to do the right thing — somebody 

mentioned — and make sure those seniors aren’t falling through 

the cracks in this prosperous time. 

 

[16:00] 

 

I guess that leads me to all the actors and writers and artists and 

musicians that live in Saskatoon Nutana and the hard work they 

do and the passion they bring and the creative talent they bring 

to our, not only our sense of who we are . . . I don’t know if 

you’ve ever seen Joey Hamilton do Saskatoon, a love story. 

He’s a brilliant spoken word artist that lives in my riding. And 

he was honoured in a national competition for a, sort of a beat 

poet, poetry piece that he said, Saskatoon, a love story. And I 

recommend everyone go on YouTube and watch it, even if 

you’re not from Saskatoon. Because he perfectly describes the 

heart of our city and to me, Madam Deputy Speaker, that is 

culture and the arts. There’s no doubt about it. 

 

And that’s what people look for when they look for a place to 

live. They want to see a vibrant cultural and arts scene. That’s 

important to people. People spend more money on arts than 

they do on sports. I just read that from a VP [vice-president] of 

Enbridge in Calgary and it’s definitely part of our 

constituency’s personality and culture, by far. And people come 

from all over Saskatoon and all over the world to enjoy the 

cultural offerings of Saskatoon Nutana, including the fringe 

festival. And I think there was a member from my constituency 

here this afternoon, Madam Deputy Speaker, Anand Ramayya 

from Karma Film. He’s one of the leading producers and film 

companies in the province. And of course that leads me to the 

film employment tax credit. 

 

I guess the single most important investment in this budget is in 

the SAID program, as far as I’m concerned. And this is the 

single most disappointing part of the budget for me, Madam 

Deputy Speaker. The film and television industry creates pride 

in our province. They work hard and they are creative people 

and they’re entrepreneurs. For every $1 that’s invested, we 

heard earlier, it actually turns into $6. And I just don’t 

understand why that’s not a good thing. Although the source of 

the funding may be offensive to the Premier, I think what’s 

being said by the people is that, can you look beyond that? Can 

you just kind of put that behind you for a moment and look at 

the whole picture and what’s going on here? 

 

What is it about this particular industry that has them singled 

out in the budget? We’re confused and not certain why this 

particular industry is being singled out. Is it because they’re 

experiencing struggles? We hear that there’s a bit of a downturn 

in the economy, in the film economy right now. I think part of 

that certainly, we know, is because of the global recession, and 

that’s affected the whole industry. So what do we do when 

someone’s struggling? Do we cut and run? These creators and 

these entrepreneurs, do we fade to black? 

 

It’s still paying for itself. And this to me, Madam Deputy 

Speaker, appears to be just another case of ideology trumping 

common sense. The return on investment, to use an economic 

term, is great. We see it’s $6 for every dollar. It employs many. 

Many people have chosen to follow their dream here. They 

don’t want to leave Saskatchewan. We’ve heard that from the 

other side. They’re proud that people are coming back to 

Saskatchewan. These people want to stay here. They want to 

raise their families here and they want to be creative and show 

off Saskatchewan to the world. That’s a good thing, Madam 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now we know their struggles are . . . They’re undergoing 

struggles right now. But we know also that in these types of 

industries it ebbs and flows. And our hope and dream for these 

people is that this government can recognize that it may be in a 

lull; there may be struggles. But with the support, strong 

support of a government to bolster them when they need it — 

just like we have crop insurance and all kinds of AgriStability 

for farmers, or there’s other programs — that’s the key. 

 

And some of the problems with the industry may be that SCN 

was taken away. That was certainly a positive aspect for the 

industry. Another issue that they’re dealing with — and I heard 

this in the rotunda — was that there’s problems financially with 

processing the tax credit itself. Sometimes it takes 18 months to 

two years for the Finance department to actually process the tax 

credit, and cash flows for those companies, which are tight to 

begin with, become even more difficult. So that creates 

struggles for them. Those are just a few of the things that I’ve 

heard about the film and television tax credit, and I know you 

will hear more. 

 

What I would like to do at this point though is stop using my 

words, and I’d like to share with you three letters from my 

constituents about this issue. And the first one is from Candace 

Savage. Now Candace is a renowned author. She’s written more 

than 20 books and been nominated for a number of awards. Her 

books on the prairie ecology are brilliant and fascinating, and I 

recommend that everybody read Candace’s books. But anyway, 

she wrote an email to the Premier and she said: 

 

I’m still reeling from the news that you have cancelled the 

film tax credit, a decision that strikes at the heart of my 

family. My daughter returned to Saskatchewan from 

Ontario to work on the Genie-award winning series 

Wapos Bay and has since been kept alive by working on 

independent productions. I’m very worried that you have 

just destroyed her livelihood and my chance to live in the 

same city as my daughter and her family. [And she has a 

beautiful grandchild.] 

 

Productions like Wapos Bay and Corner Gas, amongst 

others, put Saskatchewan on the map. They tell stories 

from here that no one else can tell. These voices deserve 

our support. The talented and determined young people 

who have worked hard, against steep odds, to build the 

film industry in Saskatchewan deserve to be able to stay 

home. But why would they stay when Saskatchewan is 

closed for business and the door is wide open next door? 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

Please, please reconsider this destructive decision. 

 

That’s from Candace Savage. This is another one I got today 

from a teacher in my riding, in my constituency. And he says: 

 

Hi Folks, [And I assume this is to the government.] 

 

You know . . . people respect others when they fess up 

that they’ve made a mistake. It’s not too late to do so. I 

know the golden rule in politics tends to be “don’t 

flip-flop” but I have always thought that is a ridiculous 

idiom. As human beings we constantly re-evaluate based 

on new information. I think it is great that the government 

is trying to save the taxpayers money . . . but not when it 

threatens jobs . . . or at the expense of the arts . . . and 

getting rid of the film tax credit is threatening jobs and 

sends a message that the arts are not important. I am an 

art teacher. I know, have worked with and have taught the 

folks whose jobs are being endangered by this momentary 

lapse of judgement. 

 

One of my students, Nathan Wahl, from many years back 

has been working as an animator as well as an illustrator 

for comic books and graphic novels. I remember that this 

was what he always wanted to do . . . and I encouraged 

him to follow his dream. How impractical is that? No talk 

of finding a “real job” or “making sure he had something 

to fall back on.” He is very talented and has been able to 

make a living at it being involved in productions such as 

Wapos Bay and that vampire movie shot in Dundurn 

called Rufus. Earlier this week I was talking to a current 

student, Connor Wall . . . who is in grade 9 and who is 

also very good at drawing. I asked him what he wanted to 

do when he graduated, and he said he wanted to become a 

graphic designer or to create comic books. He’s a student 

that struggles in other areas so I happily told him about 

my buddy, Nathan. Well now, here’s the thing. Nathan 

would have been working in this animation studio in 

Dundurn. His is one of the jobs getting axed because of 

this move. It’s all well and good to talk about working 

with the film industry or coming up with new incentive to 

help the film industry, but that sounds like trying to save 

face. If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it. 

 

I would have much more respect for the government if, 

instead of being inflexible at the risk of appearing to 

backpedal, they simply decided to keep the Saskatchewan 

film tax credit in its current form. The arts are important. 

They may not generate as much revenue as oil sands or be 

as practical as math or science, but a world without the 

arts would be a dull place indeed. Thank you. 

 

And that’s Sheldon Mojelski who’s a teacher in Martensville, 

and he’s one of my constituents. 

 

And I have a third letter that I’d like to share with you, and this 

is from Kent Allen. Now Kent Allen is one of the most 

prominent actors in Saskatchewan. He’s been recognized across 

the country as a brilliant actor, and he’s one of my constituents. 

He says: 

 

Dear Ms. Sproule, I am writing to you today to convey 

my feelings of deep disappointment and sadness 

regarding the government’s decision to cut the film tax 

credit. I was born here, and lived here my whole life. I 

have been a professional actor for more than 35 years. 

Many years ago, I made a commitment, as did many 

others, to stay in Saskatchewan to work towards making 

this province a place that would be recognized, within and 

without our borders, as a place that was full of creative 

energy, opportunity and forward thinking. We wanted to 

help in changing the perception that this was a flyover 

zone, a flatland only. We have failed. 

 

Saskatchewan has indeed changed. People have built 

many things here that serve us all. I have worked from 

coast to coast, and the things that have been accomplished 

here have been noted in other cities, and many were 

amazed with what was achieved. That was not our failure. 

It was that we now know we did not change the 

perception of this province with people within our 

borders, with our own government. Our work has been 

dismissed. My professional commitment to this province 

has come to nothing and is now meaningless. It is 

heartbreaking. 

 

Previously when it was suggested that I might find 

success in other jurisdictions, it was not something I 

would have considered. Now we, as a family, must think 

again. We love this province, but not the direction it has 

taken. I can no longer encourage my children to consider 

this province as a place to pursue their creative dreams. 

Now when I talk to aspiring, young, talented people who 

wish to pursue a career in the arts, I can no longer advise 

them to build a resumé in Saskatchewan. The pursuit of 

their passion will be better served elsewhere. Yes, our 

great failure was in not realizing that our government, 

charged with the responsibility to represent all people in 

the province, really couldn’t care less about what we’ve 

spent our lives and our careers trying to achieve. The 

government has done this. What will be next? It’s a 

frightening question.  

 

Respectfully submitted, 

Kent Allen 

 

So, Madam Deputy Speaker, those are just some of the words 

that I’m hearing from my constituents and about this film 

employment tax credit. And I have to say, and we’ve said it 

before, not a single one of them have asked me to encourage 

this government to add three more politicians. It’s just not on 

anybody’s radar screen. We all knocked on doors here and I 

know that not one of us heard it. And yet, that is being put front 

and foremost on the agenda and the less support for arts is a 

strong message that’s going out to the people of Saskatchewan, 

and it’s sad to be here today speaking about it. 

 

A few more things I want to talk about today in terms of this 

budget, in terms of my province, what I see as important in our 

province is, there’s a few things generally that I’m interested in. 

And one, I’m very interested in First Nations, Métis issues. I 

worked with the federal government for 17 years with First 

Nations and I’ve seen some of the stories that my colleague has 

talked about. I know the struggles that First Nations and Métis 

people are living in this province. And there’s many ways we 

can move those people forward. Eighteen per cent 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

unemployment is simply unacceptable and any cuts to 

economic development really cut out the heart of progress in 

particularly northern Saskatchewan, but other First Nations 

communities and Métis communities around the province. 

 

In terms of where I come from in the province, I come from the 

southern part of the province, pretty close to the border of 

Montana, and my grandpa came and homesteaded 100 years 

ago. We now have a Century Farm Award from Information 

Services Corporation. And my dad farmed, grew up there. I 

remember as a kid looking out across the prairie and we could 

actually see the town of Woodrow from our front yard. It was 

14 miles away. We could see the Wheat Pool elevator, yes. And 

there’s lots of pheasant hunting in the area; certainly my dad 

was an avid hunter. 

 

My brothers are still farming, And I know that as my grandpa 

farmed, he went through the ’30s and, if it wasn’t for the 

support of the government of the day, he would have had to 

leave. And many people did leave because it was really rough. 

He had off farm employment through the Wheat Pool and so he 

was able to put bread on the table. Well actually my grandma 

made the bread, but he was able to support the family 

financially off farm. And certainly that’s not exclusive to my 

grandfather’s generation. A lot of farmers have had to work off 

farm. My dad did and my brothers do as well. 

 

But, you know, I think the support that they got from the 

government, both federally during the ’30s and throughout the 

decades, has really helped them stay on the farm. And they are 

very appreciative and I am too. I mean, it was a great place to 

grow up and it was always, you know, something that . . . They 

also put passion and creativity into their farming, and they care 

deeply about the land and we are very connected to the land. 

And so again, role of government, keep them in place and keep 

them in the province. We didn’t have to leave, because we had 

support. And I think that’s just another reason why 

Saskatchewan’s a great place to live. 

 

I just want to talk a little bit about my city, Saskatoon. I grew 

up on the farm and as a young kid I left to pursue a professional 

career and ended up in Saskatoon. I’ve been in Saskatoon really 

since the ’80s and I love Saskatoon. However I’ve noticed a lot 

of changes in the last few years, and obviously the price of 

housing and rental prices have gone up, and the busyness. It’s a 

way busier city now. We know the population’s growing like 

mad, and so new subdivisions are being put up. We see all 

kinds of infill. People are prosperous and they’re doing really 

well. They’re making good livings in Saskatoon. 

 

And part of that growth, though, brings some growth stories 

that aren’t so positive. I think if anybody’s driven down 

Saskatoon since, you know, frequently in the last 10 years, 

they’ll see the roads are way, way busier. And there’s a lot 

more going on in Saskatoon. We’re building a new bridge this 

year with the support of both levels of government, and that’s a 

good thing. But any time you hear Mayor Atchinson speak, 

he’ll say, don’t forget we need two more bridges. It’s just not 

enough, because the growth is so great. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So growth requires care and management. We need smart 

growth, Madam Deputy Speaker. And what we’re not seeing is 

support for all the offshoots of growth. There’s more children, 

and so we’re short on daycares. We need more schools. We 

hear that from my colleague from Massey Place every day: 

Hampton Village does not yet have a school. There are young 

families there, and we’ve spoken to school boards. Kids are 

being shipped all over the city in buses, and they’re in the 

portable learning mobile units, so we need more. The 

emergencies in the hospitals, if anybody’s spent time in the 

emergencies lately — I know I have — it’s a pretty busy place. 

And so all of these incidentals of growth come with issues that 

need to be attended to. 

 

We’re short on care homes. I got a call this morning from a 

woman whose husband is needing care, and the list is so long 

that the place they found is one that just isn’t one he can live in. 

We also need interchanges. We need highways. We need 

bridges. All of those things cost a lot of money. And they aren’t 

in this budget, and I don’t know where the government is going 

to propose that they find the money. But certainly the 30 per 

cent of the revenues that come from natural resource royalties 

isn’t enough. And so we need to see a better plan, and we also 

need to see smart growth so that those resources are available 

for us for a long time. 

 

I guess the one thing that we do see that we’re going to get 

more of is politicians. And I’m not sure that that’s going to help 

the city of Saskatoon dealing with our bursting at the seams, but 

maybe the mayor could figure out a way to use these more 

politicians. I’m not sure. 

 

One other item in the budget that hasn’t been talked about a 

whole lot — and I’ll just mention it briefly because it doesn’t 

really relate to a whole lot of money; I don’t think it’s an in and 

out money issue — but it’s the turning of Tourism 

Saskatchewan from an independent agency to one that’s going 

to be tightly controlled by the government. And what I 

understand is the government wants to manage the message. 

 

And again that’s something that’s of concern to me, Madam 

Deputy Speaker, when you see a viable agency that is member 

driven, that has considerable skills in marketing their industry 

— because they are the ones running the campgrounds. They’re 

the ones running the hotels. They’re the ones managing the 

ecotourism adventures and . . . No offence to public servants, 

Madam Deputy Speaker. I was one for a long time. But I know 

how bureaucracies work. And when this particular agency is 

going to brought back into the government fold, so to speak, it 

will seriously impact their ability to continue the message that 

they’ve worked hard to develop and I think has been very 

successful. So we will be watching that with concern and care. 

 

And one of the things that’s really unfortunate is that this 

government hasn’t even talked to the industry. So I find that 

very disappointing. The industry was completely broadsided. 

They had no idea this was going to happen and the agency itself 

was reeling. And I know you were at the dinner on Thursday 

night and may have heard some comments about that last 

Thursday. I certainly did. 

 

And there is a number of concerns from all levels, the agency 

itself and certainly the operators, that are stunned by this. So I 

hope . . . And we will watch that carefully. But if it becomes a 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

marketing propaganda machine, I think it’s a real loss to the 

tourism industry for Saskatchewan. 

 

At this point, I guess it’s time for me to give some thanks. As a 

rookie MLA it’s been a heck of a learning curve here in the last 

few months, and one of the most interesting things for me is 

how to think on your feet when people are heckling you. That’s 

been a real wild trip. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’re doing good. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — And I’m learning it. I’m doing good? I get 

words from the folks over there that I’m doing good, so I’ll go 

with that for now. It’s quite a different way of expressing 

oneself, may I say. And certainly in any other job I’ve ever had, 

this wouldn’t happen. So it’s just something I’m getting used to. 

 

And part of the reason I am getting used to it is because of my 

colleagues. So I wanted to say a big thanks to all my colleagues 

here with the loyal opposition. They’re loyal colleagues as well, 

and they’ve been incredibly supportive to me as I take on this 

new journey. I told one of them the other day that I have to 

change everything I learned in 50 years to figure out how to get 

the message that we want to get across. And I’m learning, I 

hope, quickly. 

 

I also want to thank the Speaker for his assistance. He’s been 

very helpful to me as I learn. And I am also thankful for the 

folks across the way who’ve been very kind to me, and I’d like 

to say thank you for that as well . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

My colleague says I might change my tune, but at this point I’m 

still feeling the love, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

Other people I really need to thank are my two kids. I get a little 

misty about that, so I might come back to them. I want to thank 

my family. And my brothers on the farm are helping me a 

whole lot — for the Minister of Agriculture — they’re my 

consultants and they’ve been in farming a long time. And my 

dad has lots of advice for me as well. So I’m very thankful for 

that. Thankful for my friends. I’m even thankful for my ex 

because he’s helping me look after the kids when I’m away, so 

that’s been fantastic. 

 

I really want to thank my CA, Troy MacGillivray. He’s been a 

total support to me and he has been so good with the computers. 

We’ve got a great system set up in the office now. He’s so good 

with the constituents who come in, and he makes me laugh. So I 

really appreciate that. And it’s good to have someone there . . . 

You know, when these days get pretty long, you’ll go to 10:30, 

and it’s a groggy kind of night, and then you wake up in the 

morning and get a nice fresh email from the constituency 

assistant. It helps me get going. So I want to thank Troy for 

that. 

 

I also really want to thank my Saskatoon Nutana executive. I’ve 

been with the executive since probably 2003, off and on in 

various capacities, and now they’re supporting me as the MLA. 

So they’re a great bunch. We just had a really successful 

fundraiser a couple of weeks ago, and great stew. We had an 

Irish ceilidh. It was great fun. And we do, we have fun. We 

enjoy politics and we enjoy each other. So I’m very thankful for 

my executive. 

 

I’m also thankful for everyone who elected me: artists, activists, 

academics. The arts are important in my riding. It’s important to 

the people that voted for me. And the freedom of expression 

and creativity and inspiration and passion that those people 

bring to our economy and to our province are beyond pale. And 

I really want to thank everybody who voted for me. 

 

So why won’t I support this budget, Madam Deputy Speaker? 

I’ve talked about a few things, and I’ll just mention a few more. 

 

First of all, we’re losing 500 civil servants. I’m a civil servant. I 

was a civil servant. And I know those people do hard work. 

Every time a vacancy is not filled, it puts more stress and strain 

on the work unit. And I’ve seen it. I’ve lived it. And I think, 

you know, it’s all fine and dandy to not fill a vacancy because 

there’s an easy way to cut a position. That has an impact. So 

there’s 500 positions. If they’re not going to be filled, or if 

they’re just being cut through attrition, let me tell you, Madam 

Deputy Speaker, let me tell you that that has a real impact on 

the people that are left behind. And a strong civil service . . . 

  

I think it’s something you have heard from our side is that we 

are all about smart growth. And growth is good, but 

untrammelled growth is scary. And I think just to make sure 

that we’re not just growing for the sake of growing, and, you 

know, that’s not healthy. And I think the growth has to be 

managed. And I’ve said it before in our energy production. It’s 

great that we have the wonderful resources that we have in this 

province, but they are not renewable. And we need to be 

looking to the future for not just our kids but our grandkids and 

futures to come, or generations to come. So that’s something 

you will hear from me more than once as we go through this 

session. 

 

Common sense, you hear us talking about common sense. To 

me it’s common sense to support a film industry to ensure that 

it thrives. This industry is bringing all kinds of benefits to our 

province, not just economic. We’ve heard about that. But also 

the soul of our province is in the creative arts, and the film and 

television industry, huge part of that. And the way the business 

is set up, this tax credit is essential to their survival. 

 

One other concern, and this is what I’m learning from my 

colleague our Finance critic, is that the notion of it being 

balanced is an ephemeral one, and we see that in the 

commentators as well. It’s based on an optimistic estimate for 

the price of potash. So we know that it’s just an estimate, and it 

could go either way. That may be a risky assumption, and we’ll 

see at the end of the year. We know that assumptions have been 

made in the past and they weren’t bang on and it did have an 

impact on our province, you know. So that’s something I think 

that we will continue to keep a watch on. And certainly the 

numbers will prove themselves out as the year goes on. 

 

And it’s also easy to say it’s balanced when we know that the 

debt has been off-loaded onto other third parties like the 

universities and the municipalities. We know it can look like 

it’s balanced when the Crowns are stripped. So those are things 

that my colleague has effectively and well described to this 

House, and we will continue to do that as we go along. 

 

So at the end of the day, Madam . . . I can’t believe I just said 

that. I think that although there are some very good things in 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

this budget . . . There’s $11 billion. There better be some good 

things in a budget of $11 billion. Thanks to the federal 

government for the support they give us because that’s money 

we get in the budget. It’s 14 per cent. And we had 28 per cent of 

that money that’s coming in simply from the royalties. And then 

in terms of tax revenue, much of that is coming from the 

royalties themselves, the production of those non-renewable 

royalties. So although it’s a blessing, it’s a blessing that we 

need to nurture and use common sense and smart growth to 

make sure that it’s there for people in the future. 

 

So with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting 

the budget motion, and I will be supporting the amendment. 

Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 

Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing me 

some time today to enter some comments on the balanced 

budget that was presented by our Finance minister last week. 

 

In light of worldwide economic conditions and a few other 

provincial budgets that were released recently, it’s incumbent of 

us to appreciate our Saskatchewan provincial budget for what it 

is — balanced. It is my pleasure to state today that I’ll be 

speaking in favour of the budget and against the amendment. 

 

I would like to take a few moments to recognize a few people 

that help our constituents on a daily basis. I would like to 

mention all of the ministry staff and the caucus staff. Without 

their dedication and effort, a balanced budget such as the one 

presented last week would not be possible. 

 

I would like to thank Sally Gunderson, my constituency 

assistant. Sally, like many of us in this Assembly, is new and 

has had a steep learning curve over the past few months. I am 

thankful for her hard work ethic, her ability to attend to detail, 

and the respect with which she acknowledges each and every 

person that she comes in contact with each day. She works hard 

to represent the Government of Saskatchewan in the 

Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to express my sincere thanks 

to all the people of the Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency. They 

are who I represent, and not a day goes by that that isn’t 

forefront in my mind. I graciously appreciate their input and 

their support. 

 

I would also like to take a moment to thank my family. My 

children, Carter and Taryn, are supportive, and they tolerate the 

fact that they are required to modify their schedule at times to 

accommodate their father’s. And I would be remiss if I did not 

thank my lovely wife, Krista, who encourages me and keeps me 

grounded. I am forever thankful for the person that she is. 

 

Many who are presently serving in this Assembly, as well as 

many of those who have served in the past, realize the 

commitment that families make to allow us to serve here. And I 

am very thankful for mine. 

 

I would like to begin my comments on the budget on the topic 

of municipal revenue sharing. The municipalities in 

Rosthern-Shellbrook are thankful for this government’s 

commitment to providing a stable and predictable funding 

model for our municipal governments. You see, Mr. Speaker, 

representing the constituents of Rosthern-Shellbrook at the 

municipal level are over 30 governing municipalities. I can 

assure you, each one of them has the expectation that their 

provincial member of this Assembly is not only accessible and 

available to them but also working full-time, representing their 

requests on their behalf. 

 

It was last year’s budget that provided over 216 million, or one 

full percentage point of the PST [provincial sales tax] collected, 

to the municipal governments. This was exactly the type of 

stable, predictable funding model that was requested by these 

and other municipalities, and it was this government that 

delivered the municipal revenue-sharing formula. 

 

This year’s budget builds on this with an increase of nine and a 

half per cent or over $20 million. This will bring the total 

revenue sharing in the coming year to over $237 million. This 

amount is 87 per cent higher than it ever was under the New 

Democratic Party. Through municipal revenue sharing, we are 

placing one full percentage point of the PST collected directly 

into the hands of our local municipal governments. 

 

[16:30] 

 

In our constituency, this results in tangible increases in funding 

to communities such as Hafford with a 111 per cent increase, 

Rosthern with a 114 per cent increase, Blaine Lake with a 108 

per cent increase, Spiritwood with a 96 per cent increase, and 

Shellbrook with 130 per cent increase. This in turn improves 

these communities’ financial ability to respond quickly and 

appropriately to local concerns and challenges that we know 

they face each year. 

 

The budget introduced last Wednesday by the Finance minister 

laid the foundation that will repair over 1200 kilometres of 

highway to keep our commitment to invest $2.2 billion in 

Saskatchewan highways over the next four years. This includes 

over $70 million in upgrades through the rural highway 

strategy. This will bring 150 kilometres of rural highway up to 

primary weight. 

 

There has also been 63 million invested in the gateway corridor 

projects that improve the safety and the efficiency of our 

highway traffic. A project of significance to Rosthern is the 

twinning of Highway 11 from Saskatoon to Prince Albert, 

which is funded in part through this program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the introduction of the passing lane 

initiative will add another economical option to improve the 

efficiency and safety of many highways that are now 

experiencing increased traffic flow. This government’s 

investment of over $581 million in highways in this budget will 

sustain the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

As I travel through the 30-plus municipalities in 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, it is abundantly obvious that agriculture is 

a primary industry and part of the backbone of the economy in 

our province. I have previously spoken of the importance of 

funding to such programs at the outset — such as AgriInvest, 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

AgriStability, and crop insurance — to ensure their availability. 

It should also be noted that with the introduction of this year’s 

budget, crop insurance investment at 177 million is record 

provincial investment. 

 

With continued investment and productivity by Saskatchewan 

producers, it is prudent to provide an insurance program that 

meets their changing needs in the industry. And these changing 

needs that I am referring to is our provincial ag exports. In 2007 

ag exports totalled $6 billion. Last year in 2011, our 

Saskatchewan agricultural exports increased by over 60 per cent 

to over $10 billion. Much of this increase in production value 

must be attributed to our province’s producers. The producers 

that we have in Saskatchewan today are educated in all aspects 

of agronomics, business management, and marketing. 

 

In past decades, a limit in crop quality and production factors 

have often been overcome by successful research. Research and 

development have improved agronomic traits with respect to 

crop varieties, and best practices have added to not only higher 

production but better quality products to sell at the farm gate. 

This government feels it’s prudent to invest over $20 million in 

agricultural research. It is imperative, with agriculture being 

such a significant component of our economy, that we invest in 

its research and development to ensure continued success of our 

world-class Saskatchewan agricultural products. 

 

Health investment by the people of Saskatchewan will be 

greater than it has ever been, and, more importantly, this 

investment will come with a patient-focused system. Health 

care investment will increase 4.9 per cent to improve access for 

all Saskatchewan residents. This includes investments in areas 

such as infrastructure, professional recruitment and retention, as 

well as continuing their approach to the reduction of surgery 

wait times. 

 

Improving access is moving forward with design and 

construction of health care facilities in the province. This 

includes funding to continue the design and construction of 13 

long-term care facilities, as well as continuing funding to a 

completed pilot project with a non-profit organization. The 

Amicus facility is now a place that many Saskatchewan citizens 

call home. 

 

Maintaining the Saskatchewan advantage is advancing the 

design and construction phases of the children’s hospital in 

Saskatoon, the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, and 

the replacement of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

Improving access is providing $60 million to move forward 

with the Saskatchewan surgical initiative. We are continuing 

with the four-year plan to provide, by 2014, all Saskatchewan 

residents the ability to have the necessary surgery performed 

within three months. The Saskatchewan surgical initiative is 

proudly supported again in this budget and is producing positive 

results for patients and their families in our province. 

 

Improving access in rural areas continues to be addressed in this 

budget. The budget supports the increase of training seats for 

nurse practitioners and physicians. It continues to support the 

doubling the number of residency positions available to this 

province’s medical grads as well as creating opportunities for 

placement of medical grads from other areas of the world. 

Combined with the increase in training opportunities is the 

forgiveness of Saskatchewan student loans of up to $120,000 

for physicians and $20,000 for nurses and nurse practitioners 

that choose to work in identified underserved rural locations. 

This incentive will encourage new health care professionals to 

practise in our province. This is yet another example of 

improving access in health care in Saskatchewan. 

 

1.5 million in this budget will directly fund the rural locum 

physician pool. The formation of this locum pool is crucial to 

the continuity of service in rural care. This was a campaign 

commitment by this party and now will be funded and 

implemented by this government. 

 

Improving access includes a $5.5 million increase to the Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society as well as a $16 million increase to 

the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to support access to cancer 

services. 4 million has been provided to expand the colorectal 

screening program province-wide to increase early detection, 

thereby improving patient outcomes. There’s been an increase 

of $98 million to the regional health authorities to continue to 

deliver services to the people of this province. 

 

These are some of the initiatives that will improve access for all 

Saskatchewan residents to their health care system and in turn 

contribute to sustaining the Saskatchewan advantage. The 

balanced budget that the Minister of Finance presented last 

week was in culmination of hard work of many on this side of 

the House, as well as the guidance of the Premier. I am very 

thankful and blessed to have the opportunity to work with such 

a strong group of colleagues. This budget keeps the 

commitments made in last fall’s election campaign, does not 

raise taxes, and most importantly this budget is one of very few 

balanced budgets in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in summary this balanced budget will keep 

spending sustainable. This balanced budget will keep our 

economy growing. This balanced budget will keep our election 

promises and, most importantly, Mr. Speaker, this balanced 

budget will sustain the Saskatchewan advantage for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I will not be supporting the 

amendment, and I will be supporting the budget. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a privilege to rise today in my place and speak. 

This is the first opportunity that I’ve really had to stand and 

speak on any major issue since the budget. I’ve stood often in 

this Assembly, but it seems to be a one minute at a time I get to 

stand, and so today I’ll be able to expand quite a bit more, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as a former member of this place, and I wonder if anybody 

who were here before remembers someone that used to stand 

and go well, well, well. I think that used to be the member from 

Regina Dewdney, and now we have a new member from 

Regina Dewdney, Mr. Speaker. And he’s doing an amazing job 

as all the new members are. 

 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

I can tell you that I had the opportunity to sit and listen to many 

of the, all of our new members speak on the Speech from the 

Throne. And many of them have now spoke on the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as one new member on the opposition side that 

spoke today. And I know she had spoke on the Speech from the 

Throne. I want to welcome them all to this Assembly. It is a 

great place to spend time. Sometimes at 9 o’clock at night on a 

Monday or Tuesday night, you wonder if it’s that great of a 

place to spend time, but you know, it is. 

 

This is the, I guess, the 13th budget that I’ve had opportunity to 

respond to, and time flies by; 13 years has flown by. But it is a 

real honour to walk up to this building each and every day to 

serve the people. And I’m blessed with being able to serve the 

people of Indian Head-Milestone. Others may have said that 

they have the best constituency. I think there’d be probably 40 

. . . no, I guess there’d be 58 arguments to that. I am blessed to 

have served the people of Indian Head-Milestone for, this is 

now the 13th year. 

 

This past election, it was certainly a privilege again. I can tell 

you even after I guess this would be my fourth . . . And I know 

there’s members in this Assembly that have served longer, Mr. 

Speaker, than four elections, some quite a bit longer than that. 

But I know that I, certainly leading up to that date, you knock 

on a lot of doors and you think it’s all very, very positive. But 

really, literally, until you see that first poll come in, you kind of 

wonder, how is it going to turn out? And I like many others saw 

their plurality increase significantly, Mr. Speaker, and we saw 

the number of seats on this side increase significantly. So it was 

an excellent night, that night of November 7th, 2011. 

 

As I said, this is the first opportunity I’ve had to stand in my 

place, and I need to thank a number of people that have allowed 

me to be where I’m at today starting with . . . and no particular 

order of priority because I’d hate to do that — because, you 

know, some would feel that they were maybe more important 

than others — but I’m going to start kind of at the ground level 

for my political career, and that’s at the constituency level. 

 

Certainly the people of Indian Head-Milestone have been great. 

But also my constituency association has been wonderful and 

most importantly is my constituency assistant who has been 

with me for five years now, Nicole Entner-McCullough, who 

runs the office in Balgonie. And as we all would say, and some 

of us that have been here longer than others would realize, you 

know, they’re the first contact quite often to your name in the 

constituency. And that first contact is so important and those 

constituency assistants, you know, are excellent resources and 

the first contact, as I said, for us. So I wanted to thank Nicole. 

She’s done a great job and continues to do a great job. 

 

In my office as the Minister of Health, I’m fortunate to have 

great staff in my office, whether it’s Kim who has been there 

since the start, four, a little over four years ago. Jessica, Kaitlyn, 

Crystal, Lindell, and my chief of staff, Laurie, do an absolutely 

amazing job. As you can imagine, the Health file is fairly busy. 

There seems to be the odd issue come up from day to day, and 

those staff members do a great job in making sure that I’m as 

briefed, as well briefed as I can be. In fact I think they do a 

much better job. They give me an awful lot of information. 

Some of it I can retain and some of it I don’t. But they always 

have the appropriate amount of information and do a lot of 

work on that front as well as deal with cases that come in. 

Crystal does the casework; does a great job. And they all work 

very, very hard in the office, and I want to thank them all. 

Lindell, Laurie — all of them do a great job. 

 

As well as I want to also recognize the ministry as well. The 

ministry does a great job. I have a very strong deputy minister 

that . . . Dan Florizone, and then below Dan, the assistant 

deputy ministers and all the other people that work within the 

Ministry of Health do an absolutely amazing job on that front 

on a very difficult file. 

 

I mean we spend 42 per cent of the budget and people always, I 

think, at times expect more. But the ministry staff, I can say in 

the opportunity that I’ve had in the last four and a half years, 

are an amazingly dedicated staff and really, really have the best 

interests of the Saskatchewan population and patients as their 

priority number one. So I want to thank the ministry for that. 

 

Finally, I do need to thank my family. I didn’t need the note to 

tell me that I should probably thank my family — that was put 

in front of me. But I do want to thank my family, not only my 

immediate family — Cindy, my wife, and our two sons, Craig 

and Mark — but also my mother, who lives in Fort Qu’Appelle, 

who is . . . She probably won’t want me to say this, but will be 

turning 92 in July and does an amazing job; lives on her own. 

And I always call her for advice and also to hear what people 

are saying. 

 

And I was interested, because we’ve made some changes in 

Health and some changes, for example, in the drug plan. And I 

really felt guilty, because I know mom hangs around with a lot 

of seniors, of course, and I wanted to give her a heads-up before 

that. But I did talk to her, I believe, on Sunday. I was down in 

Fort Qu’Appelle on Sunday and wondered how it went. And 

she said, well you know, nobody’s mentioned it to me yet. So I 

guess that’s a good thing, that people aren’t lobbying my mom 

for a government change. 

 

My brother and my two sisters, who both live in . . . are married 

and live in Saskatchewan, helped out through the campaign. I 

want to thank them as well. But I also had a little bit of help 

during this past campaign. For the 28 days, my uncle had come 

from British Columbia and spent the whole election writ period 

here in Saskatchewan. And it was interesting because he had the 

opportunity to travel with me, or I would stop down in Fort 

Qu’Appelle and — he was staying with my mom — and pick 

him up and travel with me. 

 

And that was always really quite interesting because he is a 

former surgeon in British Columbia. And from stop to stop, he 

kept asking me why, you know, we haven’t fixed the health 

care system. And if we could go back to the way it was in 1966 

and ’67, everything would be so much better. So I certainly 

learned insight from him. And I would say that — not that he’s 

used the health care system — but he wasn’t overly 

complimentary of the British Columbia health care system, Mr. 

Speaker. But it does shed some light that it is a challenge from 

province to province across this country. I think that’s about all 

I’ll say on that, other than, as I said, the family is very 

supportive. 

 

[16:45] 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

Cindy has been great. She works in the health care system. And 

I would say that there is probably a couple of things we can’t 

talk about at the supper table, and one of them is Health. We 

tend to come at it from two different angles. As a registered 

nurse and as the Minister of Health, we tend not to kind of see 

eye to eye on the Health situation. So we tend to stay away 

from that. 

 

And of course, the boys are travelling around the world and 

living the life, living a dream. And we get to catch up with them 

every so often, but never quite often enough. We had the 

opportunity to be down in the States twice when they were 

competing in Aspen and in Breckenridge, and it is quite a thrill 

to see them do well in competitions and when they’re 

competing worldwide. 

 

So the budget. It was a heck of a budget, I think. I’ve heard a lot 

of people speak from this side, and I’ve heard a number — well 

I guess, nine — speak from the other side. It’s easier to keep 

track of that than it is, I think, on this side. But I was really 

interested to hear the nine speak from their side. And until this 

last member, the newly elected member, I don’t really 

remember many of them — and I tried to listen to quite a few of 

their speeches — really have a thing positive to say about a 

budget of $11 billion, which is really, really hard to believe. 

 

Now I think maybe if it could have been a budget, if they had 

been in government, if it could have been a budget of 16.5 

billion because they promised 5.5. They never said where 

they’d really cut. You could add another $5.5 billion towards 

the budget; would they have something positive to say then? Or 

on the health care side, you know, if they could add another 

$550 million worth of spending, would they have something 

positive to say then because until the last member — and thank 

heavens she had something positive to say, even though she 

would kind of counter it with lots of negative — that was the 

first sense of anything optimistic coming from the opposition 

benches. 

 

Now I know what it’s like to be on the opposition side. We 

happened to spend a few years there, and for myself it was eight 

years. And you oppose. But I can tell you that you could always 

find something positive in a budget. There is, you know, when 

you spend that much money, whether it’s in health care or in 

highways, there is always something positive. But unfortunately 

we didn’t hear that from the opposition members. And it 

reminds me of the way it was prior to the 2011 election. You 

know, leading up to that it was negative, negative, negative. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I quite frankly hope they continue that 

because it worked really well for them in the 2011 election. 

They had been negative all the way leading up, Mr. Speaker, 

and I would say that most of them have carried on right where 

they left off prior to 2011, except for the one new member. 

Now maybe she saw the light. But I can tell you, the other eight 

continued on right where they had left off. 

 

I need to talk a little bit, in the time that I have, about health 

care. And it has been mentioned many times on this side, but it 

is a record number, a record amount of spending in health care 

this year. It’s $4.68 billion. That’s hard to believe. $4.68 billion 

spent in health care. What that works out to is about $12.8 

million each and every day, 365 days a year; $12.8 million 

spent on a million people, well actually more than a million 

people, and growing. But it’s an amazing expenditure. And so 

when you’re spreading that much money across the province, 

it’s by far the biggest employer in the province, and it employs 

people in every corner of this province to deliver the health care 

programs that we have. 

 

But we are going to see an increase, as some have mentioned 

already, about an $89.2 million increase to the regional health 

authorities. They’re the ones on the ground that deliver the 

programs — whether it’s the acute care, long-term care, public 

health, mental health — across the province. They’re the ones 

that deliver that care on the ground. And so we’re going to see a 

nice increase. But, Mr. Speaker, if you were to ask some, they 

would certainly take more. With this increase, there are going to 

be challenges. Health regions are challenged to find 

efficiencies. But I think that’s extremely important that we keep 

challenging not only the health regions but the Cancer Agency 

to find efficiencies in the delivery of care. 

 

If we continue to do everything that we’ve always done, Mr. 

Speaker, that isn’t prudent either. We need to look at the best 

efficient, most efficient delivery models that we can. And health 

regions have answered this call in previous budgets where 

they’ve found efficiencies, whether it’s in time management, 

overtime, other issues like that. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite 

confident the health regions are pretty much on track for all 

balanced budgets in this fiscal year. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

would expect nothing less from them as we move forward with 

their management of the health care dollars. 

 

The one big area . . . So it’s $98 million to the health region. 

But on top of that is another $60.5 million just for the surgical 

care initiative. This surgical care initiative stems from the 

Patient First Review done by Tony Dagnone where patients told 

us one of the most important things was access to care, making 

sure that we could get in in a timely manner. 

 

And why would they say that was the most important issue to 

them? I think why they would say that, and we would hear it on 

the doorstep, is in 2007 and prior we had the longest wait-lists 

in Canada. There was no other province that had longer 

wait-lists than we did in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So what 

we have done is gone to work over the last three years with a 

surgical care initiative, investing $60.5 million into that 

initiative, and we’ve seen some huge gains. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people that are waiting 18 months or longer are 

down 90 per cent. That’s amazing when you think of people 

that had to wait 18 months or longer for surgery, and that was 

not uncommon. But that level of wait has been cut down by 90 

per cent. People waiting six months or longer has been cut by 

55 per cent. So we’re making huge gains, Mr. Speaker. We 

have some of the shortest waits now that we’ve had in probably 

20 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ninety-nine per cent of all surgeries are conducted within 18 

months. Our target this year is to make sure that nobody should 

wait longer than six months. Right now going into the year, 87 

per cent of all surgeries are conducted within six months. We 

need to continue to increase that number from 87 up to 100. 

That’s why this $60.5 million is not only . . . is quite frankly, 

it’s putting money where our mouth was. We said we’d 



March 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

continue to drop the wait-list and, Mr. Speaker, this government 

is doing it. Huge, huge change. 

 

Roughly about what that enters into is roughly about 8,000 

more surgeries done this year than when the surgical care 

initiative started back in 2007. Mr. Speaker, we’re putting 2.5 

million to reduce costs for those with diabetes. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we had the announcement just shortly after the 

election. That is one thing that I can honestly say that has 

allowed me to serve with the greatest pride, is we campaign on 

a commitment, we form government, and we follow through 

with that commitment, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly, certainly a 

far cry from what we saw in previous governments under the 

NDP where they promised the moon, which we saw again this 

election. They promise the moon and then they could never 

fulfill those commitments when they became government. 

 

This $2.5 million for an expansion of the long-acting drugs for 

diabetes — I should remember both of them, but I’m not going 

to go there — the two drugs that are long-acting as well as the 

extension from up to age 25 for the insulin pump. Mr. Speaker, 

we certainly heard from the juvenile diabetes society, as well as 

others that had been lobbying for this, so we were able to fulfill 

our commitment just six months after forming government on 

yet another promise that we had made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I heard it mentioned earlier before, but $4 

million is going to expand the colorectal screening program for 

the province — a huge investment, Mr. Speaker. And this is an 

investment that pays off into the future. Early diagnosis on 

colorectal cancer means for the most part a very, very treatable 

disease. We’ve had it piloted first of all in Five Hills, which is 

around Moose Jaw area, then it’s moved into Regina and a few 

other health regions. We’re expanding it across the province, 

Mr. Speaker. Anybody from the age of 50 to 74 will certainly 

be sent a kit in the mail. I would ask you to follow through with 

that and mail it back, drop it off at the appropriate site. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s maybe not the most pleasant, but I’ve had the 

opportunity to visit the Allan Blair clinic when people are in 

there with colorectal cancer, and talk about unpleasant. So this 

is a minor, minor test that you can do to help prevent that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other investments such as the $16 

million that goes into the Cancer Agency, which will certainly 

again improve care for cancer patients. I think this is 

significant. In 2007, we look at the cancer budget in 2007, and 

we look at it in 2012. It was an increase in the cancer budget by 

76 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we had some of the 

longest waits. I remember it was over three months from first 

referral from the GP [general practitioner] to the oncologist, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve reduced that significantly. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

I can tell you that average patient waits between appointment 

approved is 92 per cent reduction. Huge, huge changes, Mr. 

Speaker. For the first time the Cancer Agency is fully staffed. 

We have the proper complement of oncologists, Mr. Speaker, 

and so it’s moving in the right direction. 

 

There are many other things that I would like to talk about 

regarding the health care budget, but what I do want to touch on 

is some of the spending that the NDP said that they would do in 

the last provincial election. Now they made commitments 

during the last provincial election. They had a lot to say. 

 

In fact, you know, I remember during the campaign — I don’t 

know if anybody remembers this — but during the campaign 

talking to some of the media. They were frustrated because the 

NDP would have up to two or three announcements a day. They 

just had so much to say that they just spread the media so thin 

because they had so much to say. In fact just in health care 

alone they were going to promise $550 million extra spending, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that would take this year’s budget 

from 4.6 billion to well over $5 billion just on health care. 

 

But not once did I hear anywhere that they would reduce 

spending to add their spending, you know, whether it was $100 

million for 750 assisted living units. I guess you could put 

money in if you took away all the surgical care initiative 

money, all the Cancer Agency money. That’s what it would 

have to have taken for them to be able to afford their promises. 

Not once did they take anything away; they just continued to 

add and add and add. 

 

In health care there are many, many examples. I do want to 

correct one thing though, Mr. Speaker. I stood in the House and 

I feel bad about this. I really do feel bad about this. I stood in 

the House one day and I was asked about Alzheimer’s, Mr. 

Speaker. And I said that we were moving forward on it. And I 

said that they didn’t put any money into Alzheimer’s during the 

last campaign. Mr. Speaker, I stand corrected. They did. I know 

they promised so much, and I didn’t see it on the list. They had 

put money into Alzheimer’s. The disconcerting part was the 

opposition MLA probably could have really put me on the 

carpet on this one because they had it in their platform. He was 

part author of the platform. He didn’t know it was in their 

platform. You know you’ve done a lot of spending when one of 

the authors doesn’t even know what’s in the platform, Mr. 

Speaker, and that certainly was the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition promised $5.5 billion extra 

spending, Mr. Speaker. And when asked about it, Mr. Speaker, 

how would they ever come up with that, I think it was very 

telling the day after the budget when the interim leader, Mr. 

Speaker, finally explained to the Saskatchewan people how they 

would come up with balancing the budget. And here is what he 

said, and it was the Leader of the Opposition — well, 

practically — he also has a lot of hand movements, but I’m not 

going to do that. 

 

There are a number of areas where they could have left 

money for films. One of those things they could have done 

is look at some of the initiatives around the agriculture, 

and look at some of the things they’ve done for 

municipalities. 

 

Pretty clear, pretty clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they haven’t elected a member in rural 

Saskatchewan for 14 years at least. Well, no. No, not that long. 

They haven’t elected a member in rural Saskatchewan and with 

statements like that — not that we will ever take it for granted 

— but they will never elect another member in rural 

Saskatchewan with statements like that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their pride and joy were the cities, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, they’re taking money from municipalities, they 

take money from municipalities. They’ve only got nine 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2012 

members now, Mr. Speaker. The only thing that the opposition 

leader could have said is they take it from northern 

Saskatchewan because they’ve only got two left of those. And 

the other seven rural MLAs, Mr. Speaker, would be gone. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of adjournment, 

this House stands adjourned to 10 a.m. Thursday morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 841 

  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 841 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 841 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 841 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 841 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 841 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 841 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 842 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 842 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 842 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 842 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 842 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Housing Availability and Affordability 

  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 843 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 

 Tender Awarded for New Hospital 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 

 Support for Western Development Museum 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 844 

 Celebration of Cultures 

  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 844 

 Three Inducted to Saskatchewan 4-H Hall of Fame 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 844 

 Winning Coach, Winning Team 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 845 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 845 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 845 

 Security of Health Information 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 846 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 847 

 Employment and Education for Northerners 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 848 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 848 

 Emergency Shelters 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 849 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 849 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 850 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 851 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................... 855 

  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 857 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 858 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 861 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 869 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 870 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


