




















































Hansard: March 08, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 12A THURSDAY, MARCH 8, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 413 

 March 8, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the House, it’s a pleasure to 

introduce some guests that are seated in your gallery, some of 

whom I may have seen last in the community of Dublin at a 

very successful job fair in Ireland. 

 

Mr. Speaker, joining us today is the newly elected, newly 

chosen president of the Regina Chamber of Commerce, Cory 

Furman, originally from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, and so this 

bodes very well for the chamber. He’s joined by the president 

of the Saskatchewan Construction Association and city 

councillor, Michael Fougere. 

 

And also with them we have Rachelle Clark who’s a 

recruitment manager at ISM [Information Systems 

Management Corporation], an IBM [International Business 

Machines] company here in the capital city, Mr. Speaker; Doug 

Simon who’s chief personnel officer at Brandt Tractor; and 

Shaun Hanson who’s the assistant transport manager with 

Loblaw, Shaun being a recent nominee in terms of our 

immigrant nominee program from Newcastle, from the UK 

[United Kingdom]. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we want to welcome this delegation to the 

Assembly. Later on we’ll be reporting more formally on the 

efforts of Saskatchewan employers and the Government of 

Saskatchewan with respect to that job fair in Ireland and the 

investment attraction mission portion in London, Mr. Speaker. 

And I just want to thank them for the work they’ve done for 

representing this province so very well on that important 

mission and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to welcome 

the officials who have been part of this tour to the Assembly. I 

want to make a special welcome of Mr. Furman as he’s a 

member of my former law firm and is upholding the strong 

tradition of good business sense and good common sense as we 

develop this province. And I know that the others who have 

been working together all bring their skills together in the task 

of making our province better, and we say thank you very 

much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working alone at a gas station in Yorkton, Saskatchewan. We 

know provinces like British Columbia have brought several 

safety precautions through law, including a requirement that 

workers cannot be alone during late-night, early morning hours. 

And if they are required to work, there must be protective 

barriers such as locked doors and protective glass. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And the people signing this petition come from the city of 

Regina. I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan with resources 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes, that 

is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village as well as Dundonald, and 

the petition is about the need for a new school in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. It says: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan cause the 

provincial government to devote the necessary resources 

for the construction of an elementary school in Hampton 

Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that concern 

our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many trappers and the good people of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, March 

8th, we mark the 101st anniversary of International Women’s 

Day. This is an important day for all of us to consider 

because it provides us with an opportunity to celebrate the 

political, economic, and social contributions women have 

made to the world. But it also serves as a reminder of the 

work we still have to do. 

 

Canada elected our first woman to the House of Commons in 

1921, so you’d think we would have made great strides over the 

last century, but we currently rank 40th on a list of 109 

countries when it comes to electing women to national 

parliaments. In Saskatchewan we took a step backward in the 

fall election when it comes to gender representation and have 

two fewer women sitting in our legislature — an abysmal 19 

per cent. 

 

Women work two-thirds of the world’s working hours, produce 

half of the world’s food, but earn only 10 per cent of the 

world’s income and own less than 1 per cent of the world’s 

land. That, Mr. Speaker, is a problem. 

 

This year’s International Women’s Day is focused on 

Connecting Girls, Inspiring Futures. If we are going to inspire 

positive futures for girls, then we are going to have to do a lot 

better at showing young women that we are ready to value 

women as true equals in pay, in status, in representation and 

other decision-making bodies. 

 

I ask all members to join me in celebrating International 

Women’s Day, recognizing that we still have much work to do, 

and in committing to do this work together. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, each year on March the 8th, 

Saskatchewan joins a global community to celebrate 

International Women’s Day and mark the economic, political, 

and social achievements of women. Inspiring International 

Women’s Day events promote equal labour standards, rights to 

maternity leave, increased participation in the labour force, and 

expansion of educational opportunities. This special day has 

been observed since 1911 and was officially proclaimed by the 

United Nations in 1975. 

 

Saskatchewan’s theme in 2012 is Women and Girls Inspiring 

Leadership: Gateway to Economic Security. Saskatchewan has 

long been home to women leaders. Former Estevan Mayor Ida 

Petterson and national journalist and Senator Pamela Wallin are 

but two outstanding examples of women determined to succeed 

in their fields of expertise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the Status of Women office in 

the Ministry of Social Services, through an International 

Women’s Day grant program, is assisting 94 community-based 

women’s organizations to host 36 events throughout the month 

of March. Details of these events are listed on the Ministry of 

Social Services’ website, and I encourage my colleagues to 

attend events in their own communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this House and the 

people of this province join me in paying tribute to the many 

women who’ve contributed to making Saskatchewan such a 

wonderful place to live and work. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Seniors’ Bill of Rights 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since taking on the 

role of the opposition critic for seniors a few months ago, I have 

been contacted by many people with concerns ranging from 

access to home care and long-term care, to the quality of care, 

and to broader concerns about abuse and exploitation. And of 

course I have recently heard a lot about the rapid eviction of 

seniors in their 80s and 90s from an assisted living unit. 

 

Many of those that contacted me with concerns asked me to 

reintroduce the seniors’ bill of rights. So later today, I will 

move first reading of that Bill. I want to thank my former 

colleague, Judy Junor, who has been pushing this Bill since 

2009, and I call on the Sask Party government to stop stalling 

on this important issue because we owe it to our seniors and 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

elders to better protect their rights. 

 

I am reminded of a quote from Bill Clinton who said, “Of all 

the duties we owe to one another, our duty to our parents and 

grandparents is among the most sacred.” As a society, we have 

a duty to look out for the seniors and elders who not only built 

this province but are still contributing to our social fabric in 

many important ways, both big and small. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Screening Program for Colorectal Cancer  

 

Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, March is national Colorectal Cancer 

Awareness Month. Colorectal cancer is over 90 per cent 

preventable, and it’s highly treatable when caught early. Our 

government is committed to strengthening cancer care for 

Saskatchewan people and supporting screening programs for 

prevention and early detection of cancer. The Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency screening program for colorectal cancer is a 

great example of the benefits of early detection. The screening 

program is a proactive, effective way to identify people who are 

at risk of developing colorectal cancer. Eligible men and 

women aged 50 to 74 are able to complete the test in the 

privacy of their home using a personal test kit. The sample is 

then dropped off at a medical laboratory or mailed back in a 

supplied postage-paid envelope. 

 

As of January 2012, more than 16,000 individuals have 

responded, giving Saskatchewan one of the highest response 

rates in Canada. This program is already available in several 

health regions and has shown positive results. Because of this 

screening, dozens of patients have had precancerous polyps 

removed, avoiding invasive cancer treatment or surgery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and our 

health regions for their excellent work in introducing and 

expanding this screening program. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Provincial Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform you that 

the week of March 4th to 10th, 2012, has been officially 

designated provincial Impaired Driving Awareness Week in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The negative effects of impaired driving are staggering. The 

Canadian organization of Mothers Against Drunk Driving 

published 2008 statistics citing in that year alone 1,162 

fatalities and 68,538 injuries. While it is possible to put a 

financial cost on these tragic occurrences, it is impossible to 

record the immense suffering of the family and friends. In 

Canada, Mothers Against Drunk Driving and students against 

drunk driving work with thousands of community volunteers, 

spending countless hours carrying out a mission to stop 

impaired driving and to support the victims. 

 

The Project Red Ribbon campaign and the grade 7 to 12 school 

assembly program are examples of these initiatives aimed at 

raising awareness and money to provide services for victims, 

increase public awareness, conduct legal research, and improve 

anti-impaired driving technologies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, impaired driving is still an ongoing issue in our 

country and province, and designation of Impaired Driving 

Awareness Week is one way for a government to help better 

inform citizens of the resulting effects of a decision to drive 

drunk. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Tim Hortons Brier 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is that 

time of year again for a Canadian tradition, the Canadian men’s 

curling championship, the Tim Hortons Brier. The Brier is a 

thrilling time for players, coaches, volunteers, and event 

organizers, and especially for Saskatchewan. Twelve of the best 

curling teams from across Canada represent the provinces 

during six days of jam-packed curling action. With more than 

7,000 curlers, who attempt to qualify each year for the Brier 

through club, zone, district, and eventually provincial 

championships, these 12 teams can truly be proud of their 

accomplishments of making the Brier. 

 

The 2012 Brier has been held 10 times in Saskatchewan, and 

this is the sixth time it has been held in Saskatoon since the 

Brier began in 1927. Curling is an important part of 

Saskatchewan culture, and you’d be hard pressed to find 

someone in the province who hasn’t thrown a rock or two. And 

those small town Saskatchewan bonspiels, well they’re 

legendary. There has been a long history of championship 

curling in Saskatchewan and the Brier being a great opportunity 

to showcase what the city of Saskatoon and the province has to 

offer. And although our Saskatchewan weather has not exactly 

co-operated, I believe the 2012 Brier will yet be another 

successful event hosted by the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in 

congratulating the organizers and countless volunteers for their 

determination in putting on . . . Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

100th Anniversary of the Legislative Building 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, 2012 marks the 100th 

anniversary of this Legislative Building. On March 8th, 1912 

— 100 years ago today — Provincial Treasurer James Calder 

delivered the first budget ever tabled in this Chamber. That 

budget came at a time of incredible growth in our new 

province, and the 1912 budget reflected that growth. 

 

Saskatchewan’s population had doubled from a quarter of a 

million people in 1906 to half a million people in 1912, and the 

1912 budget spent just under $9 million or about $18 for every 

Saskatchewan resident. Five million dollars was also 

announced for a massive new highways program known as the 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

Scott good roads policy, another 1.5 million was allocated for 

telephones, and 1.25 million for public buildings. In contrast 

the budget spent just $585,000 on education and just $113,000 

on health. 

 

Another thing that has really changed is the media coverage of 

this budget. I particularly like this line from the next day’s front 

page in the Regina Morning Leader: 

 

The budget speech was a clear-cut statement of the 

financial affairs of the province, a statement that must 

have been pleasing to all who heard it, save of course for 

the opposition men who can take no pleasure from 

anything, which shows how well the government has done 

its work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot has changed since 1912, but the 1912 

budget paints a clear picture of a new province taking on 

both the challenges and the opportunities of growth. Thank 

you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Representation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a simple question for the 

Premier: does he represent everyone in his constituency or just 

those who are 18 years of age and over? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The cryptic 

question of course is in reference to legislation being brought 

forward, changes being brought forward in the wake of the 

census and the new electoral map. Mr. Speaker, the province of 

Saskatchewan will now join a number of other provinces in the 

country, I think including Ontario, in terms of the 18-year-old 

criteria. 

 

In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we continue to have a growing 

population in the province of Saskatchewan, something we’re 

grateful for. We continue to welcome newcomers to this 

province. We continue to engage those who are not fully 

engaged in the economy to a greater extent as each month goes 

by, Mr. Speaker. And as we move forward, all of those citizens 

will be represented effectively, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly 

and especially by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 36, An Act to amend The 

Constituency Boundaries Act, will eliminate people under 18 

from the equation that is used to redraw the constituency 

boundaries. In this legislation, the Premier is saying that young 

people under 18 don’t count. My question is to the Premier: 

how can the young people under 18 believe that the Premier is 

working in their best interest when he says that they don’t count 

in the electoral process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General and Minister 

of Justice. 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

can advise the members opposite that we allocate resources 

based on eligible voters. That’s how funding is given to 

constituency offices, and that’s how, in fact, elections are 

operated. I can advise the members as well that Quebec, Prince 

Edward Island, Nova Scotia, and Yukon count not only people 

that are over 18, but they require them to be registered voters as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our intention is to include everybody that is over 

the age of 18, to hopefully include people that are immigrants 

that may want to become citizens, and we would encourage 

them all to become citizens so they can vote. But we feel that it 

is an accurate and fair way of apportioning and allocating our 

resources through the province and a way of ensuring that we 

have good representation for everybody that’s there. Mr. 

Speaker, our intention is to represent each and every resident of 

the province, whether they are a citizen, whether they are a 

voter, and regardless of their age. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, about a quarter of the people in 

the province are under the age of 18. And about half of this 

approximately 250,000, or slightly more, of young people in the 

province are Aboriginal. 

 

Many times throughout the session, we in this legislature, the 

Premier and members right around, introduce the school groups 

that come to our legislature and say, welcome to your 

legislature. My question to the Premier is this: how can he stand 

with a straight face and welcome these young people to their 

legislature when he’s passing a Bill that says that they don’t 

count? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — This is incredible leadoff to question 

period, Mr. Speaker. It’s pretty obvious that when government 

enacts policies, when government delivers health care, when 

government invests in education, when government invests in 

post-secondary education, when we invest in a quarter billion 

dollar housing plan, when we outline and implement economic 

plans that, Mr. Speaker, see our province leading the nation in 

economic growth, that is for all the people of this province. 

 

And I can tell you, based on the record of this government in 

delivering those services to people of all ages, based on the 

record of this government, Mr. Speaker, in moving 

Saskatchewan forward, members on this side of the House will 

be very proud to continue to welcome every single school 

student to this legislature — to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. Other provinces and territories make the same 

calculation, Mr. Speaker. The bottom line is this: the record of 

this government is kept promises and a growing, leading 

economy on behalf of all of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this may be the Premier’s first 

question period in this session, but once again he’s speaking out 

of both sides of his mouth. In one sentence, he’s telling the 

young people of Saskatchewan that he wants them to engage in 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

the political process and that their concerns are going to be 

heard by the legislature, is going to be heard by him. In the next 

sentence he’s telling them that until they are 18 they don’t 

count in the electoral process. 

 

My question is to the Premier: how can he expect young people 

to be engaged in the politics of this province when their own 

Premier is telling them that they don’t count? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there’s no 

change to the age criteria for those who can vote. Those people 

who could vote in the past will be able, those people of that age 

will able to vote in the future. Mr. Speaker, there have been 

many avenues for young people to get involved in politics 

without having the vote, Mr. Speaker, through things like youth 

parliament, through things like the youth wings of various 

political parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this. I can tell you the greatest 

disservice ever done to the young people of this province was 

inflicted upon them for a generation by members opposite with 

economic policies that drove families and young people out of 

this province in record number. Mr. Speaker, young people and 

people of all ages and from all backgrounds, they’re voting with 

their feet, Mr. Speaker. They’re coming to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Accommodation in Seniors’ Facility 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I know the Minister of Health, I 

know the Minister of Health would simply like the St. Mary’s 

Villa issue to go away. But I continue to receive many calls on 

this issue, and emails, and individuals are asking me to raise 

concerns. One story I’ve heard is quite concerning, Mr. 

Speaker, and this story occurred after the short notice was given 

for eviction and after there was widespread coverage in the 

media. I was informed, Mr. Speaker, by five individuals, that 

while . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Mr. Member, please address your comments 

through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I was informed that while seniors 

were packing their belongings, trying to find a place to live, that 

at the same time construction work was beginning on the area 

where they were living, including the removal of asbestos. My 

question to the minister: was he aware that construction was 

beginning while residents were still living in their units, 

including the removal of asbestos? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I dealt with 

this issue, I think, on the first day of the House that we were 

sitting, and at that time I apologized on behalf of government. 

This was not handled the way we would want to see it handled. 

Nor does the health region, Saskatoon Health Region, feel it 

was handled appropriately either. You saw the CEO [chief 

executive officer] of the health region apologize. We have 

apologized. 

 

I will say in light of that, Mr. Speaker, there are thousands, tens 

of thousands of dealings with seniors each and every day in the 

health system, Mr. Speaker. And for the vast majority of them, 

they’re handled very, very well. The ones that aren’t handled 

very well we learn from and we want to make changes so that 

those mistakes won’t happen again. This is a classic example 

where there were 10 that weren’t dealt with very well. We’ve 

apologized, Mr. Speaker. We’ve not only apologized, but we’ve 

called in the Ombudsman to have a look at this, Mr. Speaker, to 

see where changes can be made so this doesn’t happen again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about individuals 

here. We’re talking about grandmothers, grandfathers, moms, 

and dads. These are specific individuals. The minister was 

informed of what was going on — there was widespread 

coverage — and he chose not to pay attention to what was 

happening. 

 

In addition to the stress of these seniors having to pack their 

belongings and find a place to live within days, they were 

confronted by individuals in protective suits with masks 

removing asbestos. One person told me that they actually had to 

close the window on her mother’s unit in order to prevent dust 

coming in. Another person told me that while the mother was 

still living in the unit that they actually started to take apart the 

window, removing the casing on the window while the woman 

was packing her belongings. 

 

My question to the minister, my question to the minister: why 

did he let this happen? It was covered in the news. He was 

informed of what was going on, but he chose not to pay 

attention and he allowed these seniors to be disrespected. Why 

did he do that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said in the 

past, the timelines were certainly tight. There were some issues 

around communication. That’s why we have the Ombudsman 

looking into this, so that we can learn from it and make sure 

that those mistakes will not happen again. 

 

I will say though, Mr. Speaker, after four and a half years of 

touring the province, of seeing many of the health care facilities 

left by 16 years of neglect by the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

government, Mr. Speaker, that there are many facilities in this 

province that need upgrading, Mr. Speaker. St. Mary’s is one of 

them. And as we move forward to upgrading and fixing more 

facilities left by the neglect of the NDP, we’ll do it better next 

time, Mr. Speaker. That is a guarantee, Mr. Speaker. But I can’t 

help but say, when you tour some of the facilities after 16 years 

of neglect, Mr. Speaker, there has to be some renewal, and this 

is one of those facilities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s trying to deflect the 

issue. The minister knows that this mistreatment happened 

under his watch. It’s about the process that happened under his 

authority as the Minister of Health. It is good that this issue has 

been referred to the Ombudsman. I support that. But that does 

not remove the role of ministerial accountability. After this 

issue was in the news, after the minister knew about it, there 

still was continued mistreatment. Actually it probably got worse 

than the initial news of having to move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are people in their 80s and 90s — as I said 

before, grandmas and grandpas, individuals that we’re supposed 

to care for in our society. I’ve been told stories about 

grandparents breaking down and crying, full of anxiety about 

what they’re going to do next. I was told about one individual 

who missed taking their cancer medication because of the 

turmoil and the anxiety with this move and the uncertainty 

about where that individual will be going. 

 

My question to the minister: when did he know about this? 

What did he know about this? And why did he choose to do 

absolutely nothing about this so that these seniors were treated 

properly? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, 

this government prides itself on really, quite frankly, having a 

good look at the health care system, putting the patients first, 

which hadn’t been done before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Day in and day out, we have thousands and thousands of 

interactions with all people of the province and especially 

seniors, where the treatment and the service delivery is done 

very, very well. And I’ll say Saskatoon’s Regional Health 

Authority is a leader in that front, Mr. Speaker, adopting the 

patient-centred care. That is what is shocking about this. That is 

what is alarming about this. And that’s what we all need to 

learn from, Mr. Speaker. It’s far from perfect. The system is far 

from perfect, and we’ll admit that, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

we’re not afraid to look into this even further with an 

independent officer like the Ombudsman that will certainly put 

forward some recommendations that we’ll learn from and move 

forward from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the treatment was unacceptable, 

but I can also tell you, Mr. Speaker, on the thousands of 

interactions that happen day in and day out, for the vast 

majority of them, they’re treated very, very well. We want to 

learn from this one. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Government Appointments 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

recently learned that since 2007, there’s a marked disparity 

between the number of women government appoints and the 

number of men appointed to Saskatchewan boards. In fact by 

the government’s own account, it shows that since 2007, a 

shamefully low 29.6 per cent of all government board 

appointees were women. 

 

My question to the minister is: half our province’s population 

are women, so why is your government’s record on appointing 

women to boards so one-sided? And does the government 

believe this is acceptable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for her question. Our Crowns, all the boards of 

government, we appoint competent people. Some are women, 

some are men, but all are competent, Mr. Speaker. We ensure 

that the leadership roles . . . I know that in our Crown 

corporations we’ve had women as CEOs, we’ve had women as 

Crown presidents. And it isn’t something we discriminate on, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s competence that we search for. And there are 

women that have contributed a great deal to the boards for our 

government, Mr. Speaker. And there’s women that continue to 

contribute their time to ensuring that our boards are well 

represented and serving the people of Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out that 

those numbers that I referenced, the 29.6 don’t include Crown 

boards. Crown board numbers are even more abysmal. SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], 2 out of 12; 

SaskPower, 2 out of 11; SaskTel, 3 out of 11; SaskEnergy, 3 

out of 9. I’m talking about Executive Council appointments. So 

the Crown appointments are even worse, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we asked the government what criteria — and we 

heard a little bit from this last minister — are used to determine 

the suitability of order in council appointees to boards. The 

response we received says, “Criteria is based on the needs of 

the ministry and includes appropriate levels of education and/or 

equivalent experience, skills, abilities, and knowledge.” 

 

So my question to the minister is: since only 29.6 per cent of 

your government’s appointees were women, does your 

government believe that for every one skilled, able, and 

educated Saskatchewan woman, there are three skilled, able, 

and educated men? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think that kind of 

question is kind of ridiculous when you look at what we have 

within our government right now. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to 

tell you that in Saskatchewan right now, we have the first ever 

deputy minister of Finance who is a woman. We have six other 

deputy ministers who are female. We have six chiefs of staff 

that are women. We have Lisa Boire who has received the 

Premier’s Award last year for her work in the lean initiatives 

right across the entire government. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

it’s important that the members opposite realize that 57 per cent 

of the government workforce is women. 

 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing right now in this province is 

making sure there is a balance of competent women, and the 

needs and the views of women are seen right across our 

government. I’m proud of the work that we’re doing right now 

and so are the women that I met with yesterday in the Inspiring 

Leadership Conference led by Dr. Timmons from the U of R 

[University of Regina], who noted that women right across 

Saskatchewan are increasing their opportunities to be involved 

in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I think one of those key words is balance that 

the minister used, and 30 per cent is not what one would call 

balance. Mr. Speaker, we know that the government’s record on 

appointing women to boards is abysmal. We also know that 

according to the government’s own admission, there is no one, 

no one in the Premier’s Executive Council office responsible 

for monitoring gender representation on the board, on boards. 

 

So to the minister: will your government develop a policy to 

ensure that women of Saskatchewan have equal opportunity to 

be appointed to our provincial boards and that in fact a 

representative number of Saskatchewan’s well-qualified, 

competent, and highly capable women are appointed to serve 

on boards? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue, 

one that has been identified by our government to make sure 

that we do have people coming forward. One of the issues we 

found is that people aren’t bringing their name forward. So I 

know that the Premier has asked the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] from Fairview to come forward and 

work with chambers of commerce and different groups right 

across the province to identify women who could be on boards 

and are willing to take time and give their expertise in many 

areas — not just on boards that are within the ministries but on 

Crown boards as well to make sure that they understand they 

have a value and that we need them as we grow the province. 

 

Women’s issues, women’s perspective is important to make 

sure that our government is looking at the whole province and 

the needs. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to the report 

that’s brought forward from the member from Fairview. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister 

tried to spin that her government had consulted with 

Saskatchewan people in the education sector when they decided 

to divert funds to previously unfunded private, independent 

schools. Mr. Speaker, that’s categorically incorrect. In fact a 

December 22nd Saskatchewan School Boards Association news 

release states: 

 

For the second time in the past six weeks, the Government 

of Saskatchewan has announced a change in education 

policy without consulting the locally elected school boards 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Not only was the education sector not consulted. I have looked 

through the Sask Party’s fall election platform and it certainly 

didn’t have any mention of diverting funds from education. 

And I’ve taken some time to go through the Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker — not a mention. 

 

To the minister: why won’t this government simply be straight 

to Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have met 

with the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association] on 

this particular issue and their press release and reminded them 

of the consultation process. And they do know and they have 

the report. The media has actually the report as well. 

 

The media have the report of the consultation process that was 

started, quite frankly, when the NDP were in power. The 

consultation began then. All of the stakeholders were involved: 

STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], SSBA, the LEADS 

[League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents], as well as the independent school 

associations, were involved in the consultation. There was 

recommendations that came forward. And we didn’t act on 

them immediately, Mr. Speaker, because the priority of course 

was to focus on working on the funding formula. But now we 

have acted on that report, Mr. Speaker, and the 

recommendations were that we do the same as other Western 

Canadian provinces and have recognition of independent 

schools. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a ministry will always be 

reviewing different aspects of a respective ministry and that 

does not count as consultation in any way, shape, or form. And 

I know that the education sector and the stakeholders — the 

SSBA, the STF, LEADS, across the piece — they in no way 

have been consulted on this front. And in fact they didn’t even 

have a funding formula for three years running when this 

surprise announcement to divert funding came along. This 

diversion of millions of education dollars has been widely 

criticized and rightfully so. There was no consultation. There 

are pressing needs and opportunities in education and now the 

government’s threatening cuts. Will the minister do the right 

thing and scrap this damaging program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — As I said in my previous answer, Mr. 

Speaker, there was an independent schools review. The review 

began under the NDP. All of the specific stakeholder groups 

had representation, and there was recommendations. Mr. 

Speaker, I know that this member keeps saying again and again 

and again that we’re diverting funding from the existing $1.7 

billion education budget. That is not true. The up to 1.7 million, 

not billion, will be new dollars and the schools that will receive 

it will have accountability. 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

Our number one goal is to serve all students in Saskatchewan. 

And we are going to improve student achievement. Schools that 

meet a certain criteria that will focus on student achievement 

will receive 50 per cent funding, the same as other provinces in 

Western Canada, including their NDP neighbours in Manitoba. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s sort of interesting, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister says they’re not diverting funding. I guess they’re just 

sending new money, millions of dollars, to previously unfunded 

private, independent schools at the same time as they’re cutting 

resources in the classroom and boards across Saskatchewan. If 

that’s not diverting dollars, I don’t know what is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another example of mismanagement . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . A question I heard opposite, where are they 

cutting funds? Better consult with the Education minister 

because there’s cases of that all across the province right here 

and now. 

 

Another example of mismanagement in education is the 

government’s high-interest loan scheme. In 2009, the Sask 

Party took complete control of education funding, stripping 

away the school boards’ ability to collect any revenues, but 

nonsensically still require boards to contribute a 35 per cent 

share for infrastructure. Without revenues and no abilities for 

boards to build reserve funds, school boards are now forced to 

borrow that share at a much higher rate than government, 

wasting millions needlessly on high interest. Question to the 

minister: how does this make any sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — School divisions have always funded 

a share of their capital projects and they used various methods 

to do so, Mr. Speaker. Some borrowed from traditional lenders, 

which is seeming to cause now the NDP problems, but yet 

under the NDP they still borrowed from traditional lenders. 

Some issued debentures but very, very infrequent, and in fact 

the last one was in 2006 and none have attempted to do so 

since. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re not reinventing anything too dynamic 

here. They did go to traditional institutions for borrowing in the 

past. What is changing, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, is we used 

to have tax revolts in our province and now we don’t. The 

school division debt was never transparent; it was hidden. Now 

it’s in the summary financial statements. They used to ignore 

crumbling schools. They didn’t have to borrow if we don’t 

build schools. Now we’re building schools across our province. 

We used to have mill rates increasing by 5 per cent every year. 

Now we don’t. There used to be an NDP government and now 

there’s not. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as the Premier’s come 

back to Saskatchewan from Ireland here this week, it might be 

interesting for him to learn that in his home community of 

Swift Current, they’re hiking property taxes by 8 per cent and 

likely more, as we move forward with off-loading at so many 

levels and certainly from this government. 

 

When the government took over full control of education 

funding in 2009, this arrangement should have changed. Or at 

least now, as a new education funding formula has been 

introduced, it should have been corrected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government is looking for inefficiency and 

waste, I found it in their high-interest loan scheme. It is wasting 

valuable education dollars and at a time when this 

government’s threatening cuts. Will the minister do the right 

thing and commit to fix this today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, what the government’s 

going to do, it’s going to focus on student achievement. It’s 

going to focus on a strong education system. We increased 

funding for education by over 18 per cent in our very first term. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to commit to building schools and 

repairing schools in this province, something the NDP did not 

do. And we inherited $1.2 billion of a disaster in school 

facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the school divisions had the power to borrow from 

traditional lenders before. They will still have the power to 

borrow from traditional lenders. This is not unique or new. It’s 

just the NDP didn’t even know what the heck the school 

divisions were doing before. 

 

[10:45] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 603 — The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

that Bill No. 603, The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 603, The Seniors’ Bill of Rights 

Act. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Broten: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Western Canada’s Natural Resources 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to discuss an issue of great importance to our province, 

an issue of Western Canadian importance and indeed one that 

has national implications, and frankly one that deserves support 

from both sides of the House. At the conclusion of my 

comments today, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving a motion that I 

believe both sides of this House, this Assembly, can support. 

 

Now recently, Mr. Speaker, there has been some attention, 

more so than usual, on Canada’s natural resource sector. There 

has been much toing and froing in the United States over the 

construction of the Keystone XL pipeline, and President Obama 

has indicated that there will be no firm decision on that 

initiative until after the presidential election later this year. 

There has been widespread debate, Mr. Speaker, over the 

Northern Gateway pipeline project that will run between 

Alberta and the West Coast of Canada. 

 

The media attention has focused on the fact that a great deal of 

Canada’s natural energy resources are located within Western 

Canada, and that somehow only the people of Western Canada 

benefit from these resources. When the issue was recently 

highlighted, Mr. Speaker, in the media, due to some unfortunate 

comments comparing the viability of Western Canada’s oil and 

gas sector versus the value of the Canadian dollar, our Premier 

immediately rose to the defence of the resource sector in all of 

Canada calling the comments divisive and not at all helpful to 

national unity. 

 

For you see, Mr. Speaker, as our Premier said to the media, 

criticisms by anyone of the oil and gas sector could just as 

easily have been directed at the potash sector or the uranium 

sector or, for that matter, the hydroelectric sector in Quebec or 

Manitoba. 

 

The natural resources within Canada — whether it be located in 

Quebec, Atlantic Canada, or British Columbia — belong to all 

Canadians and benefit everyone in this country. Mr. Speaker, 

our Premier immediately recognized that this attention and 

focus could easily have been directed at industries that are 

actually . . . that are critically vital to our economy here in 

Saskatchewan. Thousands of men and women in Saskatchewan 

rely on the potash industry, on the oil industry, the uranium 

industry for their livelihood and to support their families and 

their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the potash industry specifically, as 

we all know in this Chamber, Saskatchewan is home to 50 per 

cent of the world’s potash reserves. The Saskatchewan potash 

industry directly employs over 4,500 people and contributes to 

jobs for thousands more in spinoff activities. 

 

There are significant investments, Mr. Speaker, in mine 

expansions going on as we speak. There are new industry 

players doing their due diligence, doing their geological 

engineering and financial modelling to determine the 

economics of new greenfield operations here in the province. 

 

Now the potash industry itself, Mr. Speaker, estimates that 

there are some $13 billion in new expansions going to take 

place between now and 2020. As a matter of fact BHP 

Billiton’s Jansen project could be the largest mine in the world 

with over 1,000 permanent employees once it comes to fruition. 

 

K+S is investing $3.25 billion, Mr. Speaker, in the Bethune 

area which will create 300 permanent jobs and 1,000 

construction jobs for the first new greenfield mine in 

Saskatchewan in some 40 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, world potash demand is generally expected to 

increase by at least 3 per cent or more annually over the next 10 

years. This is based on the following: there was increasing 

world food demand; there was limited available land to expand 

agricultural production; there is a growing middle class in 

emerging economies resulting in increased protein demand; and 

of course there’s a growing world population, Mr. Speaker. The 

total annual demand could increase by as much 15 million 

tonnes by 2020. At current market share here in Saskatchewan, 

sales could increase by as much 5 million tonnes annually. 

 

In the new expansions taking place right now, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ll be the first to market, resulting in the opportunity to 

capture more of the current world market share for our own 

Saskatchewan producers. 

 

The world is looking for energy security and food security. We 

in Saskatchewan are positioned to be a leader in these sectors. 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the debate arises about the utility of the 

energy resource sector in Canada, our Premier carefully and 

clearly articulates why this sector is so important to all of 

Canada and not just Western Canadians. This is exactly why the 

people of this province trust him to defend their interests and 

speak with an informed voice on issues of national importance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me spend a few minutes on another 

critical industry to our province and that is the oil and gas 

sector. The Government of Saskatchewan strongly supports 

both the Keystone XL project and the Northern Gateway 

pipeline project since they will provide Western Canadian 

crude oil producers important access to new and expanding 

markets in the United States and Asia. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, pipelines have been operating safely and in 

accordance with high standards for decades in Saskatchewan 

under previous administrations and under this administration. 

The lack of pipeline capacity, however, in North America has 

resulted in challenges for our oil producers right here in 

Saskatchewan. It is possible if the Keystone pipeline project 

does not proceed or the Northern Gateway project does not 

proceed, it is possible that this slowdown, this lack of capacity 

for pipeline will impact the growth of Saskatchewan’s 

production in the oil and gas sector. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is Canada’s second largest 

producer of oil, home to a large part of the Bakken play, a 

formation US [United States] geological survey says is the 

largest conventional play in North America and one that we 

share with our US neighbours, Montana and North Dakota. If 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

we can increase our recovery rate through innovation and 

technology by just 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, it would triple our 

recoverable reserves of oil. Increasing our recovery rate by 10 

per cent would increase our recoverable reserves sixfold. I 

know there’s an awful lot of work going down at Boundary 

dam 3, Mr. Speaker, down in the Estevan area with respect to 

carbon capture and utilizing that captured CO2 for enhanced oil 

recovery projects. Right here in Saskatchewan, innovation is 

taking place that the world is watching. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the construction of the Keystone XL will inject 

billions of private sector dollars into the economy, creating 

more than 20,000 direct jobs and 118,000 spinoff jobs during 

construction throughout North America. Between 2010 and 

2035, Ontario is expected to see $63 billion in economic 

spinoffs and in excess of 65,000 oil sands related jobs 

according to the Canadian Energy Research Institute. The 

Canadian Energy Research Institute, Mr. Speaker, also 

projected over the same 25-year time frame that British 

Columbia could expect $28 billion in economic benefits and in 

excess of 31,000 new jobs. In Quebec, Mr. Speaker, the 

province of Quebec may see $14 billion worth of economic 

activity and in excess of 16,000 new jobs. 

 

The demand for safe and conflict-free oil remains high, 

positioning Saskatchewan well for the future. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan’s population is now at an all-time high of 1.063 

million and change. It has grown by over 15,000 people in the 

past year, making Saskatchewan the second fastest growing 

province in Canada. The province’s population has now 

increased for 22 consecutive quarters, and in the past five years, 

Saskatchewan has grown by over 70,000 people. This is the 

fastest and most sustained period of population growth in 

decades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province’s unemployment rate now stands at 

5.1 per cent, the second lowest rate in Canada and well below 

the national rate of 8 per cent. Saskatchewan has jumped from 

eighth to second in the ranking of the best performing labour 

markets as described in a report prepared annually by the Fraser 

Institute. 

 

Saskatchewan has been rated as the best place in Canada for oil 

and gas investment based on the opinions of petroleum 

executives and managers in an annual Fraser Institute survey. 

As a matter of fact, according to the Petroleum Services 

Association of Canada, oil and gas drilling in Saskatchewan has 

increased by 11 per cent, Mr. Speaker, year over year. This is 

the highest percentage increase in the country. So, Mr. Speaker, 

it is no coincidence that Saskatchewan’s population is on the 

upswing while oil and gas exploration is also on a record pace 

of growth. The two go hand in hand. So, Mr. Speaker, if the 

debate is about the viability of the natural resource sector in all 

of Canada versus a low Canadian dollar, the two are not 

incompatible as long as Canada is competitive from a 

productivity perspective. 

 

This is not a partisan issue, Mr. Speaker. This is an opportunity 

for members of the opposition and the Government of 

Saskatchewan to stand together in a unified voice and affirm 

their commitment to defending the natural resource sector and 

the thousands of men and women, many of them unionized, 

who work in these industries. This is a time for the NDP and 

the Sask Party to speak out in a bipartisan fashion and ask all 

political leaders in Canada to recognize the value that the oil 

and gas, potash, uranium, and indeed hydroelectric sectors 

bring to our country — not just in Quebec, not just in Atlantic 

Canada, not just in Western Canada, and not just Ontario, but 

clearly pan-Canadian, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Whether it was the ice storms in Quebec a few years ago, 

whether it was the manufacturing sector crisis in southern 

Ontario a few years ago, whether it was the forest fires in 

British Columbia a few years ago — all of Canada comes 

together when these types of situations occur and helps out our 

neighbours. And so it must be, Mr. Speaker, for our oil and gas 

sector. It is not a Western Canadian oil and gas sector; it is a 

Canadian oil and gas sector. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I humbly ask the members opposite to join us 

and support the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all partners in 

Confederation to join Alberta and Saskatchewan in 

sharing a positive message regarding Canada’s oil sands. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the latest industry figures, 

mining accounts for over 30,000 direct and indirect jobs right 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. It generates $1.5 billion 

in wages, Mr. Speaker, and generates approximately 7.7 billion 

in gross domestic product for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mining in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is our third largest 

industry after oil and gas and agriculture. It represents 

approximately 5 per cent of Saskatchewan’s GDP [gross 

domestic product] and will likely represent a larger portion of 

GDP under sustained high potash and uranium prices. $12.2 

billion combined, a combined value of oil and gas sales, is 

estimated for 2011, Mr. Speaker, up some 13 per cent from 

$10.8 billion in 2010. 

 

The success of Saskatchewan’s energy sector, Mr. Speaker, is 

good for Canada and it’s good for working families. The 

construction of the Keystone XL pipeline will result in 

hundreds of jobs for Saskatchewan people and considerable 

economic benefits, not only for this province, not only for our 

province, neighbours to the west, but indeed all of Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, and those communities and businesses throughout 

Canada. 

 

Oil and gas drilling in Saskatchewan is expected to increase 

now, the highest percentage increase in the country over the 

next year, Mr. Speaker. It’s a vitally important sector for the 

province of Saskatchewan. We here on this side of the House 

want to ensure that we speak with a unified voice when we’re 

defending the mining sector, the potash sector, the uranium 

sector, or the oil and gas sector. They’re critically important, 

not only to Saskatchewan, not only to Alberta, but all of 

Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we hear comments that may be 

interpreted as divisive with respect to a particular sector, this is 

a situation that the people of Saskatchewan don’t take very 

lightly. When other things happen across the country, whether 

it’s the auto manufacturing sector in southern Ontario and the 

federal government had to come to the rescue of this particular 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

sector, nobody in Saskatchewan stood up and say, I don’t want 

any of my federal tax dollars going to help that sector. What 

they said, Mr. Speaker, is this is a pan-Canadian problem. This 

is an issue that we all need to come together with and support 

that industry in southern Ontario. It’s time now the rest of 

Canada recognizes the value of our natural resource sector for 

all of Canadians.  

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move the following: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all partners in 

Confederation to join Alberta and Saskatchewan in 

sharing a positive message regarding Canada’s oil sands. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Northeast has moved 

the motion: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all partners in 

Confederation to join Alberta and Saskatchewan in 

sharing a positive message regarding Canada’s oil sands. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this afternoon to speak to this particular motion and to set 

out the balanced approach that the New Democrats in 

Saskatchewan have been following for many years as it relates 

to oil and gas policy and mineral policy. And I know that the 

members opposite support the NDP approach because they 

have, over the last five years, maintained the mineral royalty 

structures and oil and gas royalty structures that were put into 

place after much consultation with the industry over quite a 

number of years.  

 

Now what we knew and what we know from Premier 

Romanow’s work in this area — and more importantly over the 

last number of years Premier Calvert’s work, working together 

with Mr. Cline and with the other members of the cabinet — we 

understood that getting the policies right as it relates to oil and 

gas and minerals would make a huge difference in the economy 

of Saskatchewan. And we ended up also looking at taxation 

policy first and then looked at these kinds of policies. And I 

know the member who has just spoken this afternoon was 

referencing those strong policies, which continue in effect 

without change, and how important they are to the economy of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The particular motion today is talking about the oil sands. And 

for many people, they don’t always understand that 

Saskatchewan has a large part of its province that includes oil 

sands up in the northwest part of the province. Mr. Speaker, the 

oil sands projects that were and are continuing to be promoted 

by the Axe Lake project and things in that particular area have 

very many technical challenges that are sort of an added layer 

of complexity on top of what is happening in the Alberta oil 

sands area. And so what ends up happening as these particular 

assets of the people of the province are being discussed by the 

officials within our energy and mines ministry, is that we need 

to understand all of the different challenges that are there, and 

therefore we have been working with them. 

I know in my role as a minister in the previous government that 

we spent many, many hours with the companies that were 

interested in expanding across into Saskatchewan to further 

develop this asset for the people of Saskatchewan. And always 

the question was getting the right balance, making sure that the 

asset could be used safely and carefully and at the same time 

making sure that any company that was involved could do that 

in an economic fashion. But we all knew, both the companies 

and the provincial government, was that due to the complexity 

there were going to be some great difficulties. And that has 

been borne out as the projects have gone ahead. But as we 

know, each decade, probably every three or four years, there are 

enhancements in the technology that assist. 

 

Now one of the questions that comes from this motion relates to 

the overall use of these assets for the long-term health of 

Canada and North America. 

 

We all know that the oil sands of northern Alberta and northern 

Saskatchewan are an incredible reservoir of energy for use by 

the world. And it’s very clear that the world knows that as well. 

When we see now the numbers of Crown corporations — if I 

can put it that way — that have come from countries around the 

world to invest in the oil sands as partners or as main operators 

in the Alberta oil sands, we recognize that this asset is being 

treated as a world-class asset that is of value to everyone. 

 

But at the same time, we need to ask a number of very difficult 

questions to maintain the balance. One of the major concerns 

that we have from the Ministry of the Environment — and I 

know this from when I was the minister of the Environment — 

is that there are quite a number of airborne contaminants that 

come from some of the processes in Alberta that directly affect 

the lakes and rivers and the vegetation of northwestern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that this is an issue in Alberta as well, and we know 

it’s especially an issue for the federal government. I think the 

federal Minister of Environment, Peter Kent, was in Alberta 

just a few months ago to make an announcement about a very 

specific monitoring program which would be sponsored by the 

federal government and the provincial government. And I think 

our provincial government is involved as well. And the reason 

for that is that there have been a number of difficult issues 

related to both to the airborne issues but also to concerns about 

water quality. 

 

And we should never forget that this Earth where we live needs 

to be dealt with carefully. And we in Saskatchewan have to be 

good stewards of not only the resource which will be used — 

it’s a one-time resource — but also of the place where it comes 

from. And I think that what the message and what the concern 

is worldwide about the oil sands is that they have not totally 

understood how those of us who live in this place are concerned 

about the extraction of the resource and how it needs to be done 

carefully.  

 

Now we do know that over a number of decades, as this 

resource was first being developed, that there weren’t 

necessarily the same standards of how to do it, how to do that 

job, and that there are many things that were not done correctly. 

And I think many of the people involved in the oil industry will 

acknowledge that, and we’ve seen that.  



424 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

But what we also know is that we can all work together, both 

the environmental groups, the environmental ministries, and the 

oil companies, and the energy ministries to get this right. It was 

quite interesting today in The Globe and Mail that there was a 

headline about the oil industry and the oil companies in the oil 

sands coming together with a number of the very thoughtful 

environmental groups to put forward policies that they jointly 

recommend to our federal government and our provincial 

governments that will allow for the balance that makes sure that 

these projects will all go ahead but at the same time will 

address many of the concerns that come to us from around the 

world.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this issue is all about. It’s about 

how we portray what we do, how we make sure that we have 

the rules and the regulations in place that will absolutely make 

sure that the land and the water and the air is protected for the 

people and for the animals and for the fish. Because over the 

centuries, it’s that legacy that we will want to protect. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we see a motion like this, what we 

wanted to do is make sure that the position that comes from the 

Government of Saskatchewan is the traditional NDP position of 

balance. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to hold that 

perspective and make sure that that message gets out. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 

speak a little bit about utilitarianism and kind of identify what 

the meaning is. It’s held to the view that the action made is the 

action that produces the most good. My colleague from Regina 

Northeast had spoken earlier about the economic benefits of the 

oil and gas industry. The utilitarian view is: one ought to 

maximize overall good; consider the good of others as well as 

one’s own good. And resource development has many positive 

aspects in the form of thousands of jobs and procurement 

opportunities. 

 

So I also want to speak a little bit about on Saskatchewan’s 

strong economy. And we should be focusing on the 

Saskatchewan benefits basically of being a blessed province to 

have a strong resource sector. 

 

And I want to speak about Aboriginal employment and 

Aboriginal skills training, the partnerships that are taking place, 

and making a connection between education and resource jobs 

— you can’t have one without the other. So we need a Canada 

where more people are educated and working on their own 

natural resources is a better overall Canada. 

 

So I kind of want to talk about a little bit about our uranium 

industry. And approximately 49 per cent of mine site 

employees, including contractors, are residents of Canada’s 

North. Approximately 43 per cent of mine site employees, 

including contractors, are of Aboriginal ancestry. Uranium 

employed 2,341 people in 2010 — 51 per cent were residents of 

northern Saskatchewan and 87 per cent were First Nations or 

Métis. 

 

First Nations and Métis institutions like the Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technologies, which I’m an alumni of — 

that’s where I started eight years ago, so I know the value of 

their training and education programs — and the Gabriel 

Dumont Institute and the Dumont Technical Institute and First 

Nations University of Canada are playing leadership roles in 

recruiting and training Aboriginal students here in 

Saskatchewan. And I know first-hand of the good work that 

these institutions are doing because I’m still a student, and I’m 

still involved in university politics. 

 

So many of the programs that these institutions offer link 

directly into employment within the resource and mining 

sectors, and we have helped ensure these institutions receive the 

necessary funding and supports to facilitate success in the 

classroom and then success in their careers. 

 

The growing Aboriginal youth population presents a great 

opportunity for our province, with roughly 13,000 First Nations 

and Métis learners in Saskatchewan’s post-secondary system. 

And we see real progress as we continue to link learning 

opportunities with earning opportunities right here in 

Saskatchewan. We also commend the work done in the private 

sector by world-class corporations like Cameco and 

PotashCorp, both headquartered right here in Saskatchewan, on 

their efforts to train and employ First Nations and Métis close 

to home. 

 

[11:15] 

 

I want to talk a little bit about the Saskatchewan tribal council 

and the PotashCorp partnership. PotashCorp has allocated 

$250,000 per year for education and training opportunities, and 

I was sitting at that table and I know that those dollars are going 

down the right pipeline. So those dollars are basically going 

into youth entrepreneurship programs as well as educational 

and training programs and also into active measures 

programming. So these companies are looking at the Aboriginal 

population as their long-term skilled labour and are working on 

an Aboriginal strategy. They’re also working on procurement 

strategies. The Saskatoon Tribal Council has somebody 

working on procurement. 

 

With a record of economic growth, one of the lowest 

unemployment rates in Canada, and a growing population, 

Saskatchewan is the place of unparalleled opportunity. And this 

is one of the reasons why I stayed in this province once I got 

my M.B.A. [Master of Business Administration]. I could have 

went to Toronto. I could have went back to the States, but I 

stayed. This is my home, and the opportunity is here. 

 

So $2.8 billion is a record investment in post-secondary 

education. Over $46 million in funding for First Nations and 

Métis education and training, a 20 per cent increase from the 

previous year. Over the past four years we committed 142.8 

million directly into First Nations and Métis education and 

employment. We will continue to work with our partners across 

the post-secondary system including First Nations University, 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, GDI [Gabriel 

Dumont Institute], and others to ensure most First Nations and 

Métis students get the training they need to succeed in their 

careers here at home. 

 

Seeing real progress with these investments, in 2011 off-reserve 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

Aboriginal employment in Saskatchewan increased by 7.1 per 

cent, an increase of 2,600 compared to the previous year. 

Employment of 39,200 in 2011 was the highest on record, 

exceeding the previous high of 37,000 in 2008. In January 

2012, Aboriginal employment was 40,600, up 6,200 which is at 

18 per cent compared to January 2011. Youth Aboriginal 

employment was up 4,300, a total of 17.3 per cent over the 

same period. With roughly 75,000 to 90,000 jobs opening over 

the next five years, the strong investments in Saskatchewan’s 

residents will ensure we have the labour force needed in the 

future. However, training takes time and Saskatchewan needs 

skilled workers today. We also look at two other areas to meet 

the current labour demand in our province. 

 

So I want to talk a little bit more about what PotashCorp is 

doing with their Aboriginal initiatives. For recruitment they 

held three career information sessions at the White Buffalo 

Youth Lodge with the Saskatoon Tribal Council, generating 

almost 150 applications, made more than 50 presentations to 

First Nations and Métis communities and institutions, and 

opened up the dialogue between our company and the 

Aboriginal population; provided tourist information sessions 

and career fairs for more than 500 First Nations and Métis 

people. 

 

In 2010 I was part of organizing The Future is Yours career 

fair, and we had youth from as far as Black Lake, which is way 

up north, come to our career fair in Saskatoon. So for the youth, 

PotashCorp supported STC [Saskatoon Tribal Council] youth 

entrepreneurship programming in on-reserve schools, including 

an intensive introductory class at the Native Nations Institute, 

which is in Arizona — and they basically had a business camp 

for a week and I escorted them down there; co-hosted with STC 

and City of Saskatoon, ATOSKÉ [Aboriginal Training 

Opportunity for future Saskatoon Employment] summer youth 

camps to introduce youth to career possibilities and to help 

them to identify and prepare a skills portfolio; and supported 

programs at White Buffalo Youth Lodge to ensure healthy and 

safe resources are available to youth and their families. They 

provide enhanced support to super Saturdays, which is an 

introduction to university life. They bring in people from 

on-reserve and have a Saturday where they hang out at the 

university. And efforts to increase links to math and science 

programming. 

 

I just want to talk a little bit about Cameco. They have a 

northern scholarship program. They offer scholarships up to 

7,500 for northern Saskatchewan students entering a university 

degree and up to 5,000 for students entering trades or technical 

training. Scholarships of up to a total of 100,000 per annum are 

awarded under this program each year. Cameco Aboriginal 

Scholarship in Business — this scholarship to recognize and 

promote academic excellence among Aboriginal students. And 

John Desjarlais who is from Cumberland, Cameco put him 

through school with an engineering degree, and he finished 

school last year. 

 

So I support the motion: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all partners in 

Confederation to join Alberta and Saskatchewan in 

sharing a positive message regarding Canada’s oil sands. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it is indeed a 

pleasure for me to rise to speak to the debate today regarding 

this notice of motion. 

 

And I would like to say very clearly that we do support the 

motion, and we are in support with the member from Regina 

Northeast in terms of the actual wording in the motion. Indeed 

we believe there is an importance to having a positive 

relationship with the rest of Canada and that Saskatchewan 

have a positive relationship with the development of the Alberta 

oil sands. There are many ways to approach that positive 

relationship, and I’m just going to take a few moments now to 

speak to some of those ways to do it. 

 

I’m a bit disappointed that the two members opposite didn’t 

actually speak to the particulars of the motion. They spoke 

about a lot of other things. But I’m going to try and focus my 

comments on the motion itself which talks about partners in 

Confederation sharing positive messages regarding oil sands. 

 

There’s a number of ways I think that this government and our 

province could take forward a positive approach to the Canada 

oil sands. Obviously oil sands are an important part of our 

economy. In fact they’ve created what our Prime Minister is 

calling us as an energy superpower, although there’s a number 

of different articles about how you might interpret what that 

means. Certainly the oil sands are an incredibly important part 

of the economy of Alberta and certainly of Canada. The links 

with our economy aren’t direct at this point because we haven’t 

started developing our own oil sands resource, but indeed the 

economy of Canada is dependent, highly dependent on this part 

of the energy sector. 

 

One of the things I think that this government could do in terms 

of an overall strategy and bringing a positive dialogue in the 

area of energy development is to balance the development of 

non-renewable energy sources with other renewable energy 

sources. And I think that’s something that is being called for by 

many, many citizens of this province and certainly citizens of 

Canada. The idea of balance is important to have to make sure 

that as these resources are being depleted, we have an answer 

for the next century. 

 

So one of the things we want to look at is the role perhaps of 

the pipelines. And certainly the member from Regina northwest 

talked about the importance of the role of the pipelines. Maybe 

in terms of balance, because he also represents a riding that has 

an upgrader and the capacity is here in this province to upgrade, 

that maybe we could balance, have more of a balance between 

shipping crude oil out of the province and certainly out of the 

country, and that’s an issue for both of the pipelines that he 

speaks about. Or perhaps developing value-added capacity 

within our province and certainly within Alberta, I would think 

that’s something they’re looking at as well. So it’s about 

balance and it’s about sustainability. 

 

Indeed, the former premier of Alberta, Peter Lougheed, spoke 

quite frankly about this, and the concern is an economic 

concern, Mr. Speaker. It’s about the idea of shipping out raw 

materials and crude oil at a very low price as opposed to having 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

upgrader capacity here, so that we could actually keep the 

revenues and the positive benefits of developing this 

non-renewable resource here for the people of Saskatchewan. 

So I think those are things that we could focus on as a province 

and certainly as a country, is to ensure that we are getting the 

best bang for our buck here in Canada. 

 

Well right now the demand for crude is high and there’s a lot of 

people doing very well in the development of that portion of the 

oil and gas industry. I’m looking forward to positive and 

innovative ideas from this government to ensure that our own 

citizens are also benefiting from the value-added version of this 

particular resource. 

 

A couple of the things that might be considered by this 

government and certainly the federal government is how we 

actually value this non-renewable resource. Because if you 

look, if you go on Amazon you could type in “peak oil” and 

you will find 15 to 20 books that have been recently written 

about the notion that or the theory that peak oil has, we’ve 

reached peak oil, and that our supplies are now declining. So 

we’re going to have to spend more and more money finding 

more and more difficult sources of oil and gas. And indeed the 

attempts here in our province in relation to our own oil sands is 

a clear indication of that. It’s getting tougher and tougher to 

find easy, accessible conventional sources of oil. And so that’s 

something to be of concern, that is of concern as well. 

 

The federal government has different ways to . . . I’m just going 

to call on the article that was referred to earlier. There’s 

different ways to properly tax oil and gas and one of the 

conventional methods that’s being suggested is the 

cap-and-trade system. So we use the credits and we make sure 

that they’re reinvested into the impacts of this type of industry 

on our infrastructure and also on our sustainable, the 

sustainability of it from an environmental perspective. One of 

the suggestions maybe is that we could use the revenues 

generated by a potential cap-and-trade system to invest in 

green, renewable energy, in sustainable infrastructure, and 

energy saving technologies, Mr. Speaker. That’s another part 

that would turn this into a much more positive dialogue is if the 

revenues from these . . . and if proper taxation of the oil and gas 

is properly applied and if we look at the way that the oil and 

gas, the peak oil . . . Sorry, just one moment to check my notes. 

That oil and gas has been traditionally underpriced, and it has 

actually driven the dollar up. 

 

And I think we heard from our Premier recently about the 

Premier of Ontario being concerned about the Canadian dollar. 

To me that’s a valid concern. And to be calling it divisive is 

actually, our own Premier is actually driving a wedge into the 

discussion, because the concern, the concern of the people, the 

concern of the people of Canada is that it be fairly priced. And 

so we want to ensure that the price is fair. And if you look at 

some of the economics about the pricing of oil and gas, it has 

been traditionally underpriced. So if we have proper taxation 

that reflects the full cost of oil and gas, then I think we would 

have a positive message regarding the oil sands, which are 

Alberta oil sands, which the topic is today. 

 

Of course the biggest concern that we have right now in terms 

of the oil sands is the impact it may have on the environment. 

And the problem . . . In fact I have a document that’s 300 pages 

that I didn’t bring in with me today, but it is on my desk if 

anybody wants to look at it. I don’t think I have time to go get 

it, Mr. Speaker. At any rate, one of the biggest problems that 

we have with the oil sands industry right now is the rapid pace 

of development. Again that was something that the former 

premier of Alberta was concerned about, and it’s also of 

concern in terms of monitoring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s been a number of reports done. One that I’d like to 

quote from right now is from the oil sands advisory panel that 

was struck by the Government of Alberta, and the article is 

called A Foundation for the Future: Building an Environmental 

Monitoring System for the Oil Sands. So there’s been great 

difficulty in the monitoring of the impact of the oil sands, and 

the rapid pace of development is impacting that ability to 

monitor. The concluding remarks from that report, Mr. Speaker, 

say this: 

 

The establishment and implementation of an effective oil 

sands monitoring program is fundamental to the long-term 

environmental sustainability and economic viability of a 

rapidly growing oil sands . . . in Canada. 

 

So in order to have a positive message regarding the oil sands, I 

think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that the ability to monitor and 

track what’s going on in this situation is really important. 

What’s happening is there’s a lot of conflicting science, Mr. 

Speaker, about the actual impact, and until the scientists are 

able to get their heads around that, it’s something that I think 

requires a careful, balanced approach to the development of the 

oil sands. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Indeed, here’s a couple of examples of conflicting science. One 

is from an industry-sponsored study which states that “the 

differences in sediment quality conditions in the lower 

Athabasca River and the ARD [that’s the delta] as compared to 

regional baseline sediment quality conditions are classified as 

negligible or low.” That’s from the industry. 

 

And from another independent study, the Nunee Health Board 

Society report, they say that: 

 

Taken together the data indicate that sediment 

concentrations of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon or 

PAHs in the lower Athabasca River and the adjacent delta 

can vary greatly in time and space and may at times 

exceed guidelines. 

 

So again I think that’s one of the things that the Alberta study 

concluded was that there are just a whole bunch of different 

studies out there and there hasn’t been time to correlate or 

monitor them. 

 

So that’s the basic . . . I have lots more to say but I’m afraid I 

won’t be able to say it at this point. But right now I think the 

idea is that development of oil sands is important to our 

economy. We need to have a positive approach. We don’t need 

divisive wedge politics coming from the Premier accusing 

Ontario of being concerned about the Canadian dollar because 

that is of concern to Canadians. In order to do this together, we 

need to work together and be balanced and focus on 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

sustainability and just make sure we’re getting it right. Rapid 

development is causing concerns and I think, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the motion itself, certainly the history of this party has 

been to support this and the question is doing it right, being 

balanced, and doing it sustainably. So I will speak in favour of 

the motion. And I thank you for the time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The energy sector is an 

important and essential part of the Saskatchewan economy and 

that of all of Western provinces. Saskatchewan has benefited 

from the demand of our natural resources, not just oil but also 

uranium, potash, diamonds, and agricultural products amongst 

others. And no doubt Canada also benefits from 

Saskatchewan’s natural resource wealth. 

 

This year Saskatchewan has received glowing economic 

reviews touting our strong economy growth, balanced budgets, 

positive business climate, and strong population growth. We 

continue to be among the national leaders and we intend to keep 

things that way. Population here is at an all-time high. 

Saskatchewan is projected to have the second highest economic 

growth in Canada, second lowest unemployment rate in 

Canada. 2012 will mark another Saskatchewan Party balanced 

budget, another of many to come. 

 

The 1990s are behind us, and we’re not going back. We’re 

looking to the future, planning to expand our trade, keep our 

children at work in the province with great careers, attract new 

residents and employ all available hands, build our province’s 

prosperity. Looking to the long term helped build the prosperity 

of this nation in which we all live. 

 

Canada is a regional country. We seem to be forever comparing 

regions and our different ways of life, travelling the country and 

being amazed by the vastness, by the immense nature of our 

country. People look to Canada as an international model for 

development and an international example of a country in 

which we are all welcome. We will always have challenges in a 

regional country. However, instead of fighting amongst 

ourselves, Canadians have used their minds and their innovative 

nature to develop strategies to resolve their issues, at the same 

time make our country stronger and more resilient. 

 

The Canadian energy industry is top of mind in Canada now. 

The media’s talking about it. Provinces are weighing in the pros 

and cons. Citizens are educating themselves, and other 

countries are weighing in on our important domestic issue. We 

cannot make this issue go away. We cannot survive with less 

energy resources. Civilizations fall when they run short of 

energy. To continue our development as a strong, ambitious, 

and innovative civilization we need more energy, not less. 

 

The task ahead requires a plan and requires vision. How are we 

as a nation going to develop our Canadian resources; provide 

Canadians, the world, with a variety of energy options utilizing 

the vast natural resources from across the country; develop new 

energy technology to increase energy supplies in the future; and 

provide clean, alternative energy sources for all, from a safe, 

democratic, and stable Canadian democracy? 

 

Questions remain and inhibitions abound. There is a concern in 

Canada about a national energy strategy. Can we move beyond 

the failed National Energy Program, glean the positives from 

the experience while learning from the negatives? It is too easy 

to write the exercise off as a failure and to leave it in the past. It 

must be examined in order to ensure that our current national 

energy strategy moves forward with success. Can we work to 

lessen our country’s environmental impact on the world, 

providing safe, stable energy sources from a democratic 

country? 

 

Fortunately a broad, market-focused strategy that defines where 

Canada is heading as an energy-producing nation is well under 

way. Recently Premier Wall joined BC [British Columbia] 

Premier Christy Clark and Alberta Premier Alison Redford to 

start a national conversation regarding Canadian energy 

strategy. This strategy is not just about selling more resources. 

The Canadian energy strategy aims to create a fundamental set 

of values around coordinated infrastructure, greenhouse gas 

regulations, immigration and labour shortages, and 

environmental regulations. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government believes in co-operating 

with our neighbours, and Premier Clark expresses the goal of 

this co-operation best in the following statement: 

 

British Columbia’s coast does not just belong to British 

Columbia. It belongs to Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, 

Quebec, Ontario and the Atlantic Provinces and it’s 

essential that our ports and our infrastructure all across the 

west are functioning as well as they can. That’s what 

allows trade to flow inside our country and that’s what 

puts people to work. Certainly in BC we recognize the big 

contribution the oil sands make to Canada and to our 

national economy. We need to be thinking about the 

energy economy in an environmentally sustainable way. 

 

This tone from Premier Clark emphasizes the intention that 

decisions be made with Canadian public interest as top 

consideration. The first time the Western premiers met it was 

under the auspices of the New West Partnership Agreement 

which focused on breaking down barriers between the Western 

provinces and improving the economic prospects of the West’s 

9 million residents. 

 

Since then the perspective has grown. Western Canadian 

representatives and leaders feel a sense of urgency regarding 

development, developing an energy strategy. They recognize 

the energy developments and systems cannot be contained 

within the provincial jurisdictions. The energy industry operates 

nationally and internationally and we must be continually aware 

of this competitive fact. A national energy strategy should stay 

true to the principle that has served it well — let the free market 

do its work. 

 

The strategy should enhance this guiding principle by focusing 

on the following: 

 

Diversity markets. In order to create the markets necessary to 

enhance prosperity of the Western provinces, available markets 

must be cultivated. We cannot rely solely on US markets. Other 

options must be explored. The Western premiers understand the 

importance of these energy markets, but also realize that, in 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

order to open them up, the Canadian government must be a 

partner, and citizens from coast to coast need to be made aware 

of the benefits of strong energy economies and resource sales. 

We need to streamline environmental regulations, make 

regulations surrounding production and transport infrastructure 

more predictable and less susceptible to outside influence. 

Canadian regulations to meet and exceed our environmental 

obligations. 

 

Emissions reductions. Development of CO2 emissions 

reductions that address environmental concerns while 

minimizing economy harm. 

 

Labour. Development of labour markets, encourage labour 

migration within the country from jurisdictions of high 

unemployment to areas of low unemployment and increase 

immigration to address the intensifying labour crunch. 

 

Work with First Nations. Government strategies to address high 

unemployment rates in First Nations communities through 

education, training, and innovative partnerships. 

 

A national energy strategy that works solely for the West will 

not work for Canada. The Canadian energy strategy is one that 

is of national interest. The prosperity of Canada in the long 

term requires a Canadian energy system that is reliable, 

sustainable, efficient, and co-ordinated with Canadian economy 

supporting inputs and trades. 

 

The Western premiers recognize the abundance of Canadian 

energy resources and want a strategy that includes these 

resources from across the country. A true pan-Canadian 

initiative that will attract a national audience and succeed as 

policy will require an upfront understanding of what the 

potential is, what the scope of the strategy will be, who is going 

to be at the table, and what are the issues of consideration when 

developing our national energy resources and getting them to 

new markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving forward. We are moving 

away from the history of stagnant population growth, massive 

out-migration of our youth and high-income earners, low GDP 

numbers, and low investment in Saskatchewan. We’re moving 

away from a time where everyone looked elsewhere for 

opportunity. We are a part of a national strategy of extreme 

importance concerning an industry that we are promoting and 

improving. A national energy strategy must serve to unite this 

country. This initiative must aim to improve the prosperity of 

the nation as a whole while encouraging and creation . . . the 

technology and solutions that will improve and protect our 

environment and provide abundant energy resources to support 

our economies and ways of life in the future. A strong energy 

strategy will improve the lives of Canadians and provide the 

world with stable energy resources from a democratic, 

trustworthy country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this speaks strongly to my constituency 

where we currently have 5,000 oil wells in production, and with 

new steam injection possibilities into the oil patch, all these 

issues need to be addressed. So, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

supporting this motion and I thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to join the debate and certainly offer my 

perspective on the motion that’s being brought forward. And, 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question that, from our point of view, 

that developing Saskatchewan with all the resources in uranium 

and in potash and oil and gas and the list goes on, I think that’s 

something that’s very important — that every government has 

to undertake that particular work. And our point is that 

obviously as an opposition caucus, we want to make sure we 

continue working to build a brighter future for people of 

Saskatchewan and of course all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I remember going to a meeting in 

Lloydminster — this is a number of years ago when I was 

minister of Highways — and we met with a couple of folks that 

were involved with CAPP, and of course CAPP being the 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. And it was 

great, great meeting with CAPP. And I remember the people 

getting onto the podium, two or three of them, and at the time 

Stelmach was the premier of Alberta, and what did you hear of 

the CAPP folks — well not necessarily CAPP but 

representatives of the association — they were extolling the 

virtues of then Premier Calvert’s policies to attract investment 

and allow oil and gas opportunities to come to Saskatchewan. 

In fact that’s why I was there in Lloydminster, to announce 

some roads to oil projects to make sure that we had safe roads 

to transport oil. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know I have that speech somewhere, but 

this was a fine speech. And I can tell you the premier was there 

at the time, and he was being praised by the petroleum 

producers as the premier that’s ushering in a new era of 

prosperity for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the whole 

notion, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party is trying to 

say, we build the economy, we’re going to continue building, 

everybody in Saskatchewan knew that the boom and resource 

development was coming. Everybody knew. And the most 

important thing to do is everybody knows that the boom and the 

resource development will continue, Mr. Speaker. Those are the 

two principles: they know it is coming, and they know it’s 

going to continue. 

 

But one of the biggest arguments and the difference that we 

have with the Saskatchewan Party is the notion of balance to 

benefit. Who benefits the most from all that development? That 

is where the difference is, Mr. Speaker. That is where the 

difference is between our caucus and of course the 

Saskatchewan Party caucus. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that they spoke about the 

oil and gas sector, of how it’s important to embrace their role. 

There’s no question that nobody wants to see capital fleeing 

their province. We want to attract capital and we want to retain 

capital. I think that’s really important for the development of all 

of our futures. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the difference that I pointed out, the 

difference that I pointed out, if you look at some of the stats of 

some of those members that brought forward and you look at 

northern development, all the uranium mines that are occurring 

in northern Saskatchewan, I can say at the outset that Cameco 

does a terrific job. They do a terrific job, and Cameco should be 

credited with those numbers of contractors and workers, 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

Aboriginal and First Nations people. They should get the credit, 

Mr. Speaker. They should get the credit because they’re the 

ones that initiating all that fine work. And they’re the ones who 

work in the communities to make sure they extract as much of 

the resource benefits or the benefits of that resource to as many 

people living in the impacted area, Mr. Speaker. That is one of 

the key differences that we have between the NDP and the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Now on this motion, on this motion, Mr. Speaker, we 

understand, we understand that the oil and gas sector provide 

great opportunity for people. We have hundreds of people 

working in the oil and gas sector. We appreciate that, and we 

want to see that continue. 

 

But the three principles that we have in our minds, Mr. Speaker, 

the three principles that we have in our mind is that we must 

take care of our environment. Environmental protection is 

pretty darn important, Mr. Speaker. We must engage our skilled 

labour force. The labour movement, they’ve got to be part of 

this process, Mr. Speaker. And we also understand that industry 

should be appreciated and industry should be welcomed to 

Saskatchewan. That’s what we New Democrats think. Now if 

it’s all about giving away everything and not trying to protect 

the interests of those three principles, Mr. Speaker, that is what 

we mean by the balance of benefit. 

 

Now there’s no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that was a 

great moment when the CAPP folks that put on the presentation 

in Lloydminster, they really praised our premier at that day, 

which was Premier Calvert. And I’m one of the luckiest guys 

around because I was able to listen to cabinet presentations 

from people like Clay Serby from Yorkton area, people like 

Eric Cline from Saskatoon, Eldon Lautermilch from Prince 

Albert, Maynard Sonntag from Meadow Lake. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what were they talking about? They were talking 

about ways in which they could work with the premier of the 

day to attract investment and get ready for this boom. That was 

what the whole notion was. 

 

So for the Saskatchewan Party to say, oh, we want to see this 

continue because we’re doing a great job at it, number one is 

you inherited it. Number two, and our message is that all this 

was set up for you. And the bottom line is that we will continue 

asking you what is the difference between what your virtues are 

on development versus what our virtues are as a party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I can tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, when we ushered in 

the uranium development in northern Saskatchewan, it was the 

NDP that brought in uranium development to the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And what they done was they 

made sure they worked with all the communities. The same 

principle applied with oil and gas, same principle. When you 

look at northern Saskatchewan as a whole, Mr. Speaker, there is 

no question that under the service lease agreements, mining 

companies undertook that type of work, and we’re seeing the 

benefit of that today through Cameco. Cameco should be given 

great credit for what they have done, but that work must 

continue, Mr. Speaker. On top of that, on top of that, Mr. 

Speaker, environmental integrity is also something that’s also a 

key principle to the New Democrats in general. We make sure 

that we usher in this new era, but we make sure that we’re very 

responsible in protecting the environment as well. 

 

And my final point I would raise, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s 

potash, which is an American-based company, or whether it’s 

uranium or whether it’s oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, we must find 

ways and means to share the benefits as equally and as fairly as 

possible in the province of Saskatchewan. So you want to bring 

in the opportunities, you want to make sure that there’s 

environmental protection, you want to make there’s opportunity 

for the workers, but you also want to make sure there’s lasting 

benefits for everybody, Mr. Speaker. And that is one of the key 

points. 

 

During the election, we spoke about things like potash. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party jumped all over that and 

put words in the NDP’s mouth and created fear and havoc 

amongst the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 

they done. So my point today under the oil and gas sector is 

very clear. Whether it’s uranium development, do it orderly and 

do it fairly. Whether it’s gold development, do it orderly, do it 

fairly, and make sure you distribute the wealth and look after 

Saskatchewan well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the final point I would raise on the potash 

and the resource revenue sharing argument, our point was 

inclusiveness, Mr. Speaker. Our point was inclusiveness and 

fairness. Mr. Speaker, their point was . . . They brought the 

argument forward that it was exclusive to only certain groups of 

people in Saskatchewan thereby driving a wedge amongst the 

people of Saskatchewan and angering the people of 

Saskatchewan. That’s what they’ve done, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

what they’ve done. 

 

So if you want to talk about fairness in oil and gas 

development, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about fairness. Let’s talk 

about environmental protection. Let’s talk about benefits for all 

of Saskatchewan of being inclusive to all the people of 

Saskatchewan. Let us not forget where this began, Mr. Speaker. 

Let us not forget that it’s not going to end any time soon. That’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we stand up and we say 

on motions of this sort, on motions of this sort, that it’s always 

important to look at the notion of the balance of benefits, Mr. 

Speaker — the benefits of having a good sustainable economy, 

the benefits of sharing, and the benefits of maximizing the 

future of our people through a pragmatic manner, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what this is about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important people understand the 

history, and to say again to the Sask Party, you inherited a great 

economy, a booming population, don’t mess it up. 

 

The Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. Oral 

questions. I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and join in the 75-minute debate. 

 

My question is for the member from Regina Northeast. 

Certainly in the city of Regina we’re well familiar with the 

impact of Federated Co-op upgrader. In his remarks, I don’t 

know if he got into the question of upgrading capacity versus 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

the shipping of raw bitumen or the shipping of raw product. 

Certainly we’d want to capture the value and make sure that 

that value-added proposition is foremost as we approach oil and 

gas. So as an individual that actually represents a refinery in 

this province, participating in this debate, could he tell us a little 

bit more about where the Sask Party’s at in terms of upgrading 

capacity in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

Opposition House Leader for the question. And it is true that 

the Co-op Refinery is in the constituency of Regina Northeast. 

I’ve had the opportunity to be out there on several occasions, 

and I will do so more in the future. 

 

During the course of the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, in 

door knocking in Regina Northeast and speaking to a number of 

individuals who actually work there, either during this 

construction phase for the expansion purposes or have worked 

there full time, they’re quite delighted with the Co-op Refinery. 

 

As I understand it, and perhaps I stand to be corrected, it is at 

full capacity now which is the reason why they’re doing the 

expansion. And once the expansion is complete later this year, 

my understanding it will be at full capacity even with that 

expansion. So we are supplying as much crude to that particular 

refinery as we possibly can, and our producers in Saskatchewan 

need the Keystone XL pipeline and need the Northern Gateway 

pipeline for more capacity to ship that product to new markets, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, and the question goes to 

the heart of what’s an important industry in his constituency. 

Does he have people in his area who are supportive of 

expansion of the upgrading capacity so that some of that 

bitumen can be processed here in Saskatchewan or possibly in 

Lloydminster, which would be a Saskatchewan-Alberta project, 

such as being suggested by former Premier Lougheed of 

Alberta? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

question. I first of all would like to clarify as the member from 

Athabasca spoke about the boom that was already created and 

how the NDP cleverly put a lid on it, didn’t allow it to happen. 

So now that the Saskatchewan Party has come in and made that 

happen . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We created the boom. 

 

Mr. Doke: — That’s right. I would also remind the member 

from Athabasca that he is a past hockey player. I am too and 

have been recognized for high elbows. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, 64 per cent of the voting public put this 

government in power with strong leadership, and we will move 

forward under this leadership and this government to create a 

Canadian energy strategy. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — In the fall of last year, two members of the federal 

NDP went to Washington to spread fear about Canada’s oil 

sands. These same individuals have been cheering on the 

international efforts to restrict growth in Canada’s energy 

sector, a sector that is vital to our nation’s economy. In fact, 

according to a 2012 news release, NDP MP [Member of 

Parliament] Nathan Cullen applauded EU [European Union] 

efforts to unfairly target exports of Canada’s oil sands. To the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana: will you encourage your 

colleagues in the federal NDP to stop promoting an agenda that 

attacks Canada’s oil sands? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 

member opposite for the question. Obviously, as I said earlier, 

the key goal here is sustainability and balance, and so that’s 

what we’re looking for in any sort of energy strategy. We 

support the development of non-renewable resources, but we’re 

also looking for the development of renewable resources 

because that will give us the balance moving forward into the 

future. As peak oil declines and conventional sources of oil 

become more difficult to find, we have to be ready to move into 

the future and look at other forms of energy production. 

 

Some of the problems with the current system and the 

extremely rapid development of the oil sands in Alberta, as I 

indicated earlier, is problems with monitoring the actual impact 

of that. And as I mentioned earlier, there’s a number of groups 

looking into it. The paper I referred to, the oil sands advisory 

panel paper, talked about the various groups that are looking at 

it. We have the Regional Aquatics Monitoring Program, 

Cumulative Environmental Management Association or 

CEMA. We’ve got the Wood Buffalo Environmental 

Association, or WBEA, and many other groups that are looking 

at monitoring. And I think as long as we do that and listen to 

the cautions of Premier Lougheed, then I think we’ll be okay. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, according to the Canadian 

Energy Research Institute, the expected investment impact of 

existing pipeline operations is estimated to contribute 941 

billion to Canada’s gross domestic product over the 10-year 

period. Over this same period, Canadian employees’ 

compensation will reach nearly $268 billion. To the member of 

Regina Lakeview: will you commit publicly, denouncing future 

policies and proposals from the federal NDP that seek to 

undermine this growth which clearly benefits Canadian 

working families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, a bit of advice to all new 

members: work on your own questions. Don’t let the backroom 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

guys . . . [inaudible]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know, we know that the oil and gas and 

mineral policy here in this province is the NDP policy, and it’s 

the policy that has created the boom in this province. We know 

that the CAPP, the petroleum producers in Calgary, went to 

Premier Wall when he was elected, when he started ruminating 

about changing things, and saying, don’t you touch what the 

NDP have set up. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue on the balanced approach 

which looks at how the environment is treated versus how the 

product is taken and how the benefits are spread to the whole 

community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. I listened to her comments 

and the member address the issue of Aboriginal employment 

numbers and job training opportunities. 

 

Under the last term of the Sask Party government, we saw a 

number of concerning steps when it comes to the area of 

Aboriginal employment in the province. One such step was the 

unilateral elimination overnight of the Aboriginal employment 

development program that was supported by industry and 

played a very constructive role here in the province. My 

question to the member, once again, from Saskatoon Fairview: 

does she think that it was a wise decision to eliminate the 

Aboriginal employment development program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — I’d like to thank the member opposite for the 

question. As I said before, we will continue to work with our 

partners across the post-secondary system, including First 

Nations University, SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies], GDI, and others to ensure more First Nations 

and Métis students get the training they need to succeed in their 

careers here at home. 

 

Sask Party has a great record dealing with First Nations and 

Métis employment. We have a $2.8 billion record investment in 

post-secondary education and over $46 million in funding for 

First Nations and Métis education and training. As I said again, 

20 per cent increase from the previous year. 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

ask a question of the member from Regina Northeast, again on 

the question of upgrading and the proper development of the 

sector. Certainly right after the Sask Party was elected in 2007, 

the premier at the time invited Peter Lougheed to the province 

to give some advice, to provide a bit of legitimacy, perhaps 

borrow some legitimacy, Mr. Speaker, from Peter Lougheed, in 

terms of succession and all this. But one of the things that 

Premier Lougheed provided was advice on the development of 

oil and gas in this province. And I guess at the time the premier 

said that they’d offered him up . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed for the 75-minute debate. 

We will move on then to the private members’ motions. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Motion No. 2 — First Nations, Métis and 

Northern Communities 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the 

Assembly to enter into debate on a motion that I will be moving 

at the conclusion of my remarks. 

 

The motion is one that will highlight the important role that 

government can play for those who live in the North and in 

First Nations and Métis communities. So starting out with that, 

there are many issues facing First Nations, Métis, northern 

people. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s very concerning when 

you see the communities that I’m referring to. Many of the First 

Nations, the Métis, and northern communities, whether they’re 

municipalities, are having many struggles. 

 

There’s lots to talk about successes, because there are 

successes. We have leaders, Aboriginal leaders. We have young 

people in our communities who are leaders. They’re trying to 

bring forward the issues and concerns, and they’re asking us to 

do that as we visit them. And I know yesterday I asked the 

minister to come and do a visit, and I hope we’ll set up a tour. 

And I hope the Premier shows up with them and whoever else 

he can bring to deal with some of the issues. And I’m going to 

talk about those issues today, and I’m going to go through 

them. And there’s quite a few different issues. But I also want 

to make sure I talk about success stories that are going on in 

northern Saskatchewan and many First Nations communities 

and many Métis communities. Are there challenges? Mr. 

Speaker, we know that. There are many challenges. We know 

that. 

 

I want to start out, you know, talking about opportunities to our 

young people, our children, our grandchildren, my 

grandchildren, many First Nations and Métis children, northern 

children. And children in the province want a fair chance, want 

an opportunity. And it starts out at a very young age. We want 

to make sure that young people get a good opportunity, good 

nutrition, a good upbringing, supports that they need in their 

community so that they can be productive citizens, so they can 

grow. We want our elders to mentor them. We want our 

community members and our leaders to be role models and to 

guide them. That’s crucial. And that’s what we call success. 

Many do. 

 

But it’s pretty sad when a government doesn’t respond to the 

needs. And I will talk about today about the needs of northern 

Saskatchewan, Métis, and First Nations communities. And I 

will talk about the lack, lack of services that this government, 

the Sask Party government says they’re doing. It’s shocking to 

see some of the cuts. It’s shocking to see some of the disrespect 

that these communities and residents of our province are 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

experiencing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you look at housing, and I want to start out with 

housing because I think it’s important. You want to raise a 

family and you expect everyone should have a quality home, 

quality house, should have a place to call home, to be safe, to 

lay your head down at night in a bed. But unfortunately 

sometimes that’s not the story for everyone. A lot of young 

people don’t have that opportunity, whether it’s overcrowding, 

whether the conditions of the homes are falling apart, and when 

you visit some of the northern communities there are many 

challenges. Whether it’s federal responsibility, provincial 

responsibility, municipality responsibility, or a homeowner’s 

responsibility, the responsibility belongs on all of us. We wear 

that. When you go into a home and you see a home that’s 

falling apart, and you go into a community and there are no 

resources to fix the home . . . The windows are broken, the heat. 

You see seniors . . . And I visited some of the seniors recently. 

Went to Sandy Bay, Pelican Narrows to do a visit and some 

outreach just to see how things are going in those communities. 

And I mean I know that these issues have always been there, 

and we’ve raised them, housing shortages. But unfortunately 

the problem’s not getting better. For many it’s getting worse. 

 

When you see a senior, an elder in their 80s, and their house is 

falling apart and they don’t know where to go, they don’t know 

who to ask, but they figure they have a government — whether 

it’s federal, provincial — and there are leaders in their 

community trying to get the resources they can get to fix the 

homes. But it’s pretty sad to watch, when you’re sitting there 

having a cup of tea or coffee with them, and they’re telling you 

what they’ve been through in life and how they’ve got there. 

And the respect was . . . And you know it touches the heart like 

you can’t believe when you see the walls falling in, you see the 

windows are broke. It isn’t of their own doing that they’ve 

neglected their home. It’s unfortunate that the resources are not 

there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it does . . . And I say this, more needs to be 

done on all parts, governments. This shouldn’t be happening. 

We live in a province in a country that everyone says is one of 

the wealthiest, one of the most beautiful provinces to live in, 

and we should be proud. And I am proud. And she is proud to 

live in this province. She may live in a community that’s a First 

Nations community. There may be elders who live in Métis 

communities and municipalities. They may not have the best 

times and they may have gone through some rough times, but 

they deserve to be respected. And they deserve to have a home 

that’s warm, that’s safe, that has windows. It’s not falling apart. 

It’s not all full of caulking, the walls are peeling. You know, 

you look at these conditions and you say, we have to do more. 

And the leadership in their communities tries. But it’s always 

limited resources. 

 

And, you know, I plan on taking more tours and more visits. 

And then, you know, you go to some of the other communities 

and you see some of the young kids and you see the conditions 

they live in. It isn’t their own doing. It’s the times. It’s society. 

But we can’t judge. It’s not time to judge. It’s time to say, let’s 

work together. 

 

And when I invited the minister, and I invite the Premier, I did 

that sincerely so they can see some of the conditions that 

northern people, First Nations, and Métis people are living and 

dealing with. And I hope they will do the tour, have a look at 

some of the northern communities and see what the conditions 

are like and what community members have to deal with — our 

elders, our mushoms, our kohkom, what our children, our 

grandchildren, our community members who live in this 

beautiful province and belong in this province and want to call 

this province home and are proud to call this province home. 

It’s important that the government respond to that. 

 

And we can go through the tour and everything. But at the end 

of the day, I want to make it very clear that I hope the tour 

brings some action. Because if the tour brings no action, then 

that will be a sad day. And we’ll get time to talk about that and 

question the minister. 

 

So at this point, I know the minister has offered to do that and 

he has visited me in the constituency office. He’s come to the 

North and he’s come to my office and I appreciate that. And I 

know he did that, and he was sincere when he did the visit. But 

I want him to spend some time dealing with the issues, the real 

issues facing our communities, meeting with some of the 

leadership, meeting with some of the seniors, some of our 

young people. And we will set up a tour, and I hope at the end 

of the day he can see some of the issues that our leadership are 

facing, the challenges our young people are facing, our elders 

are facing. 

 

Now you want to talk about, I guess, a fair and a level playing 

field. A lot of the young people I talk to, they don’t want 

handouts. They know that there is opportunity for some of 

them. And some of them do take the opportunities, Mr. 

Speaker, and they get educated. Nobody’s against education 

and nobody’s saying that there isn’t monies put in, funding put 

in, for education and training. 

 

We could talk about all the numbers and say, oh how great it is. 

And we can cheerlead all we want. But at the end of the day, 

when you go back to some of the communities, when there’s 

300 from age 18 to 25 and they’ve got nowhere to go, they see 

no vision, there’s no hope, and they start losing hope . . . And I 

talk to a number of them to truly appreciate what they’re going 

through. And there’s no jobs in their community. There’s very 

little training opportunities, and there’s very little jobs that they 

can apply. So where do these individuals go? A lot of them are 

frustrated. They’re overcrowded in houses. They don’t see 

many supports. You know, one community — and we’ll get a 

tour and hopefully the minister will see what I’m talking about 

— one community in Sandy Bay, they’ve been waiting, and I 

think it’s over a year, for a mental health worker to come in 

there and work with the youth. They can’t fill that position. 

 

So you know, there’s situations where we have to make sure 

that we have the supports for individuals who want to move 

forward and get help. We have to make sure that the mental 

health staff is there. And I know when they are there, they do 

all they can, but more has to be done. 

 

We’ve had situations in some of these communities where it’s a 

crisis. And I’ve had some of the local community members 

express that to me, that the young people are getting frustrated. 

They’re not feeling like they’re being heard. And it isn’t that 

they’re going to say, oh it’s one government versus another 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

government. They want some opportunities for education, 

training, and they’d love to have a job. But they’re very 

frustrated, and some of them unfortunately get caught up in 

whether it’s drugs, alcohol, gangs, the violence that they get 

pulled into. They started out maybe young individuals — boys 

and girls — on a good vision. Their elders, their community 

give them the guidance they need, but they’re lost, and we’re 

failing them. And that is a sad day when you fail our young 

people. And it’s not just one or two of them. There are so many 

of them in northern Saskatchewan, in First Nations 

communities and Métis communities that we are failing. 

 

And I say this: as a province we are failing them because we 

have opportunities to reach out. We can fix this problem. We 

can take advice. We can sit down with the leadership. We can 

sit down with young people. We can sit down with the 

grandparents. We can sit around with the resources that are 

there in their communities who know some of the issues, and 

talk about a plan, a vision where we can assist and help young 

people so they’re not in the violence. They’re not into the 

drugs, the alcohol, the gangs, and into correction. 

 

The corrections system is waiting for them. It will greet them. 

There’s more jails being built. We’ll be tough on crime. But at 

the end of the day, what have we done to our young people? 

The system is not working, Mr. Speaker. It is not working for 

these young people. We have to do better. Our government has 

to do a better job. We must do a better job for them. 

 

[12:15] 

 

You know, I’m going to come back to our young people and 

First Nations and Métis communities in the North. I want to 

talk about some of the roads in northern Saskatchewan. It’s 

important that we have safe roads to travel on. And you know, 

I’ve talked to a lot of our elders, community members, leaders 

and, you know, some of the First Nations communities, some of 

the municipalities. You talk to the elders about their respiratory 

problems, and some of them are suffering with that. The dust is 

so fine, and just constant the traffic’s going. There’s growth in 

the population. There’s more vehicles so you have more traffic, 

and they’re saying that there are respiratory problems that 

they’re having from the dust because they live on a busy road. 

And that’s happening. And when you listen to them . . . And 

they are sincere about it. It isn’t that they want pavement for 

show. They want something to quit the dust and stop it. And 

you can go in there — highways or, you know, the bands, the 

municipalities. I mean they have dust control, and I understand 

they use that and they try. But they’re limited, and that’s limited 

to what it can do. 

 

So you have those issues. So when you have elders telling you 

about their breathing problems, respiratory, we have to respond 

to situations like this. And we have to make sure we make the 

government aware, especially in a province when we have so 

much wealth and a government who talks about all the money 

and all the projects on highways. And they come out with plans, 

and they make plans for five years for highways and roads. And 

we don’t hear much happening in northern Saskatchewan or 

First Nations communities because sometimes I guess it gets 

into the boundaries and we say jurisdiction. It’s time that we 

move forward. It’s time that we start doing the right thing for 

all Saskatchewan residents, all community members. It’s very 

important that we focus on the issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very clearly there are many issues facing First 

Nations and Métis and northern communities. And I know as a 

province, the government has a long list and they have a lot of 

needs to meet all over. There is a number of constituencies in 

our province. There’s lots of problems. We know that. But the 

government has to do a better job of responding to northern 

Saskatchewan without cutting all the programs. 

 

I just want to talk about, I was in Sandy Bay, Pelican, and we 

were doing some casework. And kohkom come into the office, 

and she just wanted to ask with some help with her home. She’s 

rented her home. I think it was 38 years she has been renting 

from Sask Housing. And she said, when will I own my home? 

When will I own this? I pay, pay. We paid. 

 

You know what’s unfortunate that I found out recently? We 

could have helped her, because we’ve helped some people 

move forward and apply for the home purchase program. If you 

qualify, you can ask Sask Housing to see if they will make you 

a deal and work out some type of thing where you can own 

your home. It’s a good program. It’s done well. It’s been there 

for years and it is a good program. So unfortunately Sask 

Housing, and this government, has cancelled that program. As 

of November of 2011, that program no longer exists. So you no 

longer can. 

 

So those individuals who have been renting for years from Sask 

Housing will never own their home. They won’t get the option 

to even apply and be considered if they qualify to do the home 

purchase program from Sask Housing. And that’s unfortunate. 

Here’s a woman, you know, an elder who has paid years and 

years, 38 years, and she will not own her home. Now I don’t 

know what the decision was of government to do this, but I 

guess the government of the day has made that decision. The 

ministry has made that decision. It’s unfortunate. 

 

There is many people who would like to own their own home 

and, you know, when you rent a home for that many years, you 

would like to. You’d like to say you’ve done something and, 

you know, it’s yours. And at the end of the day, she wanted 

that. And I looked across from her. I’m just saying, well what 

do I do? I said, you’ll have to continue to rent — rent, rent. 

Now hopefully . . . The government has decided to remove a 

program that would benefit. 

 

A lot of northern people could have taken advantage of that and 

I think a lot of people did when the program was introduced. 

And some individuals I know in La Ronge, there was 

individuals who actually . . . That’s how they owned their 

home. It was through the purchase home. They secured, you 

know, a 25-year mortgage with Sask Housing or, you know, 

CMHC [Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation]. But at 

the end of the day, they paid for 25 years, the rent, and they 

own that home. And there was quite a few people took 

advantage of that and there was an opportunity. So I’m hoping 

the government’s wisdom, it will come up with a program that 

will meet the needs of many people who could qualify, and 

should qualify, who have paid rent for that long. 

 

Now you want to get into addictions service. I want to talk a 

little bit about that and I think it’s important to talk about 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

addictions and what’s facing a lot of community members and 

communities. We know we have many front-line workers who 

work with our youth. Our elders work with them, trying to steer 

them in the right direction. I know La Ronge Indian Band, and I 

know some of the First Nations communities, they have 

different groups, whether it’s drum groups. They try to get them 

back on to the culture using the elders, using addiction workers, 

using the youth workers within the band system to move 

forward so that these individuals can see that there is a healthy 

lifestyle, that it’s an opportunity, that you don’t have to be 

frustrated and lose hope and go with your friends. 

 

And you know, I had a chance to talk . . . We had about 150 

youth at a youth conference in La Ronge about two weeks ago 

and I had a chance to speak to those young people. And I said, 

here we are and we’re respecting you and we’re showing you 

respect. And the reason that all these individuals . . . You have 

leaders here, you have so many community members, you have 

elders, you have support staff, you have addictions people, you 

have guest speakers, you have many people coming here to help 

you with this two-day conference because we respect you. And 

we want to show you respect. You deserve it. But when we give 

you that respect, you have to keep that respect. And that’s 

important they understand that value. And some of them have 

choices to make, and they will make the right choice. I know 

that. 

 

I listened to some of them, and I got to talk to some of them. 

Do they have challenges? Yes, they share that. But is there 

hope? I remind them all the time, never lose hope. Because it’s 

a pretty sad day when they do lose hope, and some individuals 

and young people, and we lose them to suicide. When you have 

to go pay your respects to a family member, a community 

member, a mother, a father, to a sister or brother, grandparents, 

the loss of their loved one because of their hope. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, it’s tough sometimes going out to the 

communities. And as a leader you’re supposed to go and pay 

your condolences. It’s a tough, it’s a tough job. You want to 

support them. You have so many questions, wondering why. 

Why this young person? Why didn’t they have a chance? What 

was it? What could have I done? What should we have done as 

a province, as MLAs? There’s so many young people in our 

communities, northern Saskatchewan, First Nations and Métis, 

that are losing hope. 

 

But we have a lot of resources. And sometimes our leaders ask 

us, and I guess front-line workers ask for resources and 

sometimes that goes on a deaf ear. And when that happens, I 

think people have to make sure we hold our leaders, the 

government, we have to make sure we make them answer to 

that, to why, why we can’t provide the resources that are 

needed to make sure young people have a level playing field 

and a chance at a good quality of life. 

 

That’s what these young people want. They didn’t ask to be 

born in a community or in a condition where they’re at, but 

what they want as citizens and whether they’re five years old or 

12 years old or 35 years old, they want a good quality of life. 

And I have to say that hasn’t been given to a lot of individuals, 

a lot of residents. They haven’t had a level playing field. 

There’s lots to be done; more has to be done. 

 

You know, I think about communities and as I go visiting and 

you talk to leadership, you talk about the needs of the 

communities, whether it’s infrastructure. You know, I think of 

Southend. Southend needs a certified airport so the air 

ambulance can take community members from their community 

to a nearest hospital. It’s like a five-hour trip. They have to 

come in by ambulance from La Ronge to Southend. It takes two 

and a half hours for the ambulance to get in there and it can 

take up to three hours for the ambulance to get out of the 

community. This is on gravel road; it’s not the best road. But 

they’ve been asking for an airport. I know they’ve got a 

proposal, you know, forward with the Ministry of Highways. 

They’ve been asking, and I know they’re moving on that. 

 

So those are communities that are asking and wanting help and 

deserve to have an airport. It’s a large community. It’s not a 

small community. There are smaller communities that have 

airports with 2, 300 people if you look at the data, and here’s a 

community that has probably about 1,800 people and they don’t 

even have a certified airport. And it’s important so that the air 

ambulance can go to their community and take one of their 

loved ones out or community members in an emergency. 

 

These are things that have to change, and it’s time that the 

government responds to some of the issues that they’re facing. 

You know, you look at . . . And I’ll give you another example. 

When I was talking about pavement, the Lac La Ronge Indian 

Band, they’ve got some issues — same things, type of roads 

where it’s dust. But the road is actually the main road that’s 

used to go to the dump and it’s not just the La Ronge Indian 

Band traffic on that. The road is used for all citizens. And that’s 

how we haul our garbage to the dump. But that road is just 

pounded, pounded. And the dust — and I’ve had the elders tell 

me as well, the dust is unbelievable. It’s in your home, it’s in 

your clothes, your breathing. So it gets to be a health problem 

for some of them with respiratory problems. So those are issues 

we have to work on, and I will work on, and we’ll bring 

forward to the minister, and we will bring forward to the 

government that these are things that need to be done. 

 

Now we talk about roads to Cumberland House that were 

previously announced under a previous government, and then 

the road was cancelled. The money was moved somewhere 

else. We’ve established that. It’s done; it’s there. More work 

has to be done, and we’ve seen what Cumberland House road 

went through, Highway 123. We see what condition that road 

was. We’ve seen what the leadership had to deal with, what the 

community members had to deal with. 

 

And here you have a large First Nations and Métis community. 

They’re isolated. They have one road in. And if you look at the 

condition of the road, it was amazing to watch. I mean it made 

the news. How many times we’ve seen it on the news, talking 

about it, the condition. How do they get safety? 

 

So they’ve had a lot of challenges, the leadership. And I 

commend them over there for what they’ve done. They’ve had 

crisis to have to deal with, flooding, and they’ve responded 

well. But I know they would appreciate the government 

committing to getting that road properly repaired, paved, fixed 

once and for all, so their community members can travel on 

safe roads. And I think it’s important that they be a part of this 

provincial economy and boom. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think there 

is quite a bit of information that they have that they can share 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

with the ministry, with all individuals, about the reasons why 

they need this road fixed and repaired. 

 

Now I want to go back into talking about employment 

opportunities and training. We’ve had some of the members on 

the government side talking about the numbers and how proud 

they are of the track record of the Sask Party. Well we’ve seen 

some of the funding, you know, for those opportunities for 

employment and training dry up. Some of the programs are 

gone. 

 

So how, in one hand, can you say government is helping and 

assisting and reflect numbers when I don’t believe that’s so, 

that there’s challenges. We’re hearing from individuals. We’re 

hearing from community members. They’re not receiving any 

of that benefit. They’re not receiving any of the benefit. The 

numbers are, you know, the numbers are here. In northern 

Saskatchewan, they are not experiencing the numbers that are 

being referred to, that the member from Saskatoon Fairview 

referred to. Northern Saskatchewan, a lot of First Nations 

communities, Métis, are not experiencing the boom. 

 

[12:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about being fair and equal, it 

isn’t fair and equal. In northern Saskatchewan and all of the 

First Nations and Métis communities that I represent, it isn’t 

fair. Those numbers do not reflect that. Those numbers don’t 

reflect what’s happening in my communities that I represent. 

And I want to make that very clear. We can talk about numbers 

in certain areas and say, oh this, this, this. I’m talking about 

northern Saskatchewan, our First Nations and Métis 

communities. Those numbers don’t reflect what we’re dealing 

with. 

 

You have a lot of young people who are unemployed who want 

an opportunity. They want a chance for an education, for 

training, for a good-paying job, a good quality job. And we 

have many companies up there — whether it’s Cameco, Areva 

— there are good companies up there. Truly they are working 

with northern and First Nations and Métis communities to make 

sure the employment numbers are high. But I don’t believe the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the Sask Party government 

has the right to take any credit for that. They don’t have that 

right. It isn’t done. It’s the commitment of these companies that 

are truly making the difference in some of our communities. 

 

There’s so much work that needs to be done with training 

dollars in northern Saskatchewan, for opportunities. So when I 

make it very clear, I don’t agree with some of the numbers. And 

I mean you can cheerlead on certain numbers. That’s fine. You 

can quote all the numbers you want. But I know in my 

communities I represent, those numbers mean nothing to those 

young people, mean nothing to the people living in the homes. 

And the conditions that they’re living in isn’t because of their 

own. Because the cost, the affordability cost, it truly does not 

reflect what they’re experiencing. And they are not part of the 

boom. And they are not part of the growth. They don’t see that. 

They live in a different world. And it isn’t so great sometimes 

to see what they go through and when you talk to them. 

 

I’d say to any of the members on the opposite side, go have a 

look. Go do some tours. Spend some time. Don’t just go by for 

a quick little visit. Spend some time and go visit some of the 

communities in northern Saskatchewan and see. We talk about 

. . . We can’t, you know, at the end of the day, you know, Mr. 

Speaker, I know individuals will say what they say. And there 

is, you know, there is a lot of success. And I said that earlier. I 

know the minister’s saying, you’ve got to talk about success. I 

understand that. I can hear him from across. I want to make it 

very clear. I said earlier that the leadership, some of the 

programs, some of the bands are doing an excellent job when it 

comes to development, partnerships. They truly are leaders 

when it comes to that area. 

 

And Lac La Ronge Indian Band, Peter Ball [Ballantyne], 

there’s a number of them, I’m telling you, that are doing an 

excellent job throughout the province, but I’m referring to 

northern Saskatchewan. And I want to make it very clear, yes, 

there is success and some of the members opposite have talked 

about GDI. They’ve talked about SIIT. And you know what? 

It’s very clear when you talk about these different institutes, 

they have done an excellent job. They have taken funding 

whether it’s provincial, federal; they have made partnerships. 

They’ve done some amazing things with limited resources, 

limited funding. It’s amazing to watch what they’ve done, how 

they stretch things and the excellent job they do. And a lot of 

them do do an excellent job and nobody can take that away 

from them, and I’m not ever saying that. 

 

I was fortunate to be a part of GDI and to work with that board, 

to sit on the board, to be Acting Chair for four years. It does 

some awesome things. It does create some opportunities — 

training, education, and good quality jobs for many people. But 

there’s a lot more has to be done. We have . . . [inaudible] . . . 

you know, you have the different institute and you have many 

of them that are doing a good job, an excellent job. But is there 

more work to be done? And I know that a lot of them could use 

more resources, more funding. 

 

You know, when I think about successes and you talk about 

challenges and you see some of the young people, some of the 

programs that are being developed within our own schools, and 

I want to talk about that because some of the local schools are 

coming up with different programs to meet the needs of our 

young people, and that’s bringing them back to the trapline. 

And our elders and our trappers wanted to do that. They wanted 

to start a program where they could do some training to give 

some true experience to the young people on the trapline, to 

connect with their heritage because it is part of their heritage. 

And you know, they come together; they put a proposal 

together. They applied for funding, and it was unfortunate that 

they did not receive the funding. They applied to government 

asking for some training dollars, an opportunity, a budget. And 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, their proposal was rejected. 

 

So when we have community members and we have our elders, 

our trappers, and they come up with opportunities to solve their 

own problems so that our young people are not getting caught 

up in all the different activities that are not good for them, when 

they try to reach out and they try to help and then you have a 

government who talks about all the resources and all the money 

it has and it says no to a small, little budget saying, no we can’t 

do that; we can’t help out. But we can build more jails and 

we’ll put more money into correctional facilities. 

 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

That’s a pretty sad day when you see a government, when it can 

say to community members, elders, trappers, and leaders, yes I 

see you put a good proposal together and yes, it looks all right, 

but unfortunately at this time we cannot do anything, and we 

will not fund it. But on the other hand, you hear the 

announcement of, we’re willing to build more jails. We’re 

going to be harder on crime. Well something’s wrong. 

Something’s gone totally wrong here. 

 

There’s more that can be done to meet the needs of young 

people. And when you talk about that, everyone says that. And 

I know so many people and we hear different comments back 

and forth. Our young people are our future. Our grandchildren 

are our future. The youth are the future. But we see legislation 

coming forward I don’t think that really is going to reflect that 

when you want to take an age group out of boundaries and say, 

well we’re not going to use anyone from 18 and under in our 

boundaries. Again, I want to talk about that. That’s crucial. 

Some of our communities have a large, young Aboriginal 

population. I think it’s crucial that they be counted, not only in 

First Nations but we have a lot of rural communities. A lot of 

people will be affected by this. And I think the government 

should truly think that one through. And I mean, we’ll have a 

lot of time to debate that Bill, and I know that. 

 

We talk about commitments to government employees in 

northern Saskatchewan and, you know, some of the community 

leaders are very concerned about the let-it-burn policy. It used 

to be known, the wildfire management policy, what it was 

known as when it came out, but somehow it got changed to 

let-it-burn policy. And that’s fine. We’ll refer to it that way. 

Many of the elders, the community members, whether it’s 

outfitters, fishermen, they’re very concerned about the amount 

of forest that is truly being burned every year with the large 

fires. Some of these fires are . . . They have never seen it before 

like this. Some of the areas, traditional lands where they used to 

hunt and gather food for sustenance, they used to . . . berries. 

You go talk to them. And the fish, and you talk to the 

fishermen, and they say from all the fires, even the ash on the 

water it affects. They talk about what’s affecting their 

environment and what’s going on. And now you have studies, 

and you’re talking about the caribou. I was at a conference 

where they’re concerned about the caribou, the woodland 

caribou. So there’s a lot of issues going on. 

 

We’ve requested that there be a review of the wildfire 

management policy that the current government has in place. I 

know it came and was, you know, drafted under the previous 

government, which is fine. It was done with experts. They 

thought this was the best plan at the time. But I say to the 

minister, it’s time for a review; to the government, it’s time for 

a review. 

 

Leadership in the North has asked. A lot of individuals want 

this review: the outfitters — I’ve been contacted by them — the 

trappers association. You’ll hear many groups, individuals, 

traditional land users, fishermen. There’s lots of people, young 

people. You have a lot of people who did a lot of I guess 

trapping and hunting and fishing, and they’re telling us it’s 

having a real serious impact on the quality of their life and their 

tradition. And that’s important. But they’re really concerned 

about the environment and they’re raising concern. 

 

And the government doesn’t seem to want to review the policy. 

I sent a letter off quite some time ago asking for a review, but 

the government’s response was they are currently happy with 

the policy and at that point are not willing to review it or to 

look at it. And that’s pretty sad. 

 

So I guess we have to do a lot more work as leadership, as 

outfitters, the fishermen. I guess there’s going to be a lot of 

groups will have to. I don’t know what it takes, if it takes some 

of the bigger outfitters getting involved in it and maybe getting 

the attention of the government. Maybe there is some 

connection there. But I know it needs to happen. It’s time. It’s 

gone on long enough, and it’s time for a review of it. And it’s 

important, Mr. Speaker, that that review happen, and I hope the 

government will do a review of this wildfire management 

policy that it’s currently using. It’s important that they do that, 

and I’m hoping they do that. 

 

Now you want to talk about cuts. And I was looking at just 

some of the Northern Affairs department budget items. And if 

you go to 2006-2007 year, the government allocated $5.7 

million. And if you go to 2011-2012, Northern Affairs budget is 

now $4.4 million. Since 2007 a drop of $1.64 million has 

happened in Northern Affairs’ budget. 

 

But also some of the leadership in the North has talked about 

the cuts, and they’ve seen some of the jobs, the positions in La 

Ronge and some of the other communities, we’re losing jobs. 

And any time you have a job lost — whether it’s one, two, three 

— it affects a whole community. And it does affect families 

because some of these individuals, either they’re from the area 

and they have to move or they have extended family — they’ve 

been there with their family ties — and they’re connected to the 

community. They have to leave. But it’s economics as well. It’s 

homeowners. They buy their goods in the community. When 

you lose jobs like this, again it’s concern. 

 

When we have an area where we have limited resources, 

limited staff, and we see the cuts, and I think some people are a 

little concerned with the budget. The Premier has made it very 

clear there will be cuts. He says, be ready. Don’t expect, you 

know, all this money. And don’t expect this. And expectations, 

we need to bring them down. And you know, everyone’s 

watching closely to see what’s going to happen, and we’ll see 

when the budget comes out. We’ll get the final. And we’ll 

know. I think people will have to look at it. 

 

But you know, so there’s those cuts that we were talking about, 

Mr. Speaker. And you know, they’re challenging. And we want 

to make sure some of the jobs . . . We don’t want to lose any 

more jobs when you have unemployment as high as it is in 

northern Saskatchewan. Some of our First Nations and Métis 

communities, we know that. And sometimes when government 

jobs are gone and we lose them, you never get those back. It’s 

hard to bring a job back in once the government has made their 

cuts to it. It’s not usually, you know, an opportunity. So before 

they do that, I guess these are some of the concerns we’re 

hearing, you know. 

 

Now I want to go back into talking about the mental health and 

addictions because I think it’s important. There’s so many 

community members, you know, at the end of the day, have 

their challenges and they’re put in circumstances. But they need 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

resources. And I wouldn’t want to take away from the 

addictions workers who are on the front line doing the work 

that they can do. I’ve talked to a lot of them. They’re working 

hard. They’re doing what they can do. But I know a lot of them 

are tired. They’re expected to do a lot. There’s so many 

challenges right now facing a lot of community members, you 

know, whether it’s their own doing, the choices they’ve made, 

the path they went down. But we can’t turn our backs on those 

individuals. We have to be there for them. We have to make 

sure we have all the resources we can, the treatment centres, 

and that’s important. 

 

[12:45] 

 

I think northern Saskatchewan . . . And I know Lac La Ronge 

Indian Band, they’ve been trying to get a treatment centre and I 

know will work closely with any governments. And they will 

partner with anyone to get a treatment centre in the area so that 

their community members have access to a good treatment 

centre done with the culture and the understanding and 

traditions that they would use and reflect. And maybe this could 

be very successful in helping some of the young people, some 

of our community members get their life turned around and 

move forward. 

 

There’s so many issues facing northern people, challenges. But 

you know, when you ask the people to come together, it’s 

amazing how they will come together, whether it’s fundraising, 

to watch what they do. And I look at . . . And I want to make 

comments on the fundraising they did for the children’s 

hospital. It was truly amazing to see the North come together. 

And I did a member’s statement in this House talking about 

some of the success and to see the money, $625,000 that they 

raised. And I mean truly there was a lot of individuals who 

phoned in, you know, and kids brought money. It was amazing 

to watch the giving, the true . . . 

 

And you know I was at a meeting not too long ago, about two 

weeks ago, where Cameco has announced it will be matching, 

again — they were going to have another radiothon, and they’re 

going to fundraise again, next November — and Cameco’s 

already agreed to match dollar for dollar that they fundraise. 

And that truly is amazing to see the commitment. 

 

So I want to be very clear that there is success and there are 

things happening in northern Saskatchewan. And I know First 

Nations and Métis communities that people are very proud of. 

 

And I want to make it very clear that some of our First Nations 

and Métis institutes are doing an excellent job. Some of the 

partnerships they are developing with industry and business, 

it’s amazing. Some of the opportunities that they are giving 

their community members is very . . . I guess it’s given them 

such an opportunity. 

 

But where they lack, I guess, the partnerships, is the education 

and training. If you look at the education and training, and I’ve 

heard this many times, is it a level playing field where a 

provincial student versus a First Nations student gets the level 

of funding that’s provided? So is that student getting the same 

level and opportunity as provincial students? And I think more 

has to be done by our provincial government to work with First 

Nations to see, where can the provincial government help assist 

in the funding of First Nations education? 

 

And I don’t mean in small, little partnerships and to have a 

photo op and to say, oh we’re doing this and we’re going to do 

that. That’s not what I’m talking about. To be meaningful and 

sit down and maybe top up what the federal government is not 

funding. Because if there is a difference in funding, I don’t 

think the federal government should have the opportunity to 

take away, if a provincial government assists in funding First 

Nations students on reserve, the federal government should take 

away their dollars from them saying, well seeing you’re getting 

it here, we’re going to pull our . . . I think that has to be made 

very clear. If we’re going to give a level playing field to First 

Nations students, let’s make sure that they’re getting the same 

funding, because that would give them the same opportunity. 

 

And we talk about training, and there is many training 

opportunities. And when I said that, I talk about the 

partnerships that they are developing to give their community 

members an opportunity at a good paying job. But we have to 

make sure we’re ready for that, and that has to be a long plan. It 

isn’t going to start tomorrow, where let’s do this tomorrow and 

they’re going to have that. I realize it takes time; it takes 

commitment and planning. And I think the government has to 

come up with a better plan. It has to consult First Nations and 

Métis. 

 

And I know they’re talking about a task force, and this task 

force is supposed to go out and look at different things. And I 

have to be very clear. I don’t know if that task force has even 

gone out and done anything yet. We’re waiting for the report to 

see if the task force is going to make a report. So it’s going to 

be interesting to see whereabouts the task force is, when you 

look at education and training for First Nations and Métis. And 

I’m curious to see the outcome of that report. 

 

But you can put a task force out there and you can get all the 

reports you want. And you can put it on a shelf and say, yes 

we’ve got the report and it’s on the shelf. We committed to 

doing that and we did that. It takes some action. It takes a 

commitment, and it’s going to take a plan. And we didn’t get to 

where we are in this province with the conditions I’m talking 

about for our students in northern Saskatchewan, First Nations 

and Métis. We didn’t get there three days ago. It’s taken time. 

We’ve got there. It’s going to take a plan and I think it’s going 

to take a commitment. And I’m hoping that the government will 

take that commitment. And if the task force comes out with 

some recommendations, that they will move on those 

recommendations, and not put it on a shelf for a study, and say 

it’s nice but it’s going to sit there. Some serious commitment so 

that First Nations and Métis students, citizens have a fair 

chance at our jobs, training, a good quality of life, a home, to 

live in a community where they’re productive and feeling 

positive. So there’s a lot of work to be done. 

 

But I also have to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that we have 

a lot to be proud of, our culture as Aboriginal people, our 

history. It’s there and we’re proud of it. Yes, we have some 

challenges. Yes, I’ve talked about some pretty negative stuff. 

The government has an opportunity to respond to the 

leaderships in our communities and to come forward, and I’m 

hoping that they will do that. It takes time, but let’s develop a 

plan. Let’s have a vision. How do we help these young people 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2012 

so that we don’t lose them in suicide, so we don’t lose them to 

drugs, to alcohol, to gangs? We don’t have to lose them. We 

can reach out in a meaningful way. 

 

And when I said earlier, you know, about inviting the minister 

to come and have a look, and the Premier, and if any other 

colleagues want to come to have a look at some of the 

conditions, talk to some of the leadership, the students. I’m 

setting that up and I hope that that works, that they will truly 

meet. And when they hear some of the challenges that the 

leadership, the front-line workers are faced with, they will 

respond and say it’s time to do something. It’s time for action. 

It’s time for a plan. It’s time for a vision. It’s time to include all 

Saskatchewan people in our economy in this beautiful province. 

 

And you know, everyone has pride and they want to do the best 

they can. And I talk to a lot of young people, community 

members, leaders, and I always hear that. They’ll give everyone 

a fair shake. And you know, there’s always hope, and they hope 

the government will respond when there’s budgets. And there’s 

a lot of people in First Nations, Métis communities in the 

North, they’re waiting to see what the government will do with 

all the money. They hear about all the prosperity and the 

wealth, how good the province is doing, and they wait back 

home hoping to get part of it. 

 

And I know at the end of the day they hope it isn’t about the 

politics and the, I guess, that side of it. They’re not interested in 

which party is in power and which one’s not. All they care 

about is their quality of life, their home. They just want to be 

able to feed their family, provide a nice home, a safe home, a 

safe community for their young people, an opportunity at 

training, an opportunity at jobs. That’s what they’re asking. 

 

And I think sometimes that’s all they’re asking, a fair chance at 

a quality of life. Is that so much to ask, from our young people, 

to ask of all of us? Is that so much to ask, to say, give us a 

chance. Give us the same level playing field. We’re not asking 

that you do this forever, but can we have a plan that says we’ll 

commit resources now? We’ll do these things now so that the 

next generation can have those opportunities, the quality of life, 

the quality job, can have a good home, safe communities, and 

continue to be proud citizens of this province. 

 

We owe that to these individuals. There’s so much we owe 

them. But that’s one thing I know we can do because I know we 

have the resources. We have the funds. We have the money. 

We, I hope, at the end of the day, and I hope soon, will have the 

will from the government to want to do that, to reach out truly 

and come up with a plan that addresses the issues that we’re 

talking about. Not to go to meetings and listen to individuals 

and say, oh yes, we’ll have meetings and we’ll listen. That’s not 

what I’m talking about. It’s time for some action. 

 

And many people are asking for that — northern communities, 

First Nations and Métis. They just want a level playing field. 

They don’t want anything that’s not theirs. They’re very proud. 

They just want a level . . . Should it have to go to courts? And 

we see some of the challenges going on, and I think that will 

happen as First Nations and Métis, they have to go to the 

courts. I hope that we can resolve these issues before. And they 

should be able to work with their governments to solve the 

issues before it goes to court. But unfortunately sometimes that 

doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker, and they have to go to court. And 

they’ve been successful on a number of their cases they brought 

forward to the Supreme Court — very clear, they’ve been 

successful. And I think we’ll continue to be successful. 

 

There are many challenges. And I know the leadership in the 

First Nations and Métis communities and our municipal leaders 

are working hard, and our youth leadership. I watch them. 

Some of them are doing an excellent job. They’re working 

hard. Is there a lot of work, Mr. Speaker, to be done? Yes, we 

know that. Are there a lot of challenges? Yes. But I have to also 

say there is certainly a lot of good things going on in First 

Nations, Métis communities, northern communities, lots of 

good partnerships. There’s lots of opportunities. 

 

But are a lot of individuals given the same level playing field? I 

don’t believe so. And that’s why I’ve been speaking about this, 

trying to show the government we have to do a better job to 

meet the needs of northern First Nations and Métis children in 

our province. It’s such a huge resource. And if we don’t, if we 

don’t, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t, I think, like Professor Howe 

said, it will truly be an economic disaster if we don’t. 

 

We have an opportunity. I hope that we will move forward, that 

we will continue to meet with the leadership, with the 

individual groups. And I encourage this government: not only 

should you meet with them, but you should act on the meetings 

you have with them and listen to the recommendations and 

advice that they are trying to share with you and express to you. 

It’s so crucial and important that you take the advice of the 

leadership. 

 

Now I know there’s many challenges out there, Mr. Speaker, 

and I’ve talked about those. And I’ve talked about some 

solutions, and I know that many of our leadership have good 

ideas. I hope the ministries and the ministers, all of the 

government, will hear when they bring forward their ideas and 

concerns. We have to address them once and for all. It’s time 

for action. It’s time for the government to respond to the needs 

of First Nations, Métis, and northern children. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to stop ignoring 

First Nations communities, Métis communities, and 

northern Saskatchewan as a whole to ensure opportunity 

and prosperity are shared more widely by all 

Saskatchewan residents and enable everyone to fully 

participate and contribute to our economy and our society 

in order for Saskatchewan to meet its full potential. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to stop ignoring 

First Nations communities, Métis communities, and 

northern Saskatchewan as a whole to ensure opportunity 

and prosperity are shared more widely by all 

Saskatchewan residents and enable everyone to fully 

participate and contribute to our economy and our society 

in order for Saskatchewan to meet its full potential. 



March 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

Being that it’s past the normal hour of adjournment at 1 

o’clock, this House stands adjourned till Monday at 1:30. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:01.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 413 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 413 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 413 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 413 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 413 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Women’s Day 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 414 

 Seniors’ Bill of Rights 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 414 

 Screening Program for Colorectal Cancer  

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 415 

 Provincial Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 415 

 Tim Hortons Brier 

  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 415 

 100th Anniversary of the Legislative Building 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 415 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Representation 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 416 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 416 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 416 

 Accommodation in Seniors’ Facility 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 417 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 417 

 Government Appointments 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 419 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 419 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 603 — The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 420 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Western Canada’s Natural Resources 

  Doherty .............................................................................................................................................................................. 421, 430 

  Nilson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 423, 430 

  Campeau ............................................................................................................................................................................ 424, 431 

  Sproule ............................................................................................................................................................................... 425, 430 

  Doke ................................................................................................................................................................................... 427, 430 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 428 

  McCall ............................................................................................................................................................................... 429, 431 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 430 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 430 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 431 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — First Nations, Métis and Northern Communities 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 431 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


