




















































Hansard: November 29, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 21A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2289 

 November 29, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before introductions I will be tabling the 

library’s annual report for the period of April 1, 2011 to March 

31st, 2012, the 2011-2012 caucus audited financial statements, 

and the 2011-2012 members’ accountability disclosure 

statements. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 

Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for 

an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for extended 

introductions. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to introduce and offer congratulations and a big thank you to 

the members of the Saskatchewan Internet child exploitation 

unit. Recently this unit, also known as ICE [Internet child 

exploitation], took part in Operation Snapshot. This was a 

major child pornography bust which also helped rescue a boy in 

Saskatchewan from years of child abuse. 

 

The ICE unit was established by our government in 2009. We 

provide 1.2 million each year to fund this very important 

initiative. This money funds eight investigators and four 

forensic analysts across the province. I am confident that their 

work will result in protecting more children and bringing more 

Internet predators to justice. 

 

Sitting in the Speaker’s gallery today are, from the Regina 

office, representing the chief of police, Troy Hagen: Inspector 

Tom Mansfield, Staff Sergeant Ron Weir, Corporal Candace 

Benko, Constable Lisa Davey, Corporal Drew Wagner, 

Constable Chuck Cooke, Corporal Ken Kuan, Constable Paul 

Fischer. From the Saskatoon office is Sergeant Deb Altrogge, 

Sergeant Paul Pitzel, Constable Joel Bautista, Constable Mitch 

Barber, Sergeant Darren Parisien. And from the Prince Albert 

office, Corporal Jared Clarke. And from my ministry, of course, 

Ken Sabo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through you and to you and on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan, I ask all members to join me in 

expressing a heartfelt thank you to these members. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to join with the minister 

opposite and welcome the leaders that we have here in our 

gallery here today. It’s a distinct pleasure of mine to speak to 

the work that the policing leaders from all across Saskatchewan 

represent to our province and to thank them for that work in 

protecting our most vulnerable children in this ever-changing 

world, when we’re looking at cyberexploitation and the 

disgusting and damaging damage that’s being caused by too 

many, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’d like to thank these members of the Saskatchewan ICE 

unit, the Internet child exploitation unit. And I know that these 

members represent leaders in policing from across our 

province, both in municipal forces and the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police]. I’d like to say a heartfelt thank you 

to them for their leadership and just that we continue to support 

their work, making sure they have the resources they need to 

make our community safer and to protect the most vulnerable in 

this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Please join with me in 

thanking these members. 

 

While still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to welcome 

some students that have joined us here in the east gallery. These 

students come from Sheldon-Williams Collegiate. Their MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], John Nilson, our leader, 

isn’t here today, but I’m going to be joining them here today 

after proceedings. I look forward to their questions. We met 

briefly before the Assembly, had a bit of a discussion. I’d also 

like to welcome the teachers that have joined these grade 11 

and 12 law students. Those teachers would be Ms. Lindsay 

Vindevoghel and Ms. Jeanie Dunbar. 

 

I’d like to welcome these teachers, these students, and I look 

forward to meeting with them afterwards following question 

period, look forward to the questions they’ll be bringing 

forward. I ask all members to welcome these students and these 

teachers to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, I have 

the great honour today of introducing a group of people in the 

Speaker’s gallery. Some of them are wearing their pink 

women’s builder Habitat shirts, and some of them are board 

members. Some of them are actually the owners of some of the 

homes that have been built here in Saskatchewan through 

Habitat. 

 

We had a wonderful announcement this morning, talking about 

next year’s work where we will be building two more homes 

with women who are interested not only in providing the funds 

for the homes but the energy it takes to build a home and the 

love it takes to help the members know that they’re part of a 

safe community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the chance to build 90 such homes 

right across the province right now with the wonderful 

partnership we have with dedicated volunteers who we can’t 

thank enough. It’s what we are as Saskatchewan people, 

building and helping each other. So on behalf of a very grateful 

government, I thank all of you for being here today and for all 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

of your work. And welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

opposition as critic of Housing, I want to join the minister in 

welcoming the folks from Habitat for Humanity. You’ve been a 

leader in our communities for many years about supporting 

people in the search for affordable housing. And the work you 

do is admirable, and we sure appreciate your leadership in our 

community. So on behalf of all of us in the House, we welcome 

you and we thank you for your good work. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

I have two fine gentlemen in your gallery that I’d like to 

introduce. The first is my sweetheart, the man with the large 

white, fluffy beard. Lately he’s been called Santa, Grizzly 

Adams — why he’s even been called a saint. After 38 years of 

marriage, I can guarantee you there’s a few other words that 

he’s been called — none finer, none finer than husband. I 

would ask everyone to welcome Allan Jurgens to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And the gentleman to his right is a dear friend of the family. 

His name is Doug Currie. He’s worked with Treasury Board, 

Finance. He’s worked internationally and is now enjoying his 

own consulting business. I ask everyone to welcome Doug to 

his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce a gentleman 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who’s well known in this 

Assembly. Dave Marit, the president of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities, is here for a regional 

planning conference to promote joint planning and co-operation 

between urban and rural municipalities. And SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] have 

been instrumental in moving this conference forward, and I 

understand that it’s been a big success today. So I would ask all 

members to please give Dave a warm welcome to his 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 

critic for Municipal Affairs, I too would like to echo the 

minister in welcoming Mr. Marit to his legislature. SARM has 

played a leadership role in our province for well over 100 years 

now, and we look to them in terms of helping our communities, 

both rural and now that co-operation with urban is so critically 

important when they struggle with issues like infrastructure. 

That’s a huge issue. 

 

So I would ask all members to join us again in welcoming 

David to his legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition on behalf of a number 

of northwestern Saskatchewan residents that are calling for 

improved and expanded cellphone service. And the prayer reads 

as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, 

and the neighbouring communities of Michel Village and 

St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known 

as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows First Nations along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, and all the neighbouring communities in 

each of these areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by hundreds of folks. 

And this particular petition is signed by people from Dillon, 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the finances of our province. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting, reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Constituent Recognized for Service to Community 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

with great pride today that I take this opportunity to thank 

Yvette Daigneault of Ile-a-la-Crosse for her many years of 

service to her community. Yvette has since retired from her 

years of work at the northern health and medical services 

branch where she dedicated a combined 40 years of service, 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

She has been an active volunteer for her entire life, Mr. 

Speaker, as she generously gives her time and dedication to her 

community and its many causes. She has donated her time to 

minor sports, working with the youth, and her church. Yvette 

also plans fundraisers, raising money for trips for sports teams, 

the women’s wellness group, and the countless excursions that 

have been fulfilling her fellow parish members as they take 

trips to honour Jesus and his followers. 

 

She is a leader and shows this to many boards that she’s been 

involved with. She was a board member for the Rossignol 

School Board for over 12 years, a member of the health district 

for seven years, and is currently on the board of the 

Ile-a-la-Crosse Friendship Centre. She is also currently the 

Métis Nation Local No. 21 president. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Yvette for her dedication to 

improving the lives of people in her community. I also want to 

thank her family for sharing their wife, mother, grandmother, 

and friend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me today in congratulating Yvette on 

her, finally, her years of rest that she can enjoy and wish her 

many, many more years of happiness to come. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Movember 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise to acknowledge a special growing season that lasts only 30 

days. All across our province and around the world, brave 

and/or foolish men are putting their dignity at risk for the 

Movember campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has shown leadership in many 

areas of health care and health promotion. In addition to raising 

funds and raising awareness about prostate cancer, this year 

Movember is also focusing on mental health, an area where 

men can be particularly reluctant to seek help. Mr. Speaker, this 

government is committed to providing improved mental health 

services for Saskatchewan citizens. Each year more than 45,000 

of our people use publicly funded mental health services. We 

are moving forward with the replacement of the Saskatchewan 

Hospital in North Battleford to better serve the long-term 

rehabilitation needs of mental health patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, prostate cancer is the most common cancer to 

affect Canadian men: one in seven men will be diagnosed with 

this disease in their lifetime. The Ministry of Health is working 

with health regions to establish prostate assessment centres in 

Regina and Saskatoon to help with detection and treatment. Mr. 

Speaker, over 90 per cent of prostate cancer cases are curable if 

detected in the earliest stages. 

 

I would like this Assembly to join with me in recognizing all 

the individuals who sacrificed their upper lip, and their wives, 

in order to raise money and awareness for men’s health. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Multicultural Council Honours Volunteer 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday 

the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan presented the 2012 

Betty Szuchewycz Award and honoured volunteers throughout 

the multicultural community. This took place at a special tea 

hosted by Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Betty Szuchewycz served on the board of directors for the 

Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. She was killed in a 

tragic car accident in 1990, and this award was created to help 

keep her volunteer spirit alive by honouring others who 

contribute to the community as she did. 

 

This year’s winner was Muna De Ciman. Muna is a tireless 

community leader that lends her skills and time to promoting 

multiculturalism in so many organizations throughout our 

province. She was nominated by the Saskatchewan African 

Canadian Heritage Museum where she served as a board 

member since 2006. In addition to this role, among many 

others, she also serves as the director of the Regina 

Multicultural Council. I know Muna personally and have a 

tremendous respect for her and the work she does in enriching 

the lives of people and our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating Muna for 

receiving this prestigious award and to provide a sincere thank 

you to Muna and the Multicultural Council for their leadership 

in our city and our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Government Partners With Habitat for Humanity 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise in the House today to recognize this 

government’s partnership with Habitat for Humanity as they 

launch the 100 K Women Build project in Regina. The goal of 

this initiative is to enable two hard-working Habitat Regina 

partner families to experience home ownership for the first 

time. This will be achieved with the help of 200 exceptional 

women in the province who will raise 200,000 for the project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this initiative was born out of two Regina 

projects: 100 K in 100 Days and Regina Women Build. The 

aim of the 100 K in 100 Days was to engage 100 women to 

help raise funds for a Habitat partner family in Regina. Women 

Build is a program that promotes and encourages women’s 

leadership and participation in construction and skilled trades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud that this government is supporting the 

100 K Women Build campaign by contributing an additional 

100,000 towards the construction of these two homes. Mr. 

Speaker, we are proud to partner with Habitat for Humanity to 

create more home ownership opportunities for hard-working 

Saskatchewan citizens. We encourage everyone to support this 



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

exciting initiative. Women who are interested in being part of 

this history-making build can contact Habitat for Humanity 

Regina. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

AIDS Awareness and Support 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. December 1st 

marks World AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] 

Day. Saskatchewan has proclaimed AIDS Awareness Week 

November 24th to December 1st. World AIDS Day is 

December 1st, and Aboriginal AIDS Awareness Week is 

December 1 to 5th. 

 

Events and activities during this period are dedicated to raising 

awareness and supporting people with HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS. Stigma and discrimination 

remain a reality for many people living with HIV which 

prevents them from seeking treatment and support. 

 

Our province continues to have a high rate of new HIV cases, 

primarily associated with injection drug use. We recognize HIV 

as a serious issue, and we are committed to addressing it. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan’s four-year provincial HIV strategy is 

aimed at reducing the number of new HIV infections, 

improving the quality of life for people affected with HIV, and 

reducing the risk factors for acquiring HIV. 

 

We have made significant progress. We’re recruiting front-line 

service providers, increasing social supports and access to 

public education, testing, prevention, care, and treatment for 

people affected by HIV. This year a new HIV awareness 

campaign in partnership with First Nation and Inuit health 

branch of Health Canada is encouraging testing and challenging 

HIV-related stigma. Mr. Speaker, we recognize that there is 

more work to be done. We will continue our efforts in 

collaboration with provincial partners to address this. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

All Nations Job Fair 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Regina 

& District Chamber of Commerce, under the inspired 

leadership of CEO [chief executive officer] John Hopkins, 

hosted the All Nations Job Fair at Evraz Place here in Regina. 

The sold-out fair featured more than 80 booths and employers 

who reached out to close to 1,000 attendees. Fifty employers 

offered about 1,000 jobs in various fields including 

construction, transportation, financial services, tourism and 

hospitality, manufacturing, and information technology, among 

others. 

 

The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology], 

the Regina Skills and Trade Centre, the apprenticeship 

commission, and the University of Regina were also on hand to 

provide information regarding education and training 

opportunities in the province. 

Mr. Speaker, a key objective of this event was to help better 

connect Saskatchewan’s First Nations and Métis peoples to job 

opportunities and skills right here in Regina and well beyond. 

Increasing Aboriginal participation in the economy is a priority 

outlined in our government’s Saskatchewan plan for growth. In 

order to meet this objective, our government will continue 

working with partners like the Regina & District Chamber of 

Commerce on a number of initiatives, including investing in 

post-secondary and skills training for Aboriginal peoples and 

increasing support for adult basic education and literacy 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to applaud and commend the work of 

the Regina & District Chamber of Commerce. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Provincial Budget 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

remains on track to have the only balanced provincial budget in 

Canada this year. 

 

This week’s mid-year report clearly demonstrates the benefits 

of growth. Despite a significant downturn in resource revenues 

this year, the budget remains balanced thanks to the growth in 

other parts of our economy. For example, personal income tax 

is up significantly thanks to more people working and higher 

wages. Mr. Speaker, even though our government has delivered 

record income tax reductions in the past few years and tax rates 

are down, tax revenues are up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s Leader-Post editorial states, and I quote: 

“It means Saskatchewan is still the only province in the black 

. . . Contrast that with gloomy news out of British Columbia 

Wednesday.” The deficit forecast had ballooned to 1.47 billion. 

It’s much the same sorry story elsewhere. Alberta’s deficit 

could hit 3 billion this year. Manitoba is 440 million in the hole. 

Ontario is 13 billion in the red, and the federal government has 

a $26 billion deficit. They go on to say, “. . . collectively, 

Saskatchewan’s situation is as close to ‘sitting pretty’ as it 

gets.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the strength of our growing economy means that 

even though resource revenues are down, other revenue sources 

are up and our budget remains balanced. Mr. Speaker, a diverse 

and growing economy, sound fiscal management, and balanced 

budgets — these are the fundamental principles of our growth 

released by our Premier last month, and they are a key part of 

the Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

HIV Awareness Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here in 

Saskatchewan we’re facing the worst HIV epidemic in Canada. 

Sadly this reality is not recognized by most Saskatchewan 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

people. The recent comprehensive Taking the Pulse survey 

commissioned by the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], 

CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation], Leader-Post, and 

The StarPhoenix show that 60 per cent of the population 

disagree that HIV is a problem in their community. 

 

Public awareness and education is essential, Mr. Speaker, if 

we’re going to reduce HIV rates in Saskatchewan. My question 

to the minister: what efforts are under way to ensure 

Saskatchewan people are properly informed about the HIV 

epidemic here in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we have embarked on a four-year plan, HIV/AIDS 

[human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome] strategy in this province through the Ministry of 

Health. Mr. Speaker, the first two years of that plan focused on 

ensuring that we have a number of recruitment initiatives when 

it comes to HIV strategy coordinators, including 25 front-line 

service providers as well as implementing point-of-care testing 

in seven health regions across this province as well as a number 

of First Nations communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member is correct that public awareness needs 

to be a focal point of this strategy, and that’s why I am very 

pleased to say to this House that on October 15th of this year 

we launched a social marketing campaign that addresses 

HIV-related stigma, discrimination, and awareness, Mr. 

Speaker. And we know that more work needs to be done, but 

certainly we are ensuring that there is a public awareness 

campaign as a part of our four-year commitment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that the 

minister, of course, recognizes that the HIV rate in 

Saskatchewan is a major problem. But unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, I feel the government’s actions on this issue have not 

demonstrated a full appreciation of the seriousness. 

 

In particular the Throne Speech is an opportunity for the 

government to state its key objectives and priorities. On this 

item, Mr. Speaker, there was no mention of HIV in the Throne 

Speech and especially in the section on health. My question to 

the Health minister: why was there no mention of the HIV 

epidemic in the province in the Throne Speech? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly this has been a priority of this government since we 

formed government. That’s why in 2010 we announced not just 

a one-year strategy, Mr. Speaker, but a four-year strategy. 

We’ve communicated with our health region partners, 

providers, and I think at large what those different parts of that 

strategy will entail to work to reduce the number of new 

infections that we have in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as well 

as try to address a growing concern of the number of people 

who may be infected with HIV/AIDS in Saskatchewan but may 

not know that. 

Mr. Speaker, but I can tell the member that the public aspect to 

this is important. That’s why, as I said, on October 15th we 

announced what was phase 2 of the social marketing campaign. 

That includes five YouTube videos depicting an individual 

living with HIV; a video with an elder speaking about this, Mr. 

Speaker, this illness in the Aboriginal community; a youth 

member; a member of the gay community; as well as an HIV 

strategy coordinator, as well as there will be radio advertising 

and posters to better communicate . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 

attended the All Nations Hope AIDS Network’s conference in 

Regina. I know the minister is headed there tomorrow morning. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a time when individuals from the province, 

but especially in Regina, can come together and talk about 

strategies to reduce HIV infections here in the province. 

 

We know that HIV disproportionately affects members from 

First Nations and Métis communities largely linked to the 

social determinants of health. I know at the health region level, 

Mr. Speaker, new infection rates are monitored and tracked. I 

recently actually heard of a sad case where a 17-year-old 

individual became infected with HIV. 

 

My question to the Health Minister: could he please inform this 

House about the number of HIV infections in Saskatchewan 

over the past year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, while I won’t be able to 

give the individual numbers for this year as well as last year — 

Mr. Speaker, those numbers are still being compiled — our 

most recent information indicates that we have had 173 new 

cases that were identified in 2010, Mr. Speaker. And while that 

is still a far too high number for this province, it is a reduction 

from the year prior to that, Mr. Speaker. And that is knowing 

that more people are being tested each year in this province. 

 

We need to though do more ensuring that testing is available for 

individuals, Mr. Speaker, particularly those that may be at risk, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that is why that we are 

working with our health region partners, as well as other 

partners across the piece, to ensure that we have proper 

front-line support and services, as well as support and services 

for those people that it is confirmed that they’ve been 

diagnosed with HIV and AIDS. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

statistics from 2010. But I know this is monitored on a monthly 

basis, and there is certainly more current information available 

that could be shared. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the cost of HIV to the province is 

huge. The hugest cost is the human cost, but it’s also a financial 

cost. The government’s own documents suggest that the direct 

cost to manage HIV in the province is $40 million per year. In 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

the government’s own documents it says, when the indirect 

costs are added, that number goes to $136 million per year. The 

government’s response has been $2.5 million. 

 

My question to the Health Minister: given the reality this is 

such a huge cost, human and financial, to the province, does he 

feel a $2.5 million response is appropriate? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. We certainly take this issue very seriously in this 

government. That’s why we put in place a four-year plan. We 

have spent to date $6 million on the first two, in roughly two 

and a half years of that plan, Mr. Speaker. And there is more 

work to be done in the out years of that plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a provincial leadership team that oversees the 

implementation and the evaluation of the strategy, working 

alongside with our HIV coordinators across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. As well we are looking to continue to expand outreach 

clinics for HIV, hepatitis C, TB [tuberculosis], STIs [sexually 

transmitted infections], Mr. Speaker, across the entire piece. 

And, Mr. Speaker, as well, I think a large part of it, which the 

member identified in his first question, is raising public 

awareness. And that’s why we’ve put together a multi-approach 

to that awareness campaign, be it over the airwaves or online, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue to do that work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Anti-Bullying Strategies 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the consequences of 

bullying are devastating including depression, self-harm, 

addictions, and suicide. I’ve witnessed these first-hand as a 

teacher, as I know I’m sure the minister has as well. We support 

the work that the province has done to raise awareness about 

bullying, but unfortunately it still occurs. 

 

The Minister of Education said in mid-October the province 

could benefit from further coordinated national work. I 

certainly agree, and we also believe that there’s important work 

to be done here in the province. This is an issue that matters to 

all of us, that causes damage that’s simply unacceptable. 

 

What actions has the minister and his ministry taken since 

mid-October to protect students against bullying? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for the question. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

all of our children — no matter whether they’re in our urban, 

rural schools, on-reserve — have a right to learn in an 

environment that is safe and conducive to learning. Our 

government takes this issue very seriously, Mr. Speaker, and 

we believe that we will continue to create that environment that 

is so conducive to learning. 

 

I know that school divisions take the matter very seriously, Mr. 

Speaker. Every school division, all 28, have critical incident 

procedures that are strictly adhered to. And we believe that 

those measures are consistent throughout the province and that 

they will continue to protect our children going forward. 

 

Having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, our ministry, as we speak, 

is conducting an interjurisdictional review of processes that will 

ensure that that safety takes places. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a lot 

to be gained by the experiences of other provinces and other 

jurisdictions, and it’s important work that the minister has 

identified in the interjurisdictional work that he speaks of. Each 

province is going at this in different ways. The challenges are 

real; the consequences harsh. 

 

In BC there’s of course the tragic youth suicide that we 

witnessed just a few months ago. And within a month of that, 

the provincial government stepped up and put together a 

website, erasebullying.ca. And this is a website for students to 

report bullying both in the classroom but in the community and 

as well by way of cyberbullying and providing then urgent 

resources and response, both by way of the classroom and in 

through the community. It’s anonymous and free to use. Other 

provinces have brought forward legislation and various tools 

and programs. And we have that opportunity to learn from our 

jurisdictional partners, but it’s something that we need to make 

as a priority. 

 

So I guess I look to the minister. He referenced that he’s doing 

work with other provincial partners. That’s important, as is 

working from a national perspective. Does the minister have a 

timeline for reporting back to the public and taking some 

actions on this front? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Again thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 

thank the member opposite for the question. Again we know 

that bullying is widespread, and of course that includes 

cyberbullying. We have been working with other sector 

partners as well as our school divisions. We’ve been working 

very closely with the Red Cross. 

 

And as we go forward, Mr. Speaker, and as we get into the 

student achievement initiative, one of the tools that we’ll be 

using, the Tell Them from Me survey, is an engagement tool 

that will allow us to gain first-hand information from our 

students, from our staff, from our communities as to what the 

situation is exactly in our communities. We will continue to 

monitor the interjurisdictional reports, and as soon as they’re 

ready, we will make those public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, it is important 

to learn from our interjurisdictional relationships, from our 

provincial partners. And it’s also important for us to have 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

provincial leadership and work in a co-operative fashion with 

community partners, educational partners, and students here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As I say, other jurisdictions have stepped up with legislation. 

They’ve supported and encouraged GSAs [gay-straight 

alliance], peer support networks, websites to report bullying, 

and other supports and counselling and professional 

development, all of which we could and can learn from. 

 

I believe there’s a great opportunity for us as a province to 

work together to learn and improve supports for students. A 

good start would be for us to be working with our community 

partners, with our educational partners, and with students, as 

simply our goal must be to make sure that every student has a 

safe place to learn and to thrive. 

 

So I look to the minister and ask him whether he could support 

working towards a clear goal of supporting students and 

eliminating bullying by way of developing a provincially led 

and resourced work group with our community partners, 

educational partners, and with students. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker, and to 

the member opposite for the question. I think we’re speaking 

the same language, Mr. Speaker. We have been working 

continuously with all of our sector partners to deal with the 

issue of bullying. We realize that it’s a serious issue. We realize 

that it’s widespread, Mr. Speaker. We realize that more action 

needs to be taken in the area. We need to protect and we need to 

guarantee and ensure that all of our children have a safe and 

caring environment that’s conducive to learning. We’re 

committed to that. We are going to continue to look at all 

options to make sure that those safety measures are in place, 

Mr. Speaker, and we’ll continue to do that as we go forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Support for the Commercial Fishing Industry 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party continues to ignore the people of 

Saskatchewan. And they did try to balance the books on the 

backs of many people. They did sell social housing units to the 

highest bidder. They’re selling the Crowns like ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], and they 

have been gutting Aboriginal employment development 

programs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now the commercial fishing industry is under attack. This 

past spring the Sask Party eliminated the entire fish freight 

subsidy for the northern commercial fishing industry. Mr. 

Speaker, my question: why is the Sask Party trying to kill off 

this industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan deals with the needs of the people of 

Saskatchewan in a very serious manner, both in southern 

Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan. 

 

With respect to First Nations folks and Métis people in this 

province, this government is putting more and more resources 

into programs for First Nations and Métis people than ever 

before in Saskatchewan. It’s a role that we take very seriously. 

We’ll continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll work along 

with our partners in the North in that effort. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that answer is ludicrous. This 

government is trying to grab some cash off of this industry 

because they can’t balance their books. They want to balance 

their books on the back of the commercial fishing industry. So 

what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They take away the fish freight 

subsidy. The commercial fishing industry is a multi-million 

dollar industry that employs hundreds, maybe even thousands 

of northern and Aboriginal people, Mr. Speaker. This 

government still lists the subsidy on Enterprise Saskatchewan’s 

own website, but they gutted it anyway. 

 

So my question to the minister of Industry: why are you going 

to war with the commercial fishing industry, an industry that is 

rooted in history and rooted in northern Saskatchewan? Can 

you answer me that question? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Nothing could be further from the truth, 

Mr. Speaker. The Government of Saskatchewan continues to 

work with the people in the commercial fishing industry. 

They’ve made representations around the marketing of fish and 

a number of other initiatives that we are working along in 

partnership with the folks in northern Saskatchewan. This is an 

issue that simply is not really on the radar for the people of 

Saskatchewan. I would say to the member opposite, we have 

worked very, very closely, Mr. Member, with respect to this 

industry along with our northern partners. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the commercial fishermen will 

be happy to hear that the minister says that their industry is not 

on their radar, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the commercial 

fishermen and the industry are going to fight back. This 

government has taken all the supports it offered them and is 

trying to kill off this industry, Mr. Speaker. And what the 

commercial fishing industry want, they don’t want fancy words 

or babble, Mr. Speaker. If you throw a walleye onto the ice 

when you’re fishing, Mr. Speaker, that walleye will continue to 

struggle and he’ll gasp for air in the same manner which this 

minister is gasping for answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But commercial fishermen want to know today, Mr. Speaker, 

they want to know clearly from this minister what specific 

measures are you going to undertake, sir, to ensure that the 

commercial fishing industry is going to survive for many, many 

years to come? Which concrete measures are you going to take? 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask that both the minister and the 

member asking the questions direct their comments through the 



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

Chair. I recognize the Minister Responsible for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

northern fishing industry is very important to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and we certainly recognize that. They have 

asked the Government of Saskatchewan to take some steps with 

regard to the marketing of fish, and we have done that. We have 

done exactly what they’ve asked for. We’ve done exactly what 

they’ve asked for and removed the commercial industry from 

the marketing boards that they were a part of in the past, exactly 

as they have asked for. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite knows that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Changes to Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Court of Appeal may not return a ruling on the challenge to 

Justice Ball’s decision on the essential services Act before next 

week. But the Sask Party’s version of that law was ruled 

unconstitutional. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

let their ideology trump common sense in writing that law 

because their idea of essential services is a violation of human 

rights, according to the courts. 

 

Now my question to the Minister of Labour is, if the court does 

not rule before next week, how will the Sask Party’s omnibus 

labour bill amend The Public Service Essential Services Act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

aware that the matter is being argued in the courts actually as 

we speak. It would be inappropriate for either he or I to make 

any comment on what is taking place in the courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have indicated in the House that we will be 

introducing a bill before the end of the session. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I gave notice of introduction earlier today so I think 

that sets the timeline where we’re going on it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add as well that on Saturday, 

which is December 1st, we are raising minimum wage from 

9.75 to $10 an hour, which will offer significant benefit for 

low-income people in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, people 

were surprised two weeks ago to hear a leak from the minister’s 

paid luncheon about the content of the bill that we’re about to 

see next week. And he appears to be tabling it next week and 

we look forward to it. But what was tabled this week shows yet 

another surprise for the people of Saskatchewan. In the 

government’s mid-term report the minister says he needs 

another $500,000 for the cost of developing this bill, but, Mr. 

Speaker, in committee on May 7th the minister said there 

wouldn’t be any extra costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the minister say the labour bill’s 

development wouldn’t cost the taxpayer and now we see 

exactly the opposite? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member 

that we try to do things in the most cost-effective method 

possible. We chose, following the month of May, to have a 

fairly extensive consultation. It required a significant amount of 

advertising, and in fact the advertising was very successful. It 

generated some 3,800 responses. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we held a number of minister’s 

advisory committee meetings. I think there was six or seven of 

those meetings. Mr. Speaker, the people that attended those 

meetings had their costs, their travel and hotel . . . [inaudible] 

. . . They were all-day meetings. I’d like to take this opportunity 

to thank the people who have participated in that process. 

 

The information that was gleaned at that was valuable and was 

productive. And a lot of things that were there will, when the 

members see the bill next week, were things that found their 

way into the bill. So I would like to thank them for it. And the 

money that was spent was very good value, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, let’s review 

Hansard. This minister earlier this week loved to quote me and 

I found that interesting, but let’s go back to Hansard again. On 

May 7th I asked the minister very clearly — and I quote, I 

quote myself — I say, “I’m wondering, what are the costs? 

What are the staffing implications for this?” To which the 

minister replied, the minister opposite, and I quote, “We will 

add, during the process, four temporary persons that will be, the 

cost of which will be absorbed within the existing budget.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t sound like good planning, doesn’t 

sound like spending $500,000 more taxpayer dollars to me. 

Why did the minister say the costs would be absorbed, and now 

he needs over a half a million dollars, taxpayer dollars, to be 

spent on his most extreme and now expensive labour 

legislation? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to commend the 

member opposite for his ability to quote himself in the House. I 

think if he looks about and casts about, there may be other 

members he wishes to quote, but I leave it to him to pick who 

he wishes to make his quotes from. And I’m pleased that he’s 

looking through Hansard and looking at the different things 

that were said, the representations that were made. 

 

I would like to advise the House and the member opposite that 

the bill will be introduced next week. We’ve gone through a 

very extensive consultation. We’ve received some 3,800 

responses to that. People made written responses. People 

contacted us. I’ve met with a number of people, and, Mr. 

Speaker, there is some costs incurred in that, but the money is 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2297 

money well-spent. And we believe when the bill is presented 

next week that the member opposite, I’m sure, will look at it 

and he may want to quote himself again, but he’ll be very 

pleased with the result. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister opposite would 

talk about the consultation meetings with his advisory group, 

but not one single public consultation meeting was held. And a 

single public consultation meeting might have cost the province 

money, but the minister refused time and time again to hold 

these meetings. And the minister might have spent money 

paying overtime for his staff to write the bill, but we know from 

his own leaks that he’s doing away with overtime regulations. 

So surely he wouldn’t have required that. 

 

Now the only reason he’s spending $500,000 and more is 

because when it comes to labour laws, the Sask Party can’t be 

straight with the public. They didn’t talk about the law in the 

election and people didn’t vote for it. And they didn’t vote for 

the Sask Party to waste half a million dollars to develop the 

most extreme labour laws in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party dragging this process to 

literally the last days, the last days of session? Why are they 

afraid of public scrutiny on this bill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting. In the hon. member’s question, he’s referencing 

what the people of Saskatchewan voted for in the last election. 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province voted for a plan 

to keep Saskatchewan growing, and I think they voted for a 

government that was going to insist on balanced budgets for the 

people of this province, underpinning that growth agenda. 

 

And today in the editorial of the Leader-Post, we see some 

response to that because they’ve looked, this paper’s looked at 

BC and Alberta and some other provinces and have some things 

to offer. They say, contrast Saskatchewan with the gloomy 

news out of British Columbia Wednesday. The BC government 

said its current-year deficit will increase to $1.47 billion. 

Alberta’s swelling deficit will hit $3 billion this year, Manitoba 

is $440 million in the hole, Ontario is $13 billion deficit, and 

the federal government has a $26 billion deficit. Here in the 

province of Saskatchewan, including consultation investment, a 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. And more importantly, the 

editorial goes on to say, “Compared with what’s going on 

around the nation — and globally, for that matter — 

Saskatchewan is on another fiscal planet . . .” 

 

Members opposite seem to be on another planet as well. It’s a 

negative place. We invite them to come back down to earth. 

Come back to Saskatchewan — the only balanced budget in the 

Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — Before ministerial statements, I would ask for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery, I 

would like to introduce a couple of staff members from the 

Legislative Assembly Services from member services: Diane 

Giesinger and Portia Borja, sitting up in the gallery. And I 

would ask members to welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Support for Low-Income Workers 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our 

government is doing more to support low-income workers. 

Effective December 1st of this year, the minimum wage will be 

increasing to $10 an hour, with a corresponding minimum 

call-out pay of $30. This will be the fifth increase to the 

minimum wage under this government for a total increase of 

nearly 26 per cent since 2007. This increase will bring 

Saskatchewan in line with the average minimum wage among 

all Canadian provinces. 

 

However the minimum wage is only one part of our 

commitment to supporting low-income workers. Since 2007, 

increases to the basic personal tax exemption, the child tax 

credit, and the Saskatchewan low-income tax credit have 

removed more than 114,000 people from the tax rolls. As a 

result, full-time minimum wage earners of Saskatchewan will 

have the third highest after-tax income of any province in 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, as we’ve laid out in Saskatchewan’s plan 

for growth, our goal is to secure a better quality of life for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

In 2011, Saskatchewan’s real GDP [gross domestic product] 

growth was the second best in the country at 4.8 per cent. Our 

workforce grew by over 20,000 to an all-time high of nearly 

550,000, and Saskatchewan is once again expected to be among 

the national leaders in economic growth in 2013 and 2014. 

 

Saskatchewan’s economy is performing very well right now, 

and we believe everyone should benefit from the economic 

prosperity our province is enjoying. Workers deserve a 

competitive wage that reflects the increases in the cost of living. 

We appreciate the working women and men of Saskatchewan 

and the contributions that they make to our province. That is 

why we believe that this is an appropriate increase that will help 

minimum wage earners keep up with the cost of living and 

reflect a balanced, fair, and reasonable approach in support of 

low-income earners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to thank the minister for sending over a copy in time for 

. . . Yes, I did get the copy for the minimum wage increase that 

will happen December 1st. And many folks will be clearly 

looking forward to that. And I know that there is some 10,000 

folks, I understand, that that wage is affected by, and of course 

there are those that will be driven up because of that as well. 

 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

I do want to say though, I do want to make sure there’s some 

clarity on the piece here. The government often says, talks 

about the fifth increase under the government. I suppose in 

some ways that’s correct, but our government caused many of 

those wage increases to happen and were set in place when they 

took over the reins. 

 

But I think this is an important piece of work. We were clearly 

embarrassed as a province when we sunk to the bottom of the 

ranking in terms of minimum wage, and so it was important 

that we’d get it up. The next challenge and the most important 

challenge will be that we wait to see whether or not minimum 

wage is indexed. That is the piece that’s really critical, and it’ll 

be interesting what we consider a benchmark. But that’ll be for 

another day to debate. But we’re very happy to see that this is 

in place right now. 

 

So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, to have the opportunity 

to respond to this. Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 

first reading of Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Second Bridge for Prince Albert 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise in the Assembly today and move the following 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to build a 

second bridge for Prince Albert. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly we have a number of 

debates. A number of things are said. And certainly I think 

there’s been a fair amount said on this side of the House in 

terms of responding to Prince Albert and region and the Build a 

Second Bridge campaign. What we haven’t heard a lot about, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a clear plan on the part of the members 

opposite when it comes to meeting this need that is being very 

clearly stated on the part of Prince Albert and region. 

 

We have a government that campaigned in 2007 for being 

ready for growth. They talk about the Saskatchewan advantage. 

They talk about the importance of the way the government can 

help out around infrastructure in terms of making sure that 

you’ve got the vital tools in the tool kit for people across this 

province to realize the abundant opportunity that exists in 

economy and society in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And certainly when it comes to what’s happening with the 

bridge situation in Prince Albert, the vital aspect of the bridge 

to moving people back and forth through this gateway of the 

North, Prince Albert, you’d think that this would be a natural 

for the attention of members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we don’t hear that clear response. We don’t hear a clear 

plan coming forward. What we do see instead is continued 

trouble on the Diefenbaker bridge and the way that . . . this 

summer in terms of the way that that backed traffic up coming 

and going, Mr. Speaker, and the hardship that that posed not 

just for residents in Prince Albert and region and the way that, 

you know, such a beautiful part of the creation of 

Saskatchewan, the way it as a city and a region, relies on that 

vital connector, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In terms of the trouble and the hardship and the delays that 

were caused in terms of moving people and goods across that 

bridge in and out of the gateway of the North, you’d think that 

again, Mr. Speaker, there’d be a clear response, not just on the 

part of the government opposite, Mr. Speaker, but on the part of 

members from Prince Albert and Prince Albert region. And of 

course I’m thinking of members like Prince Albert Carlton, 

Prince Albert Northcote, Saskatchewan Rivers; but also 

adjacent members, Mr. Speaker, right through that forest fringe. 

And they know the importance of this vital piece of 

infrastructure for, you know, just living a good life in the city of 

Prince Albert and surrounding region, but again in terms of the 

rhetoric that we’ve heard around being ready for growth and 

making sure that we’re realizing the abundant economic 

opportunities that exist here in the province and — I would 

remind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the House — the North. 

 

Last week we had a debate that related to some opportunities 

that exist in the mining sector, and certainly in terms of what’s 

happening in the resource sector as it relates to northern 

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of getting those 

goods to market, in terms of people moving back and forth to 

work in the industry and to make sure that they’ve got the 

people on the mine site, people doing the valuable work around 

surveying, people that are servicing those valuable sectors in 

terms of transportation — especially, Mr. Speaker, as relates to 

trucking — all of those things are poorly served if you haven’t 

got that vital piece of infrastructure, missing in action or 

hobbled by the actions of this government by not responding 

clearly to the situation as relates to making sure the 

Diefenbaker bridge is well functioning. 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

Mr. Speaker, the city of Prince Albert, certainly there’s a 

council in the city of Prince Albert. They are very clear in terms 

of the need in that community for a second bridge, not just to 

make sure the Diefenbaker bridge is up and running but also to 

ensure that there’s a second bridge so that again it takes some 

of the pressure off that bottleneck but also is, you know, not 

just a vital piece of infrastructure for P.A. [Prince Albert] and 

region but for the North indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So it’s one thing to talk about being ready for growth. It’s 

another thing to talk about the Saskatchewan advantage. But if 

you’re not putting the pieces in place to make that happen, then 

you’re not going to be realizing that potential, and economy 

suffers and communities suffer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In terms of the committee to build a second bridge, in terms of 

the great work that is being done in terms of making that case 

across not just P.A. and region but across the province, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a pretty interesting website, 

buildasecondbridge.com. And this website is replete with 

stories about the urgency of this situation and the need for this, 

again this vital piece of infrastructure. And again, Mr. Speaker, 

if you’re going to talk the talk, you’ve got to walk the walk. 

And when it comes to walking the walk, making sure that that 

bridge is up and running, making sure that you’ve got adequate 

transportation to and fro across the river, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

. . . And again it’s not just a matter of people commuting in 

from Spruce Home or pick your community on the other side, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a matter of how P.A. can live up to its title as 

Gateway of the North. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, there’s a tremendous opportunity in 

terms of economy. There’s a tremendous opportunity in terms 

of people realizing their labour potential, people realizing 

income potential. And a lot of that has to do with the resource 

sector and a lot of that has to do with making sure that you’re 

not just incenting or working with the industry to make sure 

that those kind of investments go forward, but there’s a part that 

government has to play around infrastructure as well. And in 

the case of the bridge, Mr. Speaker, we see that in very bold 

relief. 

 

In terms of other infrastructure needs throughout the North, we 

think about the promises made by members opposite in terms of 

the road to Wollaston, and again a community that is very 

significantly dependent on whether or not goods can flow in 

and out of that community and the way that road connects the 

communities of Wollaston and Black Lake to those 

opportunities that exist throughout the North, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

another example of, again, members opposite talking the talk 

but not walking the walk or in this case, Mr. Speaker, putting 

out the press release and then sort of nodding off at the wheel or 

forgetting about their promise altogether. 

 

But the people in those communities don’t forget, Mr. Speaker. 

They realize the urgency and they bring those issues forward. 

And if they’re not going to be given voice in the government 

caucus, if they’re not going to be given voice in the government 

cabinet — which I would note, Mr. Speaker; the city of Prince 

Albert and region are absent from that cabinet table — in terms 

of, and again which is in itself a peculiar arrangement, Mr. 

Speaker, in the way that such a vital community and region is 

absent from the discussions at the cabinet table and the 

decisions that are made. It begs the commitment of the 

government opposite in terms of living up to the rhetoric 

around being ready for growth. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of being ready for growth, it’s not 

a highly theoretical concept. It’s about real, tangible tools that 

you can put in the hands of Saskatchewan people to realize 

advantage in the economy. And the bridge, it’s not just us 

saying that, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just SARM passing a 

resolution in support of a second bridge unanimously, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not just different groups saying it. It’s the 

community itself that is saying that, this is a priority for us. 

 

We want to work with the federal government certainly, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve got 13 Conservative members of parliament in 

this province and the way that they’re able to do all kinds of 

different things. But when it comes to something that’s vital 

and real and important to a community like Prince Albert and to 

the whole of the North, Mr. Speaker, and the way it connects 

this province and realizes economic opportunity, again we don’t 

hear anything from the 13 Conservative members of parliament. 

But nor do we hear from members opposite that pressure being 

applied to their federal cousins, to their oftentimes fellow party 

members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again there’s a leadership role that needs to be undertaken 

here. There’s some listening that needs to take place in terms of 

responding to Prince Albert and region very clearly 

demonstrating that this is a priority for the community and for 

the region, and there’s a job to be done in terms of bringing 

together the different partners that need to be brought to bear in 

a circumstance like this, particularly the federal government, 

Mr. Speaker. But that leadership role traditionally has gone to 

the provincial government. And certainly we’ve seen the 

government talk about leadership on the other side, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of various other files. When that happens, we 

like to, we like to . . . We welcome that, Mr. Speaker. We are 

thankful for it. 

 

But you know, before I get too far down the road of praise 

there, Mr. Speaker, it’s also their job and it’s their work. It’s 

their responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan to provide 

that leadership, to come together to listen to a community like 

Prince Albert, to listen to the adjacent communities, Mr. 

Speaker, to listen to the way that the bridge situation in the city 

of Prince Albert affects not just P.A. and region but the whole 

of the North, Mr. Speaker. And if that, if that falls on ears that 

will not hear on the opposite side, Mr. Speaker, we’ll keep 

bringing this forward. We’ll keep bringing this issue to the 

attention of the House, and we’ll keep working with the 

community, with the people in Prince Albert, with other groups 

like SARM that have endorsed this project, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

going to keep working with them. And I guess if the members 

opposite, you know, if they’ll come along, so much the better. 

 

If they’ll move beyond . . . The member from P.A. Carlton 

referred to a second bridge as inevitable, Mr. Speaker, in earlier 

debates on the subject, and I guess we’d like to see a little more 

urgency in the inevitability. We’d to see those members stand 

up and say are they for a second bridge in the city of Prince 

Albert. We’d like to see that, Mr. Speaker. We’d like to see 



2300 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

them. If that’s not the case, we’d like to see them explain how 

that’s not a priority for the people of Saskatchewan, again, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of not just the P.A. and community, though 

that’s certainly important in and of itself, but again there’s a 

broader provincial consideration in terms of this key piece of 

infrastructure that is not going served, that is being poorly 

served by this government’s lack of response and its 

management when it comes to making sure that the 

Diefenbaker bridge is working in and of itself, but also to heed 

the calls from around the province, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

importance of a second bridge. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, to get goods to market, you need a reliable 

transportation system. To get people to opportunities, you need 

that same reliable transportation system. To have Prince Albert 

and region living their full potential in terms of that being that 

Gateway to the North, you need that being backed up by not 

just words, but by deeds on the part of the government. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we stand here today to say, how long 

will it take the people of Prince Albert and the people of 

Saskatchewan in this case, Mr. Speaker, to get a fair hearing, to 

get a positive response from the members opposite? And if 

they’re not getting that positive response, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, I wish them luck in explaining that. Because certainly I 

think the case has been quite well made in terms of the 

community, the region, and again in terms of other bodies 

coming on board in support of this program. But I think as well, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s some reckoning the members opposite 

would have to undertake with themselves in terms of, you 

know, how straightforward is it being with the people of 

Saskatchewan to say we’re going to come forward on a growth 

plan; we’re going to be ready for growth. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, that takes more than a few good 

speeches. That takes more than a few good ad campaigns. That 

takes giving the tools to make sure that the people of 

Saskatchewan have the tools to get the job done. And one of the 

primary tools that they’re calling out for in the tool kit of Prince 

Albert and region, Mr. Speaker, is a second bridge in Prince 

Albert, you know, leaving aside the sort of botching that has 

gone on with the Diefenbaker bridge situation and the way that 

that has impacted on not just lives and that daily commute for 

many people in Prince Albert and region, but the way that that 

affects the overall economy of certainly the North, but of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I’m going to be joined in this debate, Mr. Speaker, by my 

colleagues from the North, my colleague from Cumberland, my 

colleague from Athabasca, who again on a weekly basis have a 

pretty acute appreciation of the importance of this piece of 

infrastructure, what it means to lives, to businesses, to 

economy, to society in again not just Prince Albert and region, 

Mr. Speaker, but for the North as well. And again if we’re 

going to talk about realizing the tremendous opportunities in 

this province, it’s not just talking the talk; you’ve got to walk 

the walk. So I so move: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to build a 

second bridge for Prince Albert. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre: 

That this Assembly calls on the government to build a 

second bridge for Prince Albert. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the . . . I recognize the member for Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to stand 

up today and take part in this debate, a debate which of course 

our party recognizes as part of a bigger, encompassing 

infrastructure package, a picture that we inherited a massive 

deficit. We’ve said it before. We’ll continue saying that, Mr. 

Speaker. Because in 2007 when we formed government, we 

became acutely aware that there were many needs across this 

province, not just in our highways infrastructure and bridges. 

We talk about things like education facilities, hospitals and, as 

such, revenue sharing for the municipalities, Mr. Speaker. So 

this is a great opportunity for myself to take part in this debate, 

to highlight some of the things that we’ve done as a government 

but focusing on where we listen to municipalities and how we 

act and our relationship with them in a case such as this. 

 

Now we do know that there is a partnership. And as the 

minister has clearly articulated in his questions, answers, and in 

the media, this isn’t just a situation where the government has a 

look at a possible need for a second bridge. We go to the 

partnership model where we’ve worked with and will continue 

working with the city of Prince Albert and the two local RMs 

[rural municipality] around Prince Albert as well and have a 

steering committee to look at the functionality of the current 

bridge and looking at the possibility for a need for a second 

bridge. 

 

Now within that context, Mr. Speaker, we have a certain 

expertise, to be sure, within the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure. But we took that opportunity and we will 

continue to take the opportunity to go to experts that have more 

in-depth knowledge of how and when a bridge should be 

constructed to service a geographical and economical trading 

area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one of those things that we definitely want to look at, along 

with other things such as timing and the need, is the actual 

concept of where would the bridge go if a bridge was to be 

constructed in or around Prince Albert. How would it service 

the economy of the area in the North, as the member opposite’s 

talked about as well, which we are acutely aware that there are 

resource sector opportunities that will become more available 

as the years go on? That’s why we talk about the need and the 

timing of a second bridge if one is to be built, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again we saw, during the campaign of 2011, a very heated 

campaign where at times we saw the missing link from the 

leadership debate video that I talked about — was in Prince 

Albert I think on three or four occasions — always talking 

about the need for how they would fund another bridge crossing 

in Prince Albert area, making some very pricey promises that of 

course at the time I was the minister of municipalities, realizing 

that there was a lot of lofty goals that they were projecting had 

they formed government. Luckily they didn’t. Otherwise we’d 

be into a massive deficit in this province, for sure a $5 billion 

deficit. 

 

So again the responsible part of governing is to look at using 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2301 

experts from outside our own ministries to help give us that 

particular advice moving forward, Mr. Speaker. So when we 

look at the overall concept of infrastructure needs and demands 

in this province, we have to look at what we’ve always 

campaigned on — within a balanced budget concept, Mr. 

Speaker. And one of those things that we have are major 

commitments that we have to certain institutions and 

infrastructure across this province, but we have to look at 

what’s happening across with growth, across this province with 

our growth that we’re seeing. You know, we definitely have 

these experts that’ll be telling us across this province where 

there are increased demands based on population increases, 

economic development and activity as well, Mr. Speaker. So I 

mean that’s one of those things where we go forward and we 

look at prioritizing needs in this province. 

 

We definitely know right now that with the leadership of the 

previous minister of Highways and Infrastructure and the 

current leadership under this current minister, there is the urban 

highway connector program that we have in this province. It’s a 

great tool where municipalities can negotiate with the Ministry 

of Highways, talking about how there can be provincial 

involvement to ensure that the provincial road system that 

services the economy of this province is maintained and 

utilized. 

 

And one thing that we saw initially of course was there was this 

need to maintain the current bridge in Prince Albert, which we 

heard through various reports there was issues coming forward. 

Of course we all know that about a year ago there was a crack 

identified in one of the girders. And immediately the provincial 

government and the minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

came forward and said, we have to fix that, absolutely, because 

there’s a safety issue, Mr. Speaker. So for us, what we did is we 

had to look at studying what the problem was, getting experts 

involved. And we see today that the bridge is currently — I 

believe, if I’m not mistaken — is in the last stages of this repair, 

and I might add a $4.2 million repair that this province is taking 

the leadership to pay for that. 

 

Now what’s interesting about that particular statement, Mr. 

Speaker, is not too many years ago, about nine years ago when 

the previous NDP [New Democratic Party] government was in 

power, Mr. Speaker, the bridge in Prince Albert had to have 

some work done. And it required the top surface of the bridge, 

the paved area, to be torn up to get to the structural part of the 

bridge for the inspection and repair. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now there’s a 1958 agreement that was in place whereby the 

city of Prince Albert was responsible for the structural repairs 

to the bridge. Well at that time there was a mayor who thought 

that, you know what, to get to the structural damage, they had 

to tear off the pavement on top. So to replace and repair that 

surface area, Mr. Speaker, all they asked for, all they asked for 

was that the structural 50/50 component agreement be extended 

to the surface of the bridge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well ironically, I don’t know why . . . But I mean I know the 

member from Cumberland and the member from Athabasca 

have to use that bridge occasionally. They have to go across the 

bridge. And I’m sure they realize, as do the rest of us that cross 

any bridge in this province, that to get across the bridge you 

have to have pavement, a surface area to drive your vehicle 

across, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the ludicrous argument back in 2003 was that the 

government of the day, the NDP government, the minister and 

the leader at the time, said that they don’t believe at all that they 

should be responsible to pay for the surface of the bridge. They 

paid for half of the structural component costs but not the 

surface. Well that’s fine, Mr. Speaker, if you can somehow take 

your vehicle and stay within the actual girders of the bridge and 

not have your vehicle fall off that girder system and, you know, 

not to worry about a surface area to drive on. But of course, 

through the opposition efforts at the time, our Premier, the 

current Premier that was the leader of the opposition at the 

time, and the critic, it was brought to the attention, Mr. Speaker, 

that that was a very interesting argument that the minister of 

Highways at the time, that they wouldn’t pay for half of the cost 

of the surface of the bridge. They would help with the structural 

component based on the law of the time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one thing as a government, we took leadership in the urban 

highway connector program I spoke about, and now we will 

actually fund 100 per cent of the repairs to the Diefenbaker 

bridge. One thing that the experts are telling us now is that 

because of the current $4.2 million expenditure that we’re 

putting into repair of the bridge, that means that the taxpayers 

of Prince Albert are no longer responsible to have to raise mill 

rates to cover off 50 per cent cost share. That’s saving people of 

Prince Albert millions of dollars. It’s simple math, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one thing about this current structural repair is that now the 

experts are saying that this bridge, the Diefenbaker bridge, will 

be structurally sound till 2040 and beyond, Mr. Speaker. So 

therefore we see the safety component addressed within this 

government. We’re also going to see the maintain, inspection 

regime that this government believes is very important to 

ensure that any other damage that would ever come across is 

going to be managed and quickly dealt with. There are other 

repairs that the city of Prince Albert from a 2010 report say are 

necessary, about $7 million worth. And they are more than 

welcome, as they realize that they can apply to the Ministry of 

Highways and Infrastructure under the UHC, urban highway 

connector program, to have portions of that or all that cost 

based on a negotiated timeline and schedule, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one thing that was actually very critical to this government 

is that we had this particular urban highway connector, this 

integral part of our highway system to maintain the economy of 

the area in the North, repaired to the fact that we could get 

primary weights up so we can have the goods and services 

flowing north and south in and through Prince Albert as well, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’ve done that. 

 

So there’s one thing that was interesting though. I’ve referenced 

the fact that the previous minister of Highways, Mark Wartman, 

had some interesting comments to say about the bridge. He said 

in a quote, Mr. Speaker, “. . . the bridge isn’t [isn’t] an integral 

part of Highway 2, but merely an urban highway connector 

road exclusively within municipal jurisdiction.” 

 

You know, it’s kind of puzzling, Mr. Speaker, that they would 

say it isn’t an integral part of the system because sure you can 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

get across the river at other crossings, Mr. Speaker, but Prince 

Albert has a major flow through north and south. So I’m not 

sure why Mr. Wartman would have said that because, I don’t 

know, maybe he never crossed that river ever, being from the 

South, Mr. Speaker. Maybe he was just focused on the other 

part of the province. But one thing that he claims, it’s an urban 

highway connector. But the previous government did nothing to 

help fund or sustain that particular part of infrastructure, where 

our government stepped up upon forming government in 2007 

and negotiated those deals, Mr. Speaker, which is very 

important to talk about that. 

 

You know, I’m sure there’ll be time in the future here, I’m sure 

I’ll get a couple of questions, Mr. Speaker, by standing up 

today and taking part in the debate. I look forward to that 

because I have a lot of interesting facts that I can bring forward, 

Mr. Speaker, and answer these questions as they’re posed. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in the totality of infrastructure needs in this 

province, everything will be considered. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in 

the debate and make some comments about the second bridge. I 

support the motion. I support the cause. I think, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a lot of people are weighing in on the second bridge to 

Prince Albert, and there’s many different reasons. And I know 

we’re hearing a lot of comments from not only the leadership, 

the community member in Prince Albert and area. And I guess 

we could talk about the residents. We could talk about the 

industry. We could talk about tourism. I’m going to go over a 

lot of different areas that people rely on the bridge, you know, 

of Prince Albert. 

 

Now a bridge should make sure that it’s safe. Number one, we 

have to make sure a bridge is safe, infrastructure is there for 

residents. In a province that is doing as good as our province is, 

we hear the government constantly talking about the growth 

plan and all the different things that this government has done. 

And they’re taking the credit for that. And that’s fine if they 

want to spin it the way they want to spin. Go ahead. That does 

very little for the people of Prince Albert and area who utilize 

that bridge to make sure, whether it’s business, whether it’s the 

tourism sector, whether it’s I guess bedroom communities of 

P.A. that rely on P.A. to go in every day for work, our children 

who have to travel that bridge to go to school to get a good 

education. P.A. offers a good education. We know that. The 

people in that community do a great job. There are good leaders 

in that community trying to make sure that residents get what 

they’re entitled to, residents have a safe bridge, have a way to 

get across the river every day. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see very little, very little action from the 

two MLAs that represent P.A. and the MLAs in the area. What 

are they saying? Nothing. Very little. Nothing. They have to get 

up and start fighting for Prince Albert, for the residents who 

voted for them. I may not have voted for the Sask Party 

members, but the people that did expect them to stand up and 

fight for them. So those members need to get up and start 

fighting for P.A. They need to stand up for the people of Prince 

Albert and area to make sure they have a safe bridge. And they 

need to get them a second bridge, and if they want some 

ammunition how to do that, go back home and talk to the 

people who are suffering with not having a second bridge. 

 

Now let’s make it very clear. You know, you can go on the 

doorsteps, and you can tell people all the things you’re going to 

do and how you’re going to fight for them. And you could tell 

the people of Prince Albert, yes, the priorities of Prince Albert 

. . . The third largest city in our province does not have the 

support of the MLAs, the Sask Party government, to build them 

a second bridge. 

 

What is going on when you have a government that says we 

have a balanced budget? They like to PR [public relations] spin. 

Everything is going good. They don’t want to talk about the 

real facts. If that’s the case, then why isn’t P.A. getting a 

second bridge? The growth, you talk about a growth plan. Well 

maybe somebody needs to stick up, and that’s why we’re 

sticking up for Prince Albert. 

 

I mean, being a member of this Legislative Assembly and being 

raised in Prince Albert, I have a lot of family, a lot of ties. 

Being that the North uses the bridge, not only in the mining 

industry, it’s crucial for goods and services to be transported to 

the North. You talk about the local business people in Prince 

Albert who rely on that bridge to haul their, I guess their goods, 

whether it’s heavy equipment. You look at some of the cost that 

we’re hearing from people that are having to go and transport 

their goods in a route that is costing them thousands, hundreds, 

and some of them the time, labour. 

 

So there’s a lot of issues going on here, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

the right thing to do. And sometimes, you know, why, why 

can’t the members from P.A. stand up? We don’t hear much 

from them in this House about the second bridge. You don’t 

hear them in their communities talking. I haven’t heard, very 

little. They’re very quiet. People are asking of them, why are 

they so quiet? You know, it’s interesting. 

 

Well you know what? We have to move a motion here in the 

House. The official opposition has to move a motion in this 

House to get a 75-minute debate to get the members from 

Prince Albert and area to get up and speak. Why is that, Mr. 

Speaker? Why should the opposition have to be the ones to 

have to stick up for the people of Prince Albert? Because their 

own members will not, and surrounding area will not stick up 

and fight for the people of Prince Albert with the current Sask 

Party government. They should be ashamed of themselves. 

They were elected to represent the people and fight and bring 

the concerns forward, and they are not doing that. They are 

silent. They are quiet. That is not respect. And you need to 

respect the people of Prince Albert. You have to make sure that 

you’re voicing their concerns, whether it’s the business people, 

whether it’s the students in the outlying communities that come 

into Prince Albert on that bridge daily. 

 

We look at the tourism sector. We look at in the summertime 

what went on, the traffic jams. We’ve seen the lineups on the 

media. You see a lot of talk, whether it’s Facebook, Twitter, in 

the coffee shops, the conversations at the dinner table. What’s 

going on here? Where are our members that we elected to 

represent us, to argue for us? How come they’re not speaking 

out? They are quiet. They are told what to do. They are 

backbenchers, and they will say . . . 

 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

I’m going to tell the people in Prince Albert, remember this. 

When they were on your door asking for your support, and you 

gave them the support — I give you that; that was your right — 

there’s nothing wrong with saying to them, because you have 

not stuck up for P.A., the next election we are going to show 

you. We are going to send you a message. You cannot take 

Prince Albert for granted no more. We’re going to fight. 

They’re going to give them notice. The people of Prince Albert 

are giving notice, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to give them 

notice to the members and surrounding area very clearly. Wait 

until the election and see what’s going to happen. 

 

Not only are business paying a price, students, health. A lot of 

issues are being raised. We’re going to make sure that we hold 

. . . And I’m going to remind the people of Prince Albert what 

went on. And when you elected Sask Party members, did they 

fight for you? Remember that when you go to the ballot. 

Remember when they’re on your door. Remind them. Get a 

hold of them. Tell them to start fighting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think a lot of frustration’s going on because 

people with the traffic jam ups. You look at the lineup. Why is 

that that you have the lineup kilometres, kilometres, and row 

and a row and traffic, traffic? If you look at it during the 

summertime, when the closure of that bridge . . . Here’s a 

tourism sector trying to do the great job, and the tourism sector 

does do a great job. That industry that used to be at 

arm’s-length, I give them credit. They did a great job. And this 

summer in P.A., we’ve seen the lineup. 

 

And you know, you see the different groups weighing in on 

this. And SARM has got involved, and they’re going to support 

a second bridge for Prince Albert. So here’s the campaign. 

They’ve started a campaign, and I wish them well. And we’re 

going to be working with them. We’re going to be working 

with the leadership, the business people, and the community of 

Prince Albert and area to fight for a second bridge because their 

members won’t stick up and fight for them. But this opposition 

will do that. I guarantee that. It’s in our heart. We’re going to 

fight. 

 

We’ve heard the concerns from people and they’re saying 

clearly, the question goes back to this. Why are the members 

from Prince Albert not arguing, fighting? Where are they in the 

cabinet? Where are they at the caucus table? What are they 

telling them? We hear spin. We hear about all the good things 

— the growth plan, all of the balanced budgets, all the good 

things. And that’s good. If our province is doing good, that’s 

good. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, they can clap. Go ahead, clap. Clap. 

That’s good. Good. I’m glad that they’re clapping. You know 

why? Why don’t they give Prince Albert a second bridge? If 

things are so good and they’re so happy and proud, then why 

don’t they stand up for Prince Albert, the residents, the business 

people and give them a second bridge that they need to make 

sure? 

 

Now you talk about safety, and we talk about the industry and 

the mining, the jobs, the freight, and the trucking companies. 

There’s a lot of people being impacted by not having a second 

bridge for Prince Albert, by having a bridge constantly, I guess, 

covered off to two lanes, so you have one lane going each way. 

It’s unacceptable. And the government can sit here and say, oh 

yes, we’re covering all the cost. We’ll see at the end of the . . . 

what really goes on. 

 

But I commend, I commend the leadership of Prince Albert, the 

mayor and council, the leaders that are leading the charge on 

this, the support that they’re getting from SARM, the support 

that they’re getting from a lot of different groups. And I think 

the chamber of commerce in Prince Albert is weighing in on 

this, and they’re giving support. 

 

We’ve seen a lot of issues and a lot of concerns. And I guess 

the residents of P.A. are the ones that are suffering daily as they 

commute to Prince Albert. 

 

Prince Albert has a lot to offer. It is growing. It is doing a great 

thing. But they need a government who’ll respond. And you 

can’t keep spinning and talking about the great things in the 

province if so many communities are left behind, whether it’s 

the North that utilize that. And you look at the shopping that 

goes on. The people that commute from the North to shop in 

P.A., the gateway to the North, it’s clear it works. We have a 

good partnership with First Nations, the Métis communities in 

the North, and industry utilized that bridge. They do an 

excellent job. 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to enter 

into this debate this afternoon in regards to the motion from the 

member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 

been listening with interest to the comments from the two 

members who have spoken so far, the member from 

Cumberland and the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

And, Mr. Speaker, no one’s denying that we need sound access 

in P.A. across the bridge. 

 

The members have argued we need a second bridge, and the 

members have also . . . The member from Cumberland was 

talking about the reduced traffic flow. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

think there’s one thing that’s really interesting in all of this 

debate so far. One has to wonder what happened over the last 

16 years in maintenance and repair of the Diefenbaker bridge? 

One would have to ask what the previous government did and 

where they put their funds or where they established their 

priorities in maintaining that bridge, Mr. Speaker. One would 

have to wonder where the member from Athabasca was. In fact 

I believe the member from Athabasca happened to be a 

Highways minister at one time. I believe, Mr. Speaker, it’s any 

business person, anyone involved in the business community 

and the construction trade and even our boards of education are 

well aware of the fact that in order to maintain facilities, 

maintain capital budgets, you need to maintain and keep 

maintaining the maintenance or look after the maintenance and 

keep bridges, in this case, bridges in repair. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been over that P.A. bridge, the 

Diefenbaker bridge, on numerous occasions. And there have 

been many occasions, prior to the fact that we found that there 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

was some significant maintenance needed to take place, where 

traffic flowed very efficiently, whether it was in the middle of 

summer in tourism season or any other season. 

 

So I guess, Mr. Speaker, my question to the members opposite 

is what did they do to ensure the maintenance of the 

Diefenbaker bridge? So rather than a reduced flow and the 

reduced wait to be able to cross the bridge, we now would have 

had that four-way traffic which would, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

once the bridge’s maintenance is back and the bridge is back up 

to speed, the traffic will flow, and this issue of a second bridge 

will disappear. Mr. Speaker, it’s not just about the P.A. bridge. 

It’s all about Saskatchewan growing. It’s all about priorities in 

Saskatchewan. It’s all about funding of capital infrastructure, 

and capital infrastructure includes highways maintenance and 

repair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in five short years, this provincial government has 

put over $3.1 billion into provincial highway infrastructure and 

repair in the province, 73 per cent higher than the NDP spent in 

their last five years of government. 

 

And if you talk about highway maintenance and repair, I can 

speak about one highway. I can speak about a corridor from 

White City through to the Manitoba border — excellent 

highway until the community of Kipling, and then a 

deteriorated piece of road that had been there for years. And 

thanks to the previous two ministers, we now have that 

construction finally taking place in the province in that area, 

and we’ll have a corridor that people will be able to travel on 

from White City through to the Manitoba border, and not just 

the Manitoba border but to Kenosee Lake. It’ll impact tourism. 

It’ll impact the economy in that area. Mr. Speaker, it is a sound 

indication of what this government, the commitment this 

government has made to highways and infrastructure. 

 

And it’s not just No. 48. Just recently the Minister of Highways 

announced a number of new projects in the province of 

Saskatchewan and some additional cash injections to address 

that infrastructure, and not only are we talking highways. 

Coming back to the Diefenbaker bridge, Mr. Speaker, the 

original agreement was 50 per cent funding with 50 per cent 

from the city of P.A. Mr. Speaker, what has happened over the 

last two, three years? $4.2 million directly from the province, 

100 per cent, and that commitment to 100 per cent to make sure 

we get the bridge up and running and flowing and ensure that 

it’s a safe piece, a safe bridge that people can travel on and that 

people can commute upon to the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say as well, given some of the 

challenges we have faced within a growing province, just the 

other day the Minister of Finance brought us up to date on the 

mid-term financial reports, and the Minister of Finance 

acknowledged that resource revenues had shrunk this past year 

in the province of Saskatchewan. But guess what, Mr. Speaker? 

Despite reducing the burden on the personal income tax payee 

in the province of Saskatchewan, despite reducing the tax on 

. . . or the responsibility of property owners to fund education, 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen phenomenal growth. 

 

We have seen there are more people working in this province 

today. We have construction companies moving forward. We 

have advancement in the oil and gas sector in this province, in 

the mining sector, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of that, that has 

generated additional taxes which have offset the resource 

revenues and have allowed the Premier and the ministers in this 

province and this government to move forward with its 

commitment to capital expenditures including highway 

maintenance and repair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the previous government hadn’t been so intent 

on reducing services in rural Saskatchewan, we would probably 

be not having this debate today. If the previous government had 

not determined that they were going to close 52 hospitals, and 

specifically the Plains Health Centre — and now we see a new 

facility going up on the edge of the city to address the health 

needs in the province of Saskatchewan — we wouldn’t be 

having this discussion today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the closure of schools. Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, 

if you have no vision for growth and all your expectations are 

that the province isn’t going to grow and that the numbers of 

students are going to decrease, I guess you will not spend the 

money on the infrastructure needed to provide the services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in five short years this government has made a 

firm commitment to address the needs of the people in 

Saskatchewan, to work to address their health care needs, to 

work towards . . . In fact, the Minister of Education just the 

other day, $6.6 billion in the hands of school boards so that they 

could address the challenges that they were facing, the 

pressures that they were facing because of the increased 

enrolment in our schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d far rather live in this province today where 

there is a well-managed budget and a government that is putting 

forward a plan for growth in the province of Saskatchewan 

rather than living back in the past where we lived under a 

stagnant growth and a government had no vision for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting, truly an interesting debate. I 

would assume sometimes that members opposite, especially 

those who had the opportunity to be part of government, must 

have a hard time standing up and arguing, making some of their 

arguments, given the fact that they did such an excellent job of 

taking away from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Coming from the rural community, I know what rural 

Saskatchewan faced and the farming community faced when 

the Romanow government did away with GRIP [gross revenue 

insurance program], unilaterally did away with the GRIP 

program. Didn’t put the money into the CAIS [Canadian 

agricultural income stabilization] program. And many cases 

they were dragged kicking and screaming to the table to put 

their money forward to address the CAIS program in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had the privilege since 2007 when the 

electorate of Saskatchewan, we want to give . . . said to the 

Saskatchewan Party and the Premier Wall that we want you to 

move . . . We want to see this province move forward. We’re 

going to put the direction of the province of Saskatchewan in 

your hands, and we want to see what you’re doing. And I’ll tell 

you what, Mr. Speaker. We are getting reports every day of 

how people really appreciate living in this province. 

 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

In fact at Agribition just the other day, I was chatting to a 

young individual, an individual came out from, to bring . . . 

display his livestock from outside of province and he said, I’m 

amazed at what’s happening in this province. I am amazed at 

what I am seeing in this province. He said, I used to come to 

Agribition and it just seemed to be nothing but doom and 

gloom. And there’s just such a positive atmosphere in the 

province of Saskatchewan right now. And what have we seen in 

our part of the province, Mr. Speaker? We have seen people 

from Alberta who’ve come to Saskatchewan and bought land 

because of the opportunities they have seen in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s so much more that a person could say. 

And one would have to wonder why the opposition would be 

raising an issue of this nature when if they, in government, had 

done their job, we would have had a bridge that would’ve been 

well maintained, that would not . . . that would be shut down 

for that significant maintenance right now. And, Mr. Speaker, 

our commitment to the people of P.A. is 100 per cent to 

upgrade and bring the Diefenbaker bridge back into full 

capacity. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to be able to stand here today in the 

Assembly to give a message to the people of Prince Albert — 

who I hope are watching the proceeds of the Assembly — to 

talk to them about one thing that’s really, really important to the 

entire city, and that’s to build a second bridge. And the second 

point I want to raise is to make sure that they do the necessary 

repairs on the Diefenbaker bridge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I want to point out . . . I want to give a history to the 

people that might be watching this. A lot of people don’t know 

this, Mr. Speaker. A lot of people don’t know this, Mr. Speaker, 

but when the bridge . . . when the girder on the bridge cracked 

one and a half inches, the whole structure fell down one and a 

half inches. Now the engineers are telling the city, had that 

crack been another inch and a half, another inch and a half, and 

had the bridge collapsed another inch and a half — because the 

crack makes the bridge collapse — then you would have had 

the bridge become a bridge that could not be used safely, Mr. 

Speaker. It could not be used, it could not be used safely, Mr. 

Speaker. So the people of Prince Albert were told, you have an 

inch and a half to spare on that crack on that girder, otherwise 

there would have been a sure disaster, Mr. Speaker, a sure 

disaster. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what’s really, really important here is that 

we can park all the politics aside, Mr. Speaker. We can put all 

the politics aside. This is a safety issue for the people of Prince 

Albert. And we can talk about the $14 million effect that it has 

on the economy, a negative effect on the Prince Albert 

economy, Mr. Speaker. We can talk about that all day. But the 

people of P.A. are telling the government, the Sask Party 

government, this point — that that bridge is in dire need of 

immediate repairs, bring it up to a safety standard, and for 

crying out loud build a second bridge. That’s what they’re 

telling the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I notice that the Premier’s chirping from his chair. He went 

to Prince Albert and he was talking to the chamber of 

commerce and a group of people. And what he should have 

said, Mr. Speaker . . . Instead of saying, well, Prince Albert 

needs a new bridge. That’s what he said. Prince Albert needs a 

new bridge. And, Mr. Speaker, the point is, it was a play on 

words. He said they needed a new bridge. Why didn’t he say, 

and I’m here today as the Premier to tell you, we’re going to 

build you a new bridge? That last part he did not say, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So you raise expectations of the people of P.A. and then you 

leave. And now they’re all waiting. They’re saying, well where 

is the action plan? I can tell the people of Saskatchewan that 

there is no action plan, that you’re not getting a second bridge 

because the Sask Party failed you, and they failed you 

miserably, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other point that I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that 

there are not just two sitting MLAs that are being impacted. 

The member from Shellbrook, the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers, the member from Batoche, the members from a number 

of other different areas — they’re all impacted, Mr. Speaker. 

Why they are impacted? Because the entire region is impacted 

economically. So all those members have to wake up, shake up, 

and start doing things for their region. It’s not just one little 

area, Mr. Speaker, that the people of P.A. are concerned about. 

They’re concerned about the entire trading area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what we’re hearing, what we’re hearing, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the minister’s not making no commitment. They’re making 

no commitment whatsoever on building that second bridge or 

committing to other dollars to ensure that the traffic is safe to 

use the bridges in and around Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. Now 

they’re not making no commitment on any front. 

 

Now what the mayor and council in P.A. . . . and I can’t say 

that for certain because I didn’t meet with the mayor and 

council. They have to understand, the Sask Party has to 

understand is they want that report, the report that was 

commissioned by the province of Saskatchewan, that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers paid for. They want their report on the 

second bridge for Prince Albert, and they want that report 

ASAP [as soon as possible]. They want to see what the report 

says, Mr. Speaker. And what does the minister say? The 

minister says, oh we’re not going to have that report until the 

end of December when everybody is celebrating New Year’s 

and Christmas. That’s when we’ll unleash, unveil the 

document. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what the people of P.A. want is they want 

answers. They want answers now. Now what’s going on, Mr. 

Speaker, is the mayor and council, I think — and I can’t speak 

for them — they are getting awfully tired of the games that are 

being played. They’re getting awfully tired of some of the 

wordsmithing by the Premier and other backbench MLAs that 

refuse to stand up and speak for their constituents on this very 

important issue, Mr. Speaker. They’re getting tired of wanting a 

report that is not forthcoming from the Sask Party, because it is 

a taxpayer-paid document. They need that report as city 

planners and city engineers, and city leaders need to see what 

the report says. Well this government won’t release that report 

to them, Mr. Speaker. They will not release that report to them. 

 

[11:45] 



2306 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

And that’s the most important thing that I wanted to add is that 

they want to be partners in this thing. They want to be able to 

do what they have to do to be able to position the city well, to 

be part of the solution. But they can’t even do that because the 

government won’t release that report. So the biggest issue that 

we’re getting from Prince Albert, I think is they need to see that 

report. Can they get the report? And the minister has said no, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the worrisome part in this, Mr. Speaker, is that as well it’s 

not only an economical nor is it a public safety issue. Many 

people in the area, whether it’s Shellbrook or whether it’s 

Canwood or whether it’s a number of other communities in and 

around Prince Albert, they access the city for much needed 

health care services. There’s a hospital there that they need to 

go and get some care, and they also have to go see doctors, and 

they do a number of other things in Prince Albert. Now what 

happens if that bridge is further compromised in terms of being 

safe? Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a huge risk to those people. 

 

It’s a huge risk to industry when we hear that NRT [Northern 

Resources Trucking] trucks that are coming from the mines that 

use the bridge. And, Mr. Speaker, if that bridge is not safe — 

and this is my warning to the current minister, to the current 

Premier, to all those members that I spoke about — if that 

bridge is not safely repaired, you’re putting at risk not just the 

economy which you’re doing now, not just access to health care 

what you’re doing now, but you’re putting the huge problem of 

public safety at risk if that bridge is not repaired properly and a 

plan to begin the construction of a second bridge is not 

undertaken immediately, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I want to point out as well, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

mayor and council — I don’t know the mayor personally, Mr. 

Speaker, I know of him and I know the council — when he ran 

for election, Mr. Speaker, this past city election, he said to the 

people that I’m going to run as your mayor to get you a second 

bridge and to make sure that the current bridge is repaired. And 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, His Worship Mayor Dionne is 

coming for the Sask Party, and he’s not going to stop, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s not going to stop. He’s going to hold the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton to account for his lack of action on 

this file. He’s going to make all the members from around that 

area account for their lack of action on this file, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As he sees activity happening in other places, the mayor is 

going to come for the Sask Party. He wants his second bridge 

that they were promised. And the people of Prince Albert gave 

him the mandate. They gave him a huge mandate. And this 

mayor is not going to go away. He’s going to be in their face 

and he’s going to be fighting for the people of P.A. And on this 

side of the Assembly, we finally say, great. Finally somebody’s 

speaking up for P.A. Somebody’s fighting for P.A. Somebody 

is representing P.A. And, Mr. Speaker, the sad reality is it’s the 

mayor standing alone with the council fighting for the second 

bridge while the rest of the MLAs from that particular area 

continue to sit on their hands and say nothing and do nothing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the big question is, why? Why? There’s five to seven seats 

in that area that are really important to this government. There 

are five to seven seats, and those five to seven MLAs, I am 

sure, Mr. Speaker, were given a serious talking-to. They were 

given a serious talking-to by their constituents, by some of the 

local leaders. SARM has made a resolution. I believe SUMA is 

going to make a resolution as well. There are business people 

that are impacted, and the entire region is telling these five to 

seven MLAs in that area, get a commitment for that second 

bridge. Otherwise there are going to be serious political 

consequences. And, Mr. Speaker, I think those five to seven 

MLAs got the message. They got the message all right, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re pretty sure of that. 

 

And I’ll tell the people of Prince Albert this — that you have 

the option. You have the option of turning your backs to the 

Sask Party candidates at the next election, the same way 

they’ve turned their backs on you, on something that’s 

important to the area of Prince Albert. To the business 

community that finance some of these guys, stop it. Stop the 

financing. To the people that have voted to reach out to these 

groups, stop doing that as well. They have betrayed you. They 

have turned their back on you. And as far as we’re concerned, 

in the official opposition, on the second bridge and the current 

bridge, we give the Sask Party a big fat F, Mr. Speaker, on this 

project. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 

pleasure to weigh in to this debate about infrastructure, 

basically. And you know, as I listen to this, I can remember that 

the member from Athabasca saying that right after the 2007 

election, you know, he said, well you guys are doing good 

because you’ve got a billion dollars in the bank that we left you. 

 

And then the Finance critic, the member from Regina 

Rosemont, decided, well, that wasn’t enough. So he said, well, 

no, no, it’s $2 billion that you guys got left that you can work 

with. And I don’t know where that comes from because he 

seems to be having a hard time balancing his own leadership 

campaign. However then the member from Athabasca — not to 

be outdone, Mr. Speaker — says, oh no. No, no, it’s $3 billion 

that we left you with. Well in all this money that’s being left 

over, why, Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t they do anything on 

infrastructure? 

 

They let the infrastructure in this province go downhill. They 

didn’t fix roads. They didn’t fix hospitals. They didn’t look for 

schools. But you know why, Mr. Speaker? Because they never 

had a plan for growth. You have a government now that is there 

that has a plan for growth, has a plan to move this province 

forward. You know, we’re more business friendly. 

 

Heck, I can remember a number of years ago when there was 

this map out, and this map was showing the line of where all 

the oil wells were drilled. And it surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, it 

went right down the Alberta-Saskatchewan border. All the 

wells were being drilled over there. So needless to say, you 

know, people from Saskatchewan, the out-migration was going 

on. Everybody’s going to Alberta to work to find meaningful 

employment. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the dinosaurs did not all die on 

the Alberta side. You know, they didn’t. We had oil here too. 

But here’s the catch, Mr. Speaker. Those dinosaurs are pretty 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

resilient because some of them actually came over here. And 

that’s the NDP are the dinosaurs of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

now, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not hard to tell. I think during the, 

you know, during the past election, the people of Saskatchewan 

spoke. And they didn’t want those dinosaurs there. They only 

put nine of them over there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about infrastructure in 

Saskatchewan and especially in rural Saskatchewan. The NDP, 

you know, under Roy’s revenge, went and they shut down 52 

rural hospitals including the Plains. You know, here we are, 

here we are trying to grow this province. We want people to be 

coming to this province. There were 80,000 people in the last 

few years. Like, Mr. Speaker, this is what growth does. 

 

But with growth comes challenges. It’s called infrastructure. 

The NDP, obviously they didn’t have that plan for growth 

because they had all sorts of things that they wanted to do that 

didn’t help growth whatsoever. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They tried to grow potatoes. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — And this was brought forward. Yes, they 

tried to grow potatoes. They had this great growth potential in 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company], Mr. Speaker. You know that private-public 

ownership that there was nobody in the private end in there. 

The one where they lost $35 million, $35 million. Think of how 

many roads that could have fixed. Think of how many bridges 

that could have fixed. Instead of putting that money into 

infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, because they didn’t have a plan for 

growth, they just sat there and wasted money. 

 

And it wasn’t, you know, it wasn’t just SPUDCO. Like I mean 

there’s so many of them here that, where they lost like they . . . 

The NDP actually, their plan for growth was to get into bingo. 

Whoopee. So they ended up, they spent $8 million on their 

mega bingo. Boy, this really helped growth. This really made 

the infrastructure work. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and speaking of the growth, their leader, 

their leader over there at the present time, their interim leader, 

figures the growth in Saskatchewan is a myth, is a myth. Then 

their federal cousin, he calls growth out here in Western Canada 

a Dutch disease and thinks that we in Western Canada should 

be chastised for trying to move all, all of Canada forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they off-load it. They talk about infrastructure. 

They off-loaded everything onto the municipalities. This 

government, this government believes that those municipalities 

needed to move, needed to move forward. They needed money 

for roads. They needed money for bridges. They needed all 

those things that were there. And Mr. Speaker, this government 

helped them out by giving them 1 per cent of the PST 

[provincial sales tax]. 

 

You know something, Mr. Speaker? The municipalities of this 

province are very, very happy that they have a government in 

place at this time that is moving this province forward and is 

giving the municipalities the share of the money that they so 

rightly deserve for the hard-working people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can sit there and talk about the growth in 

Saskatchewan which is happening, and like I said before, which 

is bringing challenges. But it’s far, far better than the decline 

under that previous administration, where for 16 years they 

made people go out of this province to get meaningful 

employment. And I have said it before in this House and I will 

say it again, my children have now gone through university and 

have graduated. And our two children are both working in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. This is a far cry, this is a far cry from 

under the previous administration when they all went to Alberta 

or BC to go and work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the good part about this is, you know, we are 

having more and more people cheer for the Riders in 

Saskatchewan than what we’ve ever had before. You know, you 

can go across, go out to BC, you can go to Alberta and you’ll 

see, look in their stands when there’s a football game being 

played, and there’s a whole bunch of green out there. You want 

to know why, Mr. Speaker? Those are people who’ve moved 

from Saskatchewan out to Alberta and British Columbia. Now 

those people are coming back to Saskatchewan, finding 

meaningful employment in Saskatchewan, working here. 

 

Our children are coming out of our schools, and we’ve got jobs 

galore. Look at the statistics. Saskatchewan’s sitting there with 

either the lowest or second lowest unemployment. We have 

people working here. We have to move our infrastructure 

forward, and, Mr. Speaker, our government is doing this in a 

very systematic way. We have to spend money on our roads, on 

our schools, on our health system. And, Mr. Speaker, we can sit 

there and look at all the things. And things have to be 

prioritized, things have to be prioritized as to where that money 

goes. 

 

This government will work under a balanced budget, as we 

always have, contrary to what some people are saying on the 

other side. They can’t seem to read a financial statement. But 

this government is working on a fiscal responsibility, unlike the 

other side, who thought that they could sit there and bake 

potatoes or make bingo games or actually run dot-com systems. 

This government doesn’t do these foolish things. We have a 

Saskatchewan-first policy, Mr. Speaker. And that is what we, 

on this side of the House, are going to work . . . 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Question’s up. I recognize the member for 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 2011 election 

campaign, the NDP promised to fund only half the cost for a 

second bridge in Prince Alberta. Yet in ’03 when the 

Diefenbaker Bridge needed repairs, the NDP wouldn’t even 

honour the agreement that required the government to pay for 

50 per cent of the cost. At the time, Mark Wartman who was 

Minister of Highways stated, and I quote, “It isn’t the 

government’s responsibility. We have a law in terms of 

municipalities and what they are responsible for and no, I don’t 

think that is something that we are accountable for at this 

point.” 

 

To the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre: how do you 

expect the people of Prince Albert to trust any commitment you 

make regarding the Prince Albert bridge because when you 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

were in government you wouldn’t even honour a commitment 

to fund 50 per cent of the repairs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find it 

interesting that the member participates in this debate in this 

way. When the people that sent her to this legislature are 

looking for her to answer the question, does she support a 

second bridge for Prince Albert, yes or no, she has the 

opportunity to make that very clear, Mr. Speaker. And she’s not 

doing that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — To the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 

is the Sask Party not building the bridge because they’re broke 

or because they are simply turning their backs on the great city 

of Prince Albert? Which is it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you what this 

province is going to do, what this member from Prince Albert 

Carlton and the member from Northcote, Sask Rivers, and 

surrounding MLAs will do. We will always talk about, within 

the context of a balanced budget, funding the infrastructure 

deficit left by that previous government, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

what we’re going to do as MLAs and as a government, Mr. 

Speaker. And let’s not forget we’re still dealing with a massive 

deficit across government — health care institutions, 

educational institutions, roads, bridges. Mr. Speaker, we will 

always be there for the people in that context. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP neglected our provincial 

highways for 16 years while they were in government. Even the 

member from Athabasca agreed that the New Democratic Party 

did nothing to repair our province’s roads. As a Liberal MLA 

on May 29th in 1996 he stated, “Saskatchewan highways are a 

mess and northern Saskatchewan is worse.” Over a decade later 

when the member from Athabasca was serving as Minister of 

Highways the roads were still, and I quote, “a mess.” 

 

To the member from Cumberland: do you agree with your 

colleague from Athabasca that the NDP let the Saskatchewan 

highways become, and I quote, “a mess”? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 

question. Let me be very clear. The member from Athabasca 

and myself are very clear. We’re going to stick up for the 

people of Prince Albert. We’re going to fight for a second 

bridge and we’re going to make sure we work with the 

leadership to make sure they get a second bridge. And they’re 

tired of being neglected by the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, a question for the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton. The people of P.A. and region are 

looking for a government that fixes the problem and not the 

blame. Does that member have the ability to stand in the House, 

will he stand in the House today and say, does he support a 

second bridge for Prince Albert? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I will say is this 

when it comes to Prince Albert and region — and I will use 

numbers that these members can find anywhere in our platform 

and anywhere in our releases — St. Louis bridge, Mr. Speaker, 

and Highway No. 2 work, $55.6 million; Highway No. 11 

twinning, Mr. Speaker, $187 million cost shared with the 

federal government; the water treatment facility in Prince 

Albert, $24 million cost shared with the federal government, 

Mr. Speaker. And also, something I’m very proud to say this 

government did that the other party did not do, revenue sharing 

up by 122 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this MLA will 

stand up for day in, day out, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP lost 

millions of risked dollars in risky out-of-province investments. 

Let’s go down the list. Fifteen million on Channel Lake, 90 

million on Navigata, and 35 million on SPUDCO. Yet when it 

came to honour their commitment to fund at least 50 per cent of 

the repairs at the Diefenbaker bridge, the minister of Highways 

at the time, Mark Wartman, said, “I don’t think that is 

something that we are accountable for at this point.” 

 

To the member from Cumberland: while you were busy wasting 

the taxpayers’ dollars on risky investments, why did you feel 

that you weren’t accountable to the people of Prince Albert to 

provide funding for 50 per cent of the cost of the Diefenbaker 

bridge? I’m dying to know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t here 

at the time and didn’t get to part in that discussion. But having 

said that, having said that, you know it’s very interesting but 

I’ll tell you what I will do. I’ll tell you what I will do, Mr. 

Speaker, I will . . . Now I’m here and I’m voicing my concern 

for the P.A. bridge, for a second bridge. I’m backing up the 

leadership, the chamber, and everyone else that’s finally 

sending a message to this government and their members who 

are neglecting Prince Albert. We’re going to stand up for a 

bridge in Prince Albert and it’s time we do something, and you 

do something. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask a very 

simple question to the member from Prince Albert Carlton, and 

I’ll be very, very slow, Mr. Speaker, very slow. All the people 

of Prince Albert want to know. They don’t want a history 

lesson from a guy who wasn’t even here a couple of years ago. 

They don’t want Moosomin or Carrot River defending Prince 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2309 

Albert there. They want the Prince Albert people to defend 

Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the question I’m going to ask, and I just want a one-word 

answer: don’t give us any of your bafflegab, okay? The 

question I’m going to ask: will you get the government, the 

Sask Party government, to commit to building that second 

bridge, yes or no? Yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just take this 

really slowly for members opposite, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just talk 

about a government that’s responsible to fix the first problem, 

which is fixing the first bridge in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, 

leaving the Prince Albert economy, the chamber of commerce 

and business, and those users north and south of the bridge in 

peril, Mr. Speaker, because they failed to fund what this 

government is — $4.2 million to get that bridge safe for 

everybody in the region. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Deputy Whip . . . 

or Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that those members 

never had a plan for highways in this province. You know, in 

fact the former premier, Mr. Calvert, once stated, “How we 

have been doing things in the past has been in many cases ad 

hoc without a long-term plan.” I want to hear from the member 

from Cumberland: does he agree with Mr. Calvert that the NDP 

for 16 years had no plan whatsoever? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the new 

member should know is that it was Premier Calvert that built 

this economy and started bringing people back, Mr. Speaker. 

The member wouldn’t know obviously because he hasn’t been 

here that long. But there’s no question that the current Premier 

has really extolled the virtues and the work of the former 

Premier Calvert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Had it not been for Calvert, we would not be enjoying the 

economy today. We would not be enjoying the population 

growth and we would not be enjoying the revenues that the 

current government is getting, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question 

that that member cannot rewrite history, Mr. Speaker, because 

from our view, from our view, it was the Tories of the ’80s that 

bankrupted this province. It was the New Democrats of the ’90s 

and the 2000s, Mr. Speaker, that rebuilt the credibility, the 

economy, and the hope of the Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. And we will never take any lessons from a right wing 

government that doesn’t even know how to run the economy 

properly but makes spin after spin, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 

important lesson that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 

member from Prince Albert Carlton, it’s a real simple question. 

And I guess we’d love to ask the other members from Prince 

Albert or region, but his caucus has seen to have him carrying 

the can in this debate so that’s very interesting. So we’ll address 

those P.A. questions to the member from P.A. Carlton. Does 

the member from P.A. Carlton, does the member from P.A. 

Carlton support a second bridge for the city of Prince Albert? 

Yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Since 2008, $3.1 

billion invested in infrastructure . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and 

Resource Boom on Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Hickie.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to be able to stand and talk on the motion that was 

made by the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

That the Assembly expresses its disagreement with NDP 

Leader Thomas Mulcair’s contention that the Western 

Canadian energy and resource sector is responsible for the 

decline in central Canada’s manufacturing sector which 

Mr. Mulcair has referred to [Mr. Speaker] as Dutch 

disease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess it kind of lends to the actual leadership 

ability that has been put into the hands of this individual. To make 

a statement like that is very discouraging. It’s very disappointing 

that Mr. Mulcair would make such an ignorant statement without 

any knowledge or any consultation with people that are in it. To 

start taking one area of the country and put it against the other area 

shows a very, very lack of leadership ability, and it’s very 

disappointing that someone in his position would make that kind 

of a statement. And I realize that the history of the leadership for 

the NDP has been very, very questionable and seeing locally that 

the leadership candidates, still the talent pool is very shallow as 

they go forward in selecting a leadership candidate. 

 

When we look at Mr. Mulcair’s statement, there’s a lot of articles 

that are on the Dutch disease topic, and we have to question Mr. 

Mulcair’s leadership ability. And I noticed in one of the articles in 

The Financial Post from Diane Francis, and the article says 

“Why Thomas Mulcair is clearly a national problem”:  

 

He got tons of attention when he recycled the “Dutch 

Disease” phrase to blame the booming West for the 

beleaguered East . . . Clearly the guy is way over his head 

and he makes this a national problem. 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

She goes on to say he toured the oil sands, Canada’s economic 

cornerstone, by helicopter and described them as awe-inspiring. 

“These recent events certainly serve to reveal the character of 

the latest actor on Ottawa’s stage who is in a major supporting 

role. Here’s my analysis on Mulcair based on his recent 

milestones.” 

 

She talks about him talking about Dutch disease. Mulcair is 

simply a simple-minded ideologue. The Dutch Disease was 

named after the rise of the gilder of The Netherlands due to oil 

and gas exploration which began to reduce the competitiveness 

of the country’s other exports and tourist sector. 

 

Mulcair has seized on this to explain a world he doesn’t 

understand. He blames Canada’s booming oil exports for 

the moribund economics in Eastern Canada . . . The loss of 

jobs is due to the economic slowdown since 2008, 

competition from low labor jurisdictions and lousy 

productivity levels in Canada where they are 25% lower 

than the United States. 

 

And, just to set the record straight, countries without 

commodities have had to import them at drastically higher 

prices since 2003 [So this whole thing started back in 

2003] and, despite a drop in their currencies, they suffer 

from widespread unemployment and no growth. 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, the other countries have experienced 

the same no growth, but for Mulcair to come forward and to say 

that it’s at the fault of Western Canada is totally inadequate. 

 

What’s also missing from Mulcair’s narrative is that 

Canada’s self-sufficiency and surpluses in oil and 

commodities have saved the country from a far worse fate. 

Our booming commodity and energy exports have . . . 

[drastically] buoyed economic activity domestically as the 

export proceeds and inputs have remained inside Canada’s 

borders. 

 

The Leader of the Official Opposition should not be taking 

taxpayers’ money for his on-the-job training. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Mulcair toured the oil sands for the first time, but this 

Diane Francis says that he clearly: 

 

. . . does not do his homework. He has drubbed the oil 

sands and never visited the area. He has never conversed 

with global experts, CEOs, investors, workers or many 

westerners. After one helicopter tour, he said, golly . . . [I] 

had no idea of the scale of the place [Mr. Speaker]. This 

means that he has either a) pontificated before he listens 

and observes or b) he targets selectively for cynical 

political reasons. 

 

And I would suggest that it’s the latter. Diane Francis goes on 

to say: 

 

(The . . . leader bites the hands that feed the country. But 

only the western ones.) 

 

Clearly, the guy is way over his head and . . . [makes this] 

a national problem. Instead of a person who raises 

alternatives through thoughtful . . . debate on important 

issues, there is now a socialist who lives in a parallel 

universe. There is now Mulcair who lives in the lap of 

luxury he rails against . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I toured the oil sands. I was very fortunate to be a 

part of a tour a couple of years ago. And when you first go into 

the oil sands, Mr. Speaker, there certainly is a definite 

observation of a lot of construction. It goes for miles — the 

excavation, the trucks hauling product, the draglines that are 

moving the earth — and you can see for hundreds of hectares 

that this is what’s going on. And I can say, yes, it does look 

rather devastating from a bird’s-eye view when you look at the 

area where they’re working, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The oil sands is very productive. There’s a lot of people 

working up there. And after they show you the area where the 

work is being constructed, they take you by bus to another area. 

But when they’re going through this area, Mr. Speaker, after the 

devastation of the draglines, the trucks, the road, the 

construction, hauling the oil sands to production into the 

refinery, after you see all that and they take you to another part 

of the area, you see these mounds and mounds of white sand, 

the white sand that has been produced from the processing of 

the oil. So what they have done, Mr. Speaker, is actually taking 

the oil out of the sand, and now the sand looks very white, very 

clean. It’s piled there on the sides as the bus goes through in 

continuation of the tour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you tour through there, through this bus trip, 

from all of the excavating, past the white sands, they take you 

to, it really is a park atmosphere. There’s lots of vegetation. 

There’s trees. There’s grass. And it looks quite natural. What 

this area is in particular is what has been reforested because 

when they do the oil sands, what they do is scrape off the top of 

the topsoil before they start the excavation. After the 

excavation, the extraction of the oil sands, and the processing of 

it, they take the oil out, put the sand back, and then re-cover it 

with the topsoil that they have originally taken, thereby starting 

the process of the trees, the grass. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, part of the area is fenced. There’s a large 

herd of buffalo that actually are grazing there, very peaceful in 

an area you would never, never would estimate that had been 

disturbed with the machinery and the extraction of the oil. 

 

So when Mr. Mulcair defines this as a disease, it’s very 

disheartening And the writer of the article, Diane Francis, when 

she says he is clearly a national problem, it certainly is probably 

more to the point than most. 

 

Also looked at some other publications, the MacDonald-Laurier 

Institute publication, and it talks about the oil sand, the 

resources in Western Canada as well. The MacDonald-Laurier 

Institute has commissioned a series of essays on this very topic 

of Dutch disease. And they wanted to find out through research 

what the real effects of the high dollar on the state of 

manufacturing resources extracting from Canada, if there is in 

fact anything to that. 

 

The commission examines the benefits of the Canadian 

petroleum industry to provinces other than the oil-rich and 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

gas-rich provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, and 

Saskatchewan. And it turns out, Mr. Speaker, it turns out that 

citizens, businesses, and governments in other parts of the 

country enjoy substantial benefits from resources extracted in 

Western Canada, which is at the very least complicated by 

simplistic figures painted by those that decry that the impact of 

the Canadian dollar affects Canadian manufacturing. 

 

International trade theorists have developed models of the 

global resources and the resource boom and indirectly to see if 

they were hurting the manufacturing sector in oil-rich countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to get a sense of just how large the effect might 

be, we will summarize some of the papers, the models of the 

economic impact, the energy sector in the various provinces. 

The study focused on different activities and involved two 

different independent mythologies, which was interesting. Yet 

all reached a similar conclusion: that Western resources 

extraction showers large economic benefits to all the other 

provinces, contradicting the very theme of the Dutch disease 

that Mulcair had talked about. 

 

One of the models said, surprisingly the lion’s . . . or 

unsurprisingly, rather, the lion’s share of both the GDP and the 

employment impact due to Alberta’s oil sands project . . . 

[inaudible] . . . in Alberta. We’d all suspect that. Even so these 

projects shower a substantial benefit to other provinces. For 

example Ontario alone is projected to enjoy $64.9 billion in 

high economic impact and 882,000 person-years of additional 

employment over a 25-year period. Mr. Speaker, that was one 

study that had come out. 

 

It showed that British Columbia and Quebec also substantially 

benefit from Alberta’s oil sands projects, experiencing GDP 

growth of $28.8 billion and $14.1 billion respectively. British 

Columbia gained 426,000 person-years of employment while 

Quebec gained 211,000 hours, person-hours . . . person-years of 

employment, that should read. 

 

In another study it substantiated those figures. In fact it was 

even better. Ontario has experienced $95.3 billion in higher 

economic output and 1.3 billion person-years of additional 

employment over a 25-year period. In this particular case, 

British Columbia and Quebec also substantially benefit, 

experiencing GDP growth of $42.4 billion and $20.7 billion 

respectively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is so much information on this, so much 

information about the benefits of all of Canada because of the 

resource sector in Western Canada. And to have a leader, a 

potential . . . somebody who has aspirations to be a prime 

minister some day to come out and make a statement without 

any knowledge of what he is talking about and make that 

observation without the knowledge, just showed the lack of 

knowledge, lack of leadership, and the lack of the 

understanding of Canada. 

 

If you took all the resources that we have in Western Canada 

and put them in some other part of the world, would Canada be 

better off? I would say not. In fact I don’t think there’s much of 

a question. So why would Ontario and Quebec and particularly 

the NDP come out to that assumption that the resource sector in 

Western Canada has devastating effects on the manufacturing 

area of Eastern Canada? 

 

Somewhere in the pile of papers I have here, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s even more information on how the manufacturing areas 

of not only Eastern Canada but into the United States has 

depleted over the number of years. It has nothing to do with the 

resource sector of Western Canada, I can assure you, or the 

increase in a stronger Canadian dollar. Mr. Mulcair is definitely 

way out of field, in left field, way out of line when he makes an 

assumption that the resources of Western Canada are hurting in 

fact Eastern Canada. There’s just no doubt about it. And it goes 

on, and I could go on with facts and figures for quite some time, 

Mr. Speaker, on the nonsense of the Mulcair statement and 

what it really means to Western Canada. 

 

But probably just as, just as devastating and just as 

un-Canadian, you might say, is the fact that the NDP in this 

province have not stood up for the people of Saskatchewan. 

They have not denounced that. And we’ve got . . . There’s two 

members on the other side, the member from Cumberland and 

the member from Athabasca, even in the 75-minute debate, Mr. 

Speaker, that are chirping and challenging what they call the 

backbenchers on this side for not standing up for our 

constituencies, not standing up for the people of P.A. because 

we’re not building a bridge. They’re yipping that from their 

seats time after time. And it’s not only today, but it’s gone on 

for the past number of weeks that any time they have a chance 

to get up and talk about it, they’re saying that we’re not 

standing up for our constituencies. 

 

Well I don’t how their caucus meeting is run. I suspect that’s 

what it is. They are told to shut up and sit down and let the 

leaders take over, if they have leadership there at all. But, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not how the caucus runs here. When we sit 

around the table, we have good discussions, and then of course 

it comes out as the ministers . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, 

that is the process that we’re doing, yet they stand there and say 

that we’re not standing up for our constituencies. We are 

standing up for our constituencies. 

 

But when it comes to the oil resources of Western Canada and 

Mulcair making the statement that he did that the oil resources 

are hurting Eastern Canada, those nine members sit on their 

hands and say nothing, absolutely say nothing about the effects 

that this has on the province of Saskatchewan. I’m not sure why 

they don’t want to stand up and say, well maybe this is 

something we have to talk about. Why wouldn’t Mulcair talk to 

them before he made such a statement? Why wouldn’t they be 

on the phone telling him and saying, have you got your facts 

right? Because this doesn’t look right to us. 

 

And it would especially hurt Saskatchewan and as well as 

Alberta, but more importantly right now we’re talking about the 

effects on Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the effects of 

cutting back on the resource sector to benefit Eastern Canada 

would just absolutely make no sense. It would definitely hurt 

the country in so many ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Dutch disease that we’re talking about that 

Mr. Mulcair referred to, there’s a lot of factors that can go into 

this. There are over 60,000 direct or indirect jobs in the 

combined mining and oil and gas sector here in Saskatchewan 

— 60,000 direct or indirect jobs. Those would be affected if 



2312 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

Mulcair decided to cut down. 

 

I should say that there was one of the leadership contenders that 

did have a comment on the Dutch disease and on Mr. Mulcair’s 

comments, where the other four leaders have again sat on their 

hands, said nothing in the best interest of the Saskatchewan 

people, have just made no comment on the comments that came 

from their national leader. The only one that did make a 

comment, Mr. Speaker, was — if I can find it here — was one 

of the leaders that said, yes, he agrees with it, but what we 

should be doing is raising the royalties. How would that 

balance? By raising the royalties, how could he possibly 

balance the manufacturing jobs that are downturning in eastern 

Ontario? 

 

I can tell you one thing it would do, and we’ve seen this before 

when the NDP got into power a few years ago and moved a lot 

of the industry out of the province. And I know that the speaker 

at our convention was talking about the droves of people that 

left the province in 1944 when they saw that the socialist 

government was taking over. He cited that Moose Jaw could be 

the Calgary of today had that not happened, had they had some 

leadership and some insight and some development, some 

encouragement for the industry for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

[12:30] 

 

The other thing was the takeover of the potash industry in the 

1970s. Mr. Speaker, that just flattened the resource level at that 

point. We’ve started to bring it back, but what really did help us 

was when Alberta a few years ago decided to adjust their 

royalty rates. And here’s Mr. Weir, the front-runner for the 

NDP leadership, saying that if we adjust our royalty rates, it 

would fix this whole situation with the Dutch disease. All the 

royalty rates would do would again send the industry into a 

tailspin one more time. We’re very fortunate that we’ve got the 

industry moving forward. There’s more expansion in our oil 

and our resource industry than ever before, both in gas and oil, 

and in coal with the clean coal projects, and uranium. And to 

have that stop would be very, very, very devastating for the 

province. 

 

So what does royalties, the resource royalties do for the 

province? Well we saw in the past five years its growth. Our 

whole economic plan, the whole plan for the province as the 

Premier announced a number of weeks ago was a growth 

agenda. How do we keep the growth going in Saskatchewan? 

Well it’s not by raising the royalties. It’s not by trying to adjust 

the output for the petroleum industry. 

 

The resource revenue in this province is tremendous, Mr. 

Speaker. It creates employment. There’s more rigs being 

brought in. There’s more drilling being done. They’re looking 

for opportunities here. With increased employment, it increases 

the average wages in Saskatchewan. The average wage has 

gone up quite substantially since 2007, and it’s now at $928 a 

week. The minimum wage, you heard today, will be increasing 

on Saturday, on December the 1st. And, Mr. Speaker, since 

2007, the minimum wage has increased by 26 per cent under 

this government, a great increase because we’ve got more 

resources that we have developed. We have a workforce that is 

eager and a province that’s growing. 

 

When you have resource revenues, it attracts immigration. 

We’re looking for people. People are looking at Saskatchewan 

as the place to be. More and more people are coming into the 

province. They’re coming here because there’s opportunities. 

There’s better wages. There’s better living conditions. They’re 

looking for places to invest from a business standpoint. With 

more investment, you get more employment going. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a nice position to be in as Saskatchewan continues 

to grow, continues to lead the country in many economic 

sectors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t need to remind you we’re the only 

province in Canada with a balanced budget. When you look at 

that, that’s pretty substantial for a province our size and a 

province that for many years under the NDP was a have-not 

status, continually have-not status. And their whole 

understanding was that we’d be in and out of equalization 

forever. That doesn’t necessarily have to be the case. And it’s a 

lot because of the resource sector that this province has and the 

development we’re doing to bring the resources for the good of 

the people of Saskatchewan. And yet you’ve got somebody in 

Ottawa, a leader, that is saying that very sector is a disease. And 

we’ve got the NDP in this province that are sitting on their 

hands doing nothing and saying nothing to contradict that. 

 

When we look at revenue resources, it’s good for the province. 

With more investment, more employment, more immigration, 

we have an increased tax base. There’s more people working in 

the province than ever before. We’ve got a higher tax base. 

With a higher tax base, you get more taxes to pay for the 

programs that we need for health and for social services and all 

of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, retail sales are up by 6.4 in September. This is the 

latest from Statistics Canada, 6.4 in September where the 

national average is 1.8 per cent. So you can see the growth that 

we’re seeing in this province, and it’s all tied largely around the 

oil, the resource sector. 

 

In highways we’ve been able to invest in highway structure, in 

highway investment in a big way: $361 million in this fiscal has 

been invested in highways. That’s the second largest investment 

in highways that this province has ever seen, and it’s only 

second to the first year when we made a higher commitment. 

$3.1 billion has been spent in our highway structure improving 

the highways for the people of Saskatchewan since the spring 

of 2008 — $3.1 billion, Mr. Speaker, just in highways alone. 

 

And it’s important when you have a growing economy that 

you’ve got transportation, that can be affected, to get the 

product to market and the needs to the people in remote areas, 

rural areas, wherever manufacturing or resource development, 

farming is carried on. So highways are important, and resource 

revenue is part of how we keep the growth in Saskatchewan 

going. 

 

We’ve seen schools, and one-third of the schools have had 

investments to improve since we’ve taken over power in 2007. 

The schools were in terrible condition. And I think the former, 

the member from Canora-Pelly, the former minister of 

Education once pointed out it was easy to know which priorities 

would be for fixing schools. It was just simply count the pails 

in the hallways when it rained and see which ones had the most 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

pails. Education has been a priority, and we’ve invested very 

well there. 

 

Health care — always something. Health care, both increasing 

in the formulary as well as building hospitals, hiring more 

nurses, educating more nurses and doctors, hiring more doctors. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the amount that we’ve spent on multiple 

sclerosis liberation is . . . We’re the first in Canada to look at 

the liberation treatments and see how that could improve the 

quality of life of the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Resource revenue improves the seniors care and the seniors 

care facilities. We were able to lower taxes — personal income 

tax, property tax, small business tax — all been lowered partly 

because of the growth and the resource revenue in this 

province. So for Mulcair to say that that is devastating the 

manufacturing down east, that just doesn’t make sense, and it 

would certainly, if we didn’t have it, would certainly hurt the 

province of Saskatchewan and the well-being of all the people 

that live here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province is seeing more daycare expansions 

and daycare spaces provided. And we’ve paid down the debt; 

44 per cent of the debt has been paid down since we came to 

power. 

 

So all this stuff makes it, life, better for the people of 

Saskatchewan — for growing, for families, for businesses, a 

better place to raise your family, to have a home, and enjoy life. 

And what’s another great thing about all of this, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the resource revenue . . . We can all do it within a balanced 

budget even when there’s a small turndown. The revenues as 

we heard yesterday from the mid-term financial report is 

resources are less than they were, but other areas, because of 

the growth, other areas can compensate like agriculture, like 

manufacturing. 

 

The resources of my constituency in Moose Jaw North have 

seen considerable growth and I want to spend a little bit of time 

there. In Moose Jaw just because, partly because of the 

resources, Moose Jaw has seen more than a doubling of the 

revenue sharing for the city of Moose Jaw. I think it’s about 

124 per cent in total, 124. That’s more than double the amount 

of revenue that we could share with the cities of the province 

and the municipalities of the province so that they could 

continue their operations and improve the quality of life for the 

citizens there. 

 

I’ve talked a little bit about the school improvements, one-third 

of the schools. I know that Central Collegiate and Peacock 

Collegiate have seen improvements in the schools, as well as 

others. Additional child care spaces as well in Moose Jaw. 

 

And probably the biggest improvement that we’ve seen is the 

announcement of our new hospital. And I’m so pleased that we 

are able to see that, and it all is part of those resource revenue 

that comes into the province that we can expand. And it 

certainly shows in my home constituency, in my city of Moose 

Jaw with a new hospital. And it’s going through the planning 

stages right now, Mr. Speaker. It’s progressing very well. And 

to think that if we didn’t have those royalties, those resource 

revenues as Mulcair would indicate — and the NDP sit on their 

hands and don’t stand up for Saskatchewan — that would be 

devastating to the province. We wouldn’t get these benefits. 

And it’s really that simple. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a few minutes about the area around 

Moose Jaw, the Moose Jaw-Regina industrial corridor. This is 

designed as a heavy industrial node because of its location on 

the Trans-Canada Highway. It intersects just a little ways away 

from No. 2 North and No. 39 South going toward Weyburn and 

the US [United States] border. It’s also served by the CP 

[Canadian Pacific] and the CN [Canadian National] rail lines, 

along with the Soo line, going into the United States to market 

our products across Canada and into the United States. 

 

The Belle Plaine industrial site just east of Moose Jaw 

represents a near ideal large-scale industrial project. The land is 

flat. The transportation is excellent. There’s access to water. 

Natural gas and electric power are readily available, and it is 

close to two of the fastest growing urban centres in 

Saskatchewan, namely Moose Jaw and Regina. And it’s centred 

in the natural resource sector being established there. This area 

has experienced massive industrial construction. 

 

I’m taking a lot of this information from the Moose Jaw city 

website. The area has experienced massive industrial 

construction and much more is under way or is coming soon. 

It’s estimated that more than $22 billion in major projects is 

slated for this province and much of it will take place in this 

Belle Plaine industrial park being designated as the Moose 

Jaw-Regina industrial corridor. Other possible developments 

for the Belle Plaine industrial park are being discussed and 

could be related to cogeneration or energy resource-linked 

projects. 

 

This major industrial facility is already located in this industrial 

corridor park including Mosaic company, Canadian Salt 

Company, Yara, Tara Grain Fuels, and Alpine Plant Foods. 

These companies are attracted by the corridor’s many 

competitive advantages including its rail and highway 

infrastructure giving optimum access to markets, major pipeline 

delivering natural gas at attractive prices, wide open spaces 

from distant urban populations, and of a substantial, sustainable 

supply of water. 

 

Mr. Speaker, emergence of Moose Jaw as an economic 

powerhouse is thanks to a lot of world-class assets that provide 

the foundation of investment and constantly a driving growth 

unseen in the area between Moose Jaw and Regina for more 

than a decade and much of this century. And this growth, which 

Mulcair defines as a disease and the NDP here seem to support 

it and won’t stand up for the interests of Saskatchewan, is 

concerning to all of us. 

 

When we look at that Regina industrial corridor and we look at 

potash, the world’s drive to increase food production has 

resulted in renewed demand for fertilizer, a key ingredient in 

the farmer’s arsenal for increased input. Moose Jaw is a 

benefactor of the world’s desire for more food production. 

There is a need to feed the planet’s growing population and, of 

course, fertilizer is part of that. We know that the world wants 

more potash and the Moose Jaw area is one of the principal 

suppliers of potash designed for farm fields all around the 

globe. And yet Mr. Mulcair defines the potash industry and the 

resource industry as a disease, and the NDP on the other side 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2012 

seem to support that and do not stand up for Saskatchewan 

interests. 

 

[12:45] 

 

When we look at Mosaic Potash, which is set up on that 

corridor, Mosaic Potash is one of the world’s key potash 

suppliers. It is a well-established player in the Moose Jaw area 

and in the Belle Plaine mining operation. Mr. Speaker, the 

company employs 700 people and the number will increase and 

grow as the company continues its major expansion activities. 

 

But Mosaic, which was one of the companies that’s in that 

industrial corridor just east of Moose Jaw, is more than just 700 

employees who get a good living from there and support their 

families. They buy groceries. They support the local economy. 

It’s much more than those 700 workers. Mosaic supports the 

community in a large way. Just one of those companies, it 

supports the communities. 

 

And I don’t have to talk about Mosaic Stadium where the 

Riders play. And that’s Saskatchewan pride when you talk 

about the Riders and what the Riders do for Saskatchewan. We 

know that the Grey Cup is coming next year and hopefully that 

trend that the hometown that hosts the Grey Cup is the ones that 

win the Grey Cup in the last two years, and I’m confident that 

the Riders will be there next year in Mosaic Place. But Mosaic 

Potash sponsors that. 

 

And I can’t say enough about Mosaic Place in Moose Jaw — or 

that Mosaic also sponsors that, where the Warriors play. 

They’ve had ups and downs all season. They’ve just come off 

two major wins lately so they’re doing very well. And last year 

was a real banner year for the Moose Jaw Warriors, probably 

their best year ever in their first year at Mosaic Place. And what 

it has done for the community, what it has done for the city is 

phenomenal, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had some great concerts 

there. Alice Cooper was there. Terri Clark was there. The Nitty 

Gritty Dirt Band just performed a little while ago. I’m sorry, 

Terri Clark will be coming up later on. But the point is that 

there’s a lot of activity in Moose Jaw because of the 

contributions made by a great player in the resource sector — 

Mosaic Potash. And yet we’ve got Mulcair defining that as a 

disease. And the NDP are not supporting it. They sit on their 

hands and won’t stand up for the Saskatchewan interests. 

 

Mosaic Place also supports our communities through the Health 

Foundation, both in Regina and in Moose Jaw. At the Festival 

of Trees they’re one of the biggest contributors, and they’re 

also one of the biggest bidders when it comes to buying product 

and supporting the health foundation in both . . . [inaudible] . . . 

Mosaic also sponsors Hunger in Moose Jaw that supplies 

lunches for many needy students in the Moose Jaw area. Seven 

hundred workers that support their families at Mosaic Place, 

and hundreds of thousands of dollars that are spent in our 

community, and yet Mulcair defines us as a disease. And the 

NDP just sit on their hands. They won’t support us and they 

don’t stand up for Saskatchewan’s interests. 

 

Another major player in that very corner, Mr. Speaker, is K+S 

Potash. K+S, as you will remember, did their big sod-turning in 

June of this year to start the first new potash mine in over four 

decades. A $3.25 billion solution mine will be just on the other 

side of the Saskatchewan River just outside of Moose Jaw. K+S 

mining officials describe Moose Jaw as their home base, even 

though their head office is located in Saskatoon. It’s located 

about a half an hour out of Moose Jaw. Moose Jaw’s close 

proximity to the mine will eventually accommodate many of 

the 400 direct operational workers plus 400 contractors 

expected to be on the site working in the mine. 

 

In the meantime, peaks of over 1,000 construction workers will 

be on site. And I expect it to challenge Moose Jaw and 

surrounding communities in keeping up with the basic demands 

of food and shelter and fuel and accommodations, of course. 

 

At the company’s official sod-turning in June, the president of 

K+S in his presentation made reference and noted that the NDP 

in the ’70s virtually kicked them out of the province. And he 

made it a commitment that they would be, they are back and 

they’re back to stay. And obviously they are. They’ve started 

construction on this three and a quarter billion dollar project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is part of what keeps Saskatchewan going. 

And yet, the NDP leader, Thomas Mulcair, defines it as a 

disease. And the NDP support that, that it is a disease because 

they have said nothing to contradict it. They’ve . . . obviously in 

support. They sit on their hands and they just won’t stand up for 

the interest of Saskatchewan people. And it seems that same 

narrow-minded thought process seems to be in mind on the 

leadership that we’re seeing for the NDP and the members 

opposite. 

 

The K+S mine, the construction has started and notably 

supports the community with many other things, as Mosaic did. 

Most notably, even though they haven’t started actual 

production, it’s all costs at this point for K+S, and yet they 

come out and they sponsor the summer jamboree at Mosaic for 

Wakamow Valley. Wakamow Valley is a beautiful park in the 

heart of downtown Moose Jaw. They struggle to keep the park 

up. It’s a very nice park. It’s probably one of the gems, the 

hidden gems, of Moose Jaw. And here comes K+S and supports 

the jamboree to raise money for a lot of things. 

 

And I want to mention them and commend them for their 

involvement in the community, even though it’s all a cost 

process right now, as they haven’t sold any potash and won’t 

for a couple of years. But they are part of the community. They 

are a part of Saskatchewan. They are a part of building 

Saskatchewan. And they are a part of the resource sector that is 

so important to Saskatchewan. And Mulcair is calling it a 

disease, and the NDP won’t stand up for Saskatchewan interests 

by standing up and denouncing what Mulcair is saying. 

 

Another . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — With leave to introduce guests, please. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt . . . Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



November 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed a pleasure to introduce to this House and to you, Mahlon 

Mitchell and April Mitchell. If you could give a wave, Mahlon 

and April. And Tom Graham of course is no stranger to this 

House as president of CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 

Employees] Saskatchewan. 

 

Mahlon Mitchell is in town today speaking to the CUPE folks 

about his experience with the struggle that working people 

found themselves in Wisconsin in the last couple of years, 

particularly in terms of the budget repair bill. Mahlon ran for 

lieutenant governor in June this year, was unsuccessful in his 

bid. But what was interesting about Mahlon is he’s a 

professional firefighter. He was the youngest professional 

firefighter to reach the presidency of the state association of 

professional firefighters, and this is a major accomplishment. 

 

What was interesting in the struggle was that the firefighters 

were exempt from the budget repair bill, I understand. But the 

firefighters stood shoulder to shoulder with all the other public 

service workers in the state to make sure that they achieved 

their end. And that’s a struggle that continues on. 

 

So I’d ask all members to welcome our visitors to the 

legislature here and show them a warm welcome. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Deputy House 

Leader has moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:56.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2289 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2289 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2289 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2289 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2290, 2315 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2290 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2290 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2297 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2290 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2290 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Constituent Recognized for Service to Community 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2290 

 Movember 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2291 

 Multicultural Council Honours Volunteer 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2291 

 Government Partners With Habitat for Humanity 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2291 

 AIDS Awareness and Support 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2292 

 All Nations Job Fair 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2292 

 Provincial Budget 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2292 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 HIV Awareness Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2292 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2293 

 Anti-Bullying Strategies 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2294 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2294 

 Support for the Commercial Fishing Industry 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2295 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2295 

 Changes to Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2296 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2296 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2297 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Support for Low-Income Workers 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2297 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2297 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2298 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Second Bridge for Prince Albert 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2298, 2308 

  Hickie ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2300, 2308 

  Vermette ........................................................................................................................................................................ 2302, 2308 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2303 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2305, 2308 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2306 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2307 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2308 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2308 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2309 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and Resource Boom on Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

  Michelson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2309 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


