




















































Hansard: November 26, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 18A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2157 

 November 26, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I would like to 

introduce two separate groups of people. Firstly my first guest 

that I’d like to introduce is someone who is responsible for me 

being here, literally, is my mother, Pat Ottenbreit. Just give us a 

wave, Mom. With her are my godparents, Ange and Arnold 

Bieber from Regina. Also among the guests there today is my 

mom’s other cousin, my second cousin, Gloria Plabiak. So I 

would ask all members to welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, another significant 

group of people, constituents of mine from Yorkton. They are 

representatives of the Yorkton Regional High School robotics 

club who recently returned from São Paulo, Brazil with some 

great news. I’ll be talking more about that in a few minutes. 

 

In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Kevin Chiasson. He’s the 

expert and trainer. Kevin, just give us a wave. His son Bo 

Chiasson is one of the roboteers, I guess I would describe him 

as. With them is Jayden Leister from Yorkton, the other 

competitor. 

 

And along with them is Adrian and LeeAnne Leister, two very 

good friends of mine from Yorkton. I would say Adrian’s 

probably one of my advisers. We have coffee probably two, 

three times a week, and he’s always happy to give me insight on 

what we’re doing in this place. He’s also the general manager of 

Rilling Bus lines and operates that company with his wife, 

LeeAnne. So I’d ask all members to welcome these robotics 

people and parents to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to the rest of the members of the House, 

I’d like to introduce 24 grade 7 and 8 students from MacNeill 

School here in Regina. Accompanying these grade 7 and 8 

students is their teacher Scott Bansley. So welcome to the 

Legislative Assembly. We will be getting together later and 

having . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Dilly Bars. 

 

Ms. Ross: — No, stop that. We will be having juice and an 

opportunity to get together, and they can ask some questions 

about the Legislative Assembly. So thank you very much for 

coming and attending, and I look forward to getting together 

with you. So thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce one of Saskatchewan and Canada’s best curlers, Ms. 

Nicole Lang, who’s joined us here today. Nicole is also a 

constituent and a fourth-year business student, a graduate of 

Martin Collegiate. She was recently on Team Saskatchewan in 

the mixed nationals in Montreal, finishing fifth, and she plays 

for Team Hartung. What’s up next for Nicole is the women’s 

playdowns for the Scotties. She also has a pretty famous mom 

here in this Assembly, Ms. Iris Lang, who works in the Clerk’s 

office. 

 

I’d also like to introduce her friend that’s joining her here 

today, Ms. Ellen Glaze, a friend who studies commerce at the 

University of Saskatchewan and is originally from Riceton. 

 

So I ask all members to join with me in introducing these two 

young leaders in their province and wishing Nicole all the best 

in the rest of her curling here this year. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Request 

leave for an extended introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has asked for leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I have the honour of welcoming two very special 

young guests to our Assembly today, Mr. Daniel Peters and 

Alana Krug-MacLeod, up in your gallery. Give us a wave. 

Thank you. 

 

This summer, Mr. Speaker, these two students participated in 

the Students on Ice Arctic Youth Expedition 2012. Mr. Speaker, 

this arctic journey explored the eastern Canadian Arctic and 

western Greenland. It involved 80 international high school 

students 14 to 18 years of age and a team of 35 world-class 

scientists, historians, artists, explorers, educators, leaders, 

innovators, and polar experts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the students spent time learning about the changes 

taking place in the Arctic and how these types of changes are 

linked to broader global environmental changes. The students 

explored natural ecosystems and were asked to consider how 

can they work to bring about positive change to their lives, their 

communities, and the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, already at such a young age both students are 

wonderful role models for our province. In 2010 Alana received 

the Student Nobel Prize from the University of Saskatchewan 

for her film titled From One Tiny Seed. She was also selected 

from over 100 applicants across Canada to receive the Leacross 

Foundation Scholarship, a program that awarded Alana a trip to 

the Antarctic on an educational expedition in January of this 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

year. 

 

In addition to her remarkable accomplishments and passion for 

the environment, Alana also contributes to her local community 

garden. In her free time, Alana loves photography and film. She 

has won local and national competitions for two of her videos 

which raise awareness about the importance of our natural 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these achievements only scratch the surface of 

what Alana has accomplished in her young life. This year she 

was also awarded Saskatchewan’s Junior Citizen of the Year 

Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Daniel also joins us today. He is an honours 

student and currently spends much of his time participating in 

the Scouts Canada program. His achievements include being 

selected to attend Encounters With Canada in Ottawa to learn 

about the nation’s capital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Daniel has also achieved his Chief Scout Award 

in Scouts Canada and is currently working on his Duke of 

Edinburgh Award, an international award given in Canada. 

Along with the Scouts program, Daniel often participates in 

food drives for the food bank and fundraising to assist those 

who cannot afford to go to camp. Mr. Speaker, Daniel helps to 

organize Scout camps and aids in teaching camping skills to 

younger members. He has obtained his boating and snowmobile 

licence, firearms licence, first aid and CPR [cardiopulmonary 

resuscitation] certificate, all of which assist him with his 

outdoor initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though Daniel has faced a number of health 

challenges, nothing has stopped him from achieving his goals. 

In fact Daniel believes that life is even better when you can 

make life better for others. Mr. Speaker, during the expedition 

to the Arctic, Daniel collected soil samples to assist the 

Canadian Light Source synchrotron, Canada’s national 

synchrotron research facility, in performing acid rain research 

here in our province. 

 

Daniel’s a remarkable young man and, for his many 

accomplishments, he has also been awarded Saskatchewan’s 

Junior Citizen of the Year Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me today in 

welcoming Alana Krug-MacLeod from Aden Bowman 

Collegiate in Saskatoon and Daniel Peters from Centennial 

Collegiate in Saskatoon and their families to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to join 

with the minister opposite and welcome these two remarkable 

young people to their legislature, along with their families. 

What accomplishments and experiences these two young people 

have had to date. 

 

As I was listening to the many experiences that these young 

people have had, I thought of what sort of future these young 

people might have within our province, within our country, and 

within our world. This experience in the Arctic displays in 

many ways some of what’s best about experiential learning. 

And I’m sure we all sat here thinking, what a remarkable 

experience this must have been in discovering some of this vast 

land and some of the environmental science that’s going to be 

so important to us as we move forward. 

 

So on behalf of the official opposition I’d like to welcome these 

two young leaders and look forward to their contributions to 

their province, their country, and to our world. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to introduce a group of individuals 

seated in your gallery. Nine individuals are affiliated with the 

Parkland Christian Centre in Canora, and of course that centre 

is also affiliated with the Saskatchewan House of Prayer. So I’d 

ask for a wave when I introduce them. I’d first like to introduce 

Pastor Mavis Watson; the Bradleys, Jason and Laila Bradley 

and son Jonathan; Paul and Carmen Born and their son Logan; 

Elaine Desrochers; Richard Stadnyk; and of course from the 

Saskatchewan House of Prayer, Richard and Joanne Lepp and 

Patricia Fraser, who need no introduction. I’d ask all members 

to join me in welcoming this group to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on cell service for underserved areas 

of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cellular service to the northern hamlet of Dore Lake, 

which is located in northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

from Dore Lake, Beaupré Creek, and Big River. And I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to our provincial finances. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Success and Regina Beach. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Violence 

Against Women 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The United 

Nations General Assembly has designated November 25th as 

the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against 

Women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, violence against women takes many forms — 

physical, sexual, psychological, and economic. These forms of 

violence are interrelated and affect women across all age 

ranges. Violence against women and girls is not confined to any 

particular political or economic system, but it is prevalent in 

every society in the world. It cuts across boundaries of wealth, 

race, and culture. 

 

Six hundred and three million women live in countries where 

domestic violence is not yet considered a crime. Worldwide, up 

to 50 per cent of sexual assaults are committed against girls 

under the age of 16. As many as 1 in 4 women experience 

physical or sexual violence during pregnancy and, Mr. Speaker, 

up to 70 per cent of women in the world report having 

experienced physical and/or sexual violence at some point in 

their lifetime. 

 

The United Nations International Day of the Elimination of 

Violence Against Women calls on national government, civil 

society, non-governmental organizations, and the international 

community to join forces in addressing this global pandemic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, eliminating violence against women will take a 

concerted effort from all of us. Violence against women can no 

longer be tolerated. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Northern Economic Summit 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, November 23rd, I 

had an honour of attending the second Northern Economic 

Summit in La Ronge. The summit had over 100 participants: 

community leaders, First Nations and Métis leaders, small- and 

medium-sized business. Large corporations were also 

represented. 

 

At last year’s summit, several committees were organized to 

conduct activities under the key priority areas that were 

identified by summit participants. This year the committees 

presented updates on those projects that were completed or are 

continuing. One example of a successful project is the 

development of a northern business directory and database. 

 

The main challenge at this year’s summit was to identify 

interest in developing tools and structures to support economic 

development in the North. With funding cuts last year for the 

enterprise regions, addressing the key priority areas have 

proven extremely difficult as there is no administration support 

to organize activities. The organizers will receive the summit 

report in a few weeks, which will lay out the different options 

that participants have suggested to continue the work of 

supporting northern economic development. The organization 

will also determine what the next steps will be to carry on this 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the summit organizers and 

participants in coming together to develop a northern solution to 

address economic development issues. I look forward to 

reviewing the initiatives put forward by this year’s summit. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Women of Distinction Award 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday evening five of 

Prince Albert’s finest citizens were formally recognized for 

their contributions to our community. An inspiration to all of 

us, these five women of distinction did not ask for accolades, 

rather they saw a need, then took action. These women 

recognized how their strengths, passions, and unique skills 

could be given freely to help others. 

 

Prince Albert’s five women of distinction for 2012 are Lynda 

Monahan for arts, culture, and heritage; Leslie Blacklock for 

business, entrepreneurship, and leadership; Marilyn Young for 

education; Whitney Darchuk for young women’s leadership; 

Valarie Dewhurst for lifetime achievement. Mr. Speaker, I wish 

there was more time to highlight each of these women. 

 

Ashley Mclean, Chair of the Women of Distinction committee 

would be the first to say that the YWCA [Young Women’s 

Christian Association] was looking for outstanding women to 

honour and highlight how they contributed to their community. 

However, this year’s women of distinction would be the first to 

tell us of people that inspired them, then go on to credit others 

for their awards. Through their passions in creative writing, 

design, education, business, and research, these amazing leaders 

contributed to making our community of Prince Albert a great 

place to live, work, and play. Although these five women of 

distinction were formally recognized with awards, it is our 

community that reaps the rewards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to help me 

recognize the contributions made by these five women of 

distinction. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

New Project for Broadway Business Improvement District 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Broadway Business 

Improvement District in the heart of Saskatoon Nutana was 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

formed in 1986 to encourage good community relations through 

yearly programming, popular activities, and bringing local 

concerns to municipal government. The themed street with 

lampposts, cobblestones, and park benches creates Broadway’s 

unique community character. And with Nutana’s small town 

appeal, the revitalization of the commercial district, and a short 

walk to downtown and the University of Saskatchewan, the 

Broadway Business Improvement District has created one of 

the city’s most desirable neighbourhoods. 

 

Today there are more than 160 businesses that belong to the 

Broadway BID [business improvement district]. The BID 

blends trendsetting culture and history. The Broadway BID is 

proud to be part of an exciting new project. Shawn Storry, who 

is a cultural heritage mapping student at the University of 

Saskatchewan, is working on an innovative project that links 

cultural heritage, learning, and technology together. 

 

Appealing to smart phone users, the BBID has come up with a 

great way to engage these users and invite them to learn about 

Broadway. As you tour the street, many shop windows have 

installed QR codes, an acronym for quick response codes. 

Using your smart phone as your tour guide, you can scan these 

codes as you stroll, shop, eat, or listen to live music, and be 

linked instantly to great information about the coded building 

with photographs, interviews, past businesses, owners, and the 

stories that tie the past into the present. Congratulations to the 

Broadway Business Improvement District and Shawn Storry for 

putting together this great project. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Saskatchewan Philanthropists Honoured 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I rise in the House today to recognize two remarkable 

Saskatchewan philanthropists, Grant and Liza Kook of 

Saskatoon. The members from Saskatoon Southeast, Saskatoon 

Northwest and I had the opportunity on November 22nd to 

attend the Saskatoon United Way 2012 Gold Hearts Gala 

honouring Grant and Liza Kook for their outstanding dedication 

to community service. This amazing couple was recognized for 

their embodiment of the true spirit of the United Way, building 

community and motivating others to make a difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, close to 800 people packed TCU Place in 

Saskatoon to honour this couple, and a United Way record 

amount of money was raised. Grant and Liza have a long 

history of giving back to the community for their work: their 

work with the Children’s Hospital Foundation for example, the 

Vanier Cup, SaskTel, community councils and committees, and 

various other community children’s programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Grant and Liza have generously contributed their 

time and energy to our province. They have shown exceptional 

leadership and are passionate about the work they do to 

strengthen not only the city of Saskatoon, but indeed the 

province of Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the Kooks on receiving the 2012 United Way 

Golden Heart. And I ask all members to join me in thanking 

them for making Saskatoon and Saskatchewan a better place. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Yorkton Regional High School Robotics Team 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to 

bring to the attention of this Assembly an amazing 

accomplishment and rise in the House today to congratulate the 

Yorkton Regional High School robotics team on their very 

recent first place finish at the WorldSkills Americas 2012 

competition. 

 

WorldSkills Americas takes place every two years and brings 

together the world's brightest youth in skilled trades and 

technology from countries and regions within the Americas. 

Mr. Speaker, Bo Chiasson and Jayden Leister represented the 

team and travelled to São Paulo, Brazil accompanied by their 

trainer and coach, Mr. Kevin Chiasson, to compete in the 

robotics division for team Canada, winning first place in the 

division with a score of 91 out of 100 total points. 

 

Kevin started the extracurricular robotics club three years ago 

with three students. In the second year they grew to 12 students. 

In the third year they doubled to 24 students, Mr. Speaker. Ever 

since they started building robots, the YRHS [Yorkton Regional 

High School] robotics club have been making their mark. In 

fact the Yorkton Regional High School club has gone 

undefeated in 2012, including first place at the Canadian 

provincials, first place at the Canadian nationals, first place at 

the WorldSkills Americas competition. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

summer they will be competing in the WorldSkills International 

in Leipzig, Germany from July 2nd to the 7th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

Yorkton Regional High School robotics team on their past 

success and wish them good luck in their coming competitions. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Tisdale Hero 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I would like to acknowledge a brave young man from 

Tisdale. Grade 6 student Chase Armstrong attends Tisdale 

Middle & Secondary School. He’s an active player in soccer, 

bowling, and is learning to play the alto saxophone. He is 

outgoing and well-liked, and after a recent incident, Mr. 

Speaker, he is also a hero. 

 

Chase was walking home from school with his siblings and his 

best friend, Parker. After realizing that a vehicle was about to 

strike his friend, Chase pushed Parker out of the way and was 

struck by the vehicle. The impact threw him into a nearby 

snowbank. With the help of his siblings, he made it the three 

blocks home and the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

were contacted. Fortunately Chase was released from the 

hospital that evening with no broken bones but did receive 

some injuries to the right side of his body due to the impact. 

 

Chase risked his own health to put the safety of his friend 

before his own. At 11 years of age, Chase embodies the type of 

person we should all strive to be. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

members to join with me in commending Chase’s actions and 

congratulating him on his act of bravery. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Health Care for Refugees 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in question 

period, I raised the case of a man who was denied cancer care 

because of the federal Conservatives’ decision to eliminate 

health care for refugees here in Canada. The case highlighted 

the mean-spirited nature of the cuts by the federal government, 

and it also underscored the confusion that exists within 

provinces, Mr. Speaker, as ministries, health providers, and 

refugees don’t know what is covered and what isn’t covered. 

 

I’d like to compliment the Premier for his harsh words about the 

decisions the federal government made, and I’d like to thank the 

Health minister for providing coverage for the man’s 

anti-nausea medications. I believe both of these actions were the 

right thing to do. 

 

On this issue, my question to the Health minister: beyond the 

events of last week, what actions are currently under way in 

order to pressure the federal government to reinstate coverage 

for refugees here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to thank the member for his question and his comments. 

Certainly this case that came up in the House last week 

highlighted really a significant issue and a problem that not 

only the province of Saskatchewan but other provinces have 

with the decision of the federal government. Certainly Health 

ministers raised this issue with the federal Health minister this 

summer. 

 

As well I can tell the House that members of the Ministry of 

Health have had a number of teleconferences with federal 

officials to try to determine what exactly is intended by the 

changes and what will be covered going forward. Those 

conversations continue. As well I am writing to the Minister of 

Immigration seeking clarification and a review of the decision 

that was made by the federal government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very, very 

pleased that the man who needs cancer care is receiving the 

treatment that he needs. That’s a positive thing. But in order for 

that to happen, Mr. Speaker, the man needed a strong advocate 

in the role of Sister Carol. Questions had to be asked in question 

period and there was considerable media attention. It was 

through those steps, Mr. Speaker, that the right care has been 

put in place. After those steps occurred, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that there are . . . Change was realized for this individual and 

that’s good. 

 

We know there are other individuals, other refugees, Mr. 

Speaker, who may not have an advocate that we’ve seen for this 

man, Mr. Speaker, and may not have the attention to their case. 

My question to the minister: can he guarantee that there are not 

other refugees here in the province who are falling through the 

cracks with respect to receiving necessary medical care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 

member, I want to thank him for that question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell the member and members of this House 

that the deputy minister of Health has had a conference call 

with CEOs [chief executive officer] of all the health regions to 

outline the position of the provincial government while we 

work through this process of having the federal government 

review the changes that were made and the impacts that it has 

on the province. 

 

The message which was reinforced at that time, Mr. Speaker, 

which I think was reinforced in this House last week, is that 

going, Mr. Speaker . . . is that the provincial government will 

ensure that emergent and urgent care as defined by CIHI 

[Canadian Institute of Health Information] will be provided to 

refugees, Mr. Speaker, that fall outside of the health program 

provided by the federal government as well as imminent events, 

Mr. Speaker, whether that be childbirth or Caesarean section for 

women that are expecting in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of confusion in the 

province with respect to what is covered and what is not 

covered, and the minister detailed some of that information 

now. 

 

Last week the minister himself talked about the confusion that 

is present: 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to this point there is certainly still a lot 

of confusion between the federal government and 

provincial Health ministries in terms of what exactly is 

being covered because it’s not exactly clear which 

categories are not being covered with supplementary 

benefits. [Last week from the minister.] 

 

We can imagine, Mr. Speaker, if the ministry, if health region 

CEOs are confused about what is covered and what is not 

covered, we can imagine how confusing it would be for health 

care providers that are delivering care, not to mention refugees 

who may not have a perfect command of English, as one 

example. We know, Mr. Speaker, when confusion reigns, there 

is a tendency, Mr. Speaker, for people to fall through the cracks 

if they don’t know the information. 

 

I recognize some initial steps may be taken, Mr. Speaker, but 

last week the minister said he wanted to handle these cases on a 

case-by-case basis and not make a change in policy. My 

question to the minister: is he content to still handle situations 

like this on a case-by-case basis? 

 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly want to ensure that we are putting the 

patient first, Mr. Speaker, particularly in regards to refugees 

who are in many cases if not all cases, Mr. Speaker, arriving to 

Canada and to Saskatchewan under extreme situations of 

distress and what could only be a very difficult situation for 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that in those situations, where 

they are life-threatening, where it is urgent and emergent care 

and treatment that is required, Mr. Speaker, that we will provide 

that, Mr. Speaker. That’s why in fact we were providing 

chemotherapy to no cost of the patient, Mr. Speaker, prior to 

this issue being raised in this House last week. We’ll continue 

to do so in those cases and, Mr. Speaker, we will ensure that the 

Ministry of Health is working with all of our health regions so 

that that information is provided to providers throughout the 

health regions to ensure that that actually takes place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know when confusion reigns 

people do fall through the cracks. The minister is correct that 

the province was covering the man’s chemotherapy treatments, 

but the man was not receiving coverage for the anti-nausea 

medication. And that’s the problem, Mr. Speaker, in dealing 

with these situations case by case. Other provinces have 

recognized this and seen that, when there is confusion, people 

do fall through the cracks. Because of that, Manitoba has 

stepped forward and they’re filling the gap, Mr. Speaker, that 

has been left by the federal government through their 

mean-spirited decision. 

 

My question to the provincial Health minister here: recognizing 

that people do fall through the cracks and not receive the care 

that they need, as evidenced by the man who did not have his 

anti-nausea meds, will the provincial government also do the 

right thing and fill the gap that is left by the federal government 

in order to ensure people aren’t left in a state of confusion about 

what is covered, what is not, resulting, Mr. Speaker, in people 

either not accessing care or health providers not providing care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we are certainly going to, as the Ministry of Health, 

first of all continue to press the federal government to revisit the 

changes that they made in April and subsequent to those 

changes. As well, Mr. Speaker, we are going to be working with 

our health regions, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that that information 

is provided in terms of the coverage that the province will fill, 

making sure that, Mr. Speaker, we are going to cover those 

costs. We are going to cover those costs and deal with our 

dealings with Ottawa and the federal government at a later date, 

Mr. Speaker, ensuring that the patient doesn’t have to worry 

about those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this case or in any other cases, what has been 

communicated in our understanding was that needs that were 

urgent and essential in nature would be covered. Mr. Speaker, 

as the case indicated last week, this was not the case. Mr. 

Speaker, as chemotherapy or any types of these types of 

life-threatening procedures would indicate, if they’re not urgent 

or essential, Mr. Speaker, then I’m not sure what is. We’ll 

continue to press the federal government on this matter. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Housing Needs 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, with the low vacancy rate right across Saskatchewan 

for places to rent, the lack of affordable housing is a 

Saskatchewan-made crisis. That’s why it makes absolutely no 

sense that tenants of social housing are being called and told 

they must vacate the premises. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because the 

Sask Party government, in the midst of a cold, snowy winter, 

wants to boot them from their homes. They want to sell these 

homes because that’s apparently the cornerstone of their 

affordable housing strategy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the CEO of Sask Housing said the phone 

calls to the tenants were made in error. But why can’t the 

minister admit the real error is the Sask Party government’s 

lack of any of action on affordable housing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, 

what the member opposite should talk about is the efforts that 

we have made in affordable housing. We’ve funded over 2,000 

new units for $182 million since 2007, and we’ve funded over 

$114 million in investments, Mr. Speaker, to repair homes. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that there are people that are living in 

social housing right now with incomes, some of them as much 

$100,000. We know people that need social housing are making 

a lot less money than that, so we sent out letters to individuals 

advising them that within the year, there’ll be opportunities for 

them to move into another place if their income is at the level 

that warrants it. There are individuals who are making a lot of 

money — from 4,600 to $9,400 a year — that we do not believe 

belong in social housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more work to be done, and we want to 

ensure that people have a place to live that’s safe and warm in 

our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the error of this 

government to ignore the housing crisis will be one of the worst 

legacies of this Sask Party government. People in communities, 

large and small, cannot find decent, affordable housing, and the 

vacancy rate here in Saskatchewan, in Regina is below 1 per 

cent because the Sask Party hasn’t made building affordable 

housing a priority. And there’s been housing summits and 

forums, and still the projects are stalled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the planned sell-off of social housing lands 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

squarely on this minister’s desk. It is that government who 

wants to force people out of their homes. Why are tenants being 

told they should look at their options for a new place to live 

when the minister clearly should know these places don’t exist? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am well aware that the 

member opposite knows that we’re going to be spending $344 

million on housing through this government up to the year 

2015-16. Mr. Speaker, that member also knows that in its last 

year, they built 58 units. Mr. Speaker, we know that the social 

housing that we have right now has got some tenants in there 

that have the means to live outside of the social housing units 

that we have. 

 

We’re going to reinvest about $53 million into more 

multi-density homes within our city, but no one is going to be 

asked to leave the place that they’re in right now until there is 

someplace for them to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all the savings, all the money that is invested that 

we receive in Regina will go back into housing in Regina. 

We’re going to be working with tenants on a one-to-one basis 

and, Mr. Speaker, the families will have the opportunity to buy 

these homes if they qualify for a CMHC [Canada Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation] mortgage. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, living on the street isn’t an option 

but until there are affordable housing options for people, the 

risk of turning people on to the streets exists. It’s unbecoming 

of a government who claims to support Saskatchewan people to 

force them out of their homes. Until the options are actually 

built, it’s ridiculous that people will have to be told that they 

have to leave their homes. 

 

Now Sask Housing said the content of the calls was in error. 

But they shouldn’t have been making the calls in the first place, 

and they wouldn’t have been made in the first place if the Sask 

Party had any ideas about housing that didn’t require the 

sell-off of social housing units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, until there are actually affordable housing options 

in our communities, where does the minister think people 

should live? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have told the member 

opposite that anyone that’s in a social housing right now, if 

their income is below the $46,000, they will not be asked to go 

unless there’s another place for them to live. The people that 

have a higher income can look for other places to live. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would much prefer to have someone with a 

high income look for a house to live than someone with a low 

income looking for a place to live. Mr. Speaker, there are 

opportunities for people who have higher incomes to go 

looking. I would rather . . . A family that has got two children 

that are making less than $20,000 a year needs government 

support, and that’s where we are going. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

State of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, after their spring budget of 

hurtful cuts to seniors, students, and the film industry, at the 

financial first quarter the Sask Party announced another $55 

million of new cuts, but there was no explanation and no detail. 

Now we’re on the cusp of the mid-year financial report, and 

clearly the Sask Party has created a budget that’s off track once 

again. People and communities are rightfully nervous about 

where the axe will fall and who will pay the price. Mr. Speaker, 

with the mid-term financials being released tomorrow, who is 

going to pay the price for the Sask Party’s faulty budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for that question. And as he’s alluded to, the mid-year 

will be presented tomorrow and all of the information necessary 

to show that this province is going to be on track, that this 

province is going to be, I believe, the only province who will 

still have a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member also knows that during the course of a 

year when we budget an $11.1 billion expenditure, there are 

always things that don’t occur by the end of the year, and 

normally that fall-off is about $75 million. It involves 

vacancies. It involves shifting. It does not involve any program 

cuts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I ask the member to stay tuned for tomorrow’s mid-year, 

and as I said once before in this House, he’ll be pleasantly 

surprised at the growth and the resiliency of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister references those things that 

don’t occur throughout a budget year. It’s sort of like those 

promised balanced budgets over the past few years, only to see, 

at the end of year, three consecutive deficit budgets, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Last year the Sask Party promised it wouldn’t touch the money 

of SaskPower. This follows their raiding of over $2 billion from 

the Crown sector in their very short tenure in government. But 

they broke that promise and stripped over $120 million from 

SaskPower in a late, unplanned cash grab. Now we see cuts to 

rural service centres and a rate hike of nearly $100 million 

being forced upon ratepayers, a direct hit for families and 

businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party going to pretend to balance the 

budget once again on the backs of ratepayers and our Crown 

utilities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the only pretending that occurred was last year during the 

election campaign when that member and his colleagues 

projected a $5 billion expenditure, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 

where that member keeps finding the words deficit, but you 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

know, it must be that NDP [New Democratic Party] calculator, 

Mr. Speaker, because you know, it produces a different number, 

it produces a different deficit every time you put in a number. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan recognize that we 

have lowered the debt of this province. We lowered the debt 

from $6.8 billion, Mr. Speaker, down to 3.8 billion. That’s 

phenomenal, Mr. Speaker. You know, at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, since 2007 we’ve made significant changes to the 

personal income tax. Mr. Speaker, up to today, up to this year, 

$450 million have been saved in the pockets of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers, and we still have balanced budgets. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, for that minister opposite, 

reporting our finances is nothing more than a game of spin, Mr. 

Speaker. The Sask Party’s record, as verified by the Provincial 

Auditor of our province, is that of three consecutive deficit 

budgets — this in supposed good times. 

 

And the Sask Party have created another faulty budget and now 

they’re scrambling. They’re selling off assets: ISC [Information 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], affordable homes and 

land, taking a costly privatized approach to infrastructure, 

raiding another $200 million from our rainy day fund, and 

further cuts for families are looming. These are nothing more 

than short-sighted actions from a government scrambling to 

pretend that it has a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the province’s finances, when 

will this government get its act together? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty 

clear where the NDP stand on the growth of Saskatchewan. The 

Leader of the Opposition refers to the economy of 

Saskatchewan as a myth. It’s a myth, Mr. Speaker. And today 

the member opposite stands and says, supposed growth in 

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to read a quote to 

the member opposite and let him understand what growth does 

for an economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this quote is this. It said: 

 

Here is the acid test of any government: is the population 

growing or is it decreasing? Are we getting people to 

come here because there are jobs and hope and 

opportunity for the future? Or have we faced massive job 

cuts, loss, massive outflow, and exodus by the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that quote was made on April 19th, 1989 by Roy 

Romanow. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Community Pastures 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, 

community pasture patrons met with other concerned citizens to 

discuss the federal government’s hasty off-loading of the 

management of the 62 federal community pastures. 

 

The minister’s initial plan to sell off these pastures is meeting 

resistance by the patrons. The minister has tried to soften 

resistance by offering them money to pay for consultants and 

business plans, but that won’t help them find the money to buy. 

Patrons are worried they will not be able to afford continuing 

operations if forced to buy the land from the government. And 

people are concerned about reports that foreign investors have 

offered to pay cash outright for these pastures. If this happens, 

these heritage lands will be lost to the people of Saskatchewan 

forever. 

 

To the minister: what is his hurry? And how will he build in 

safeguards and conditions in these unwelcome forced sales to 

prevent a land flip to foreign investors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for her question. As the member knows, this is a 

federal initiative. The federal government is getting out of the 

business of operating the pastures known as the PFRA [Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Administration] community pastures. And 

because of the contents of an agreement that was signed 

between the provinces and the federal government in 1939, 

when the federal government gets out of the pasture managing 

business, those lands revert to the provinces that they are in, and 

we have this to deal with. 

 

We’re not going to operate them as a provincial government 

entity. We believe that the best people to operate those pastures 

are the patrons, the cattle producers that are actually out there 

on the land, Mr. Speaker, making a living on the land and have 

a vested interest in maintaining the environment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the patrons are speaking out. 

They know that the support from management of these pastures, 

from the federal government through the pasture managers and 

the other support staff, has been world-class. And that’s what 

they’re worried about losing. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, people are concerned about what the 

province is going to do about our provincial community 

pastures. In addition to the federal lands, the province also 

currently manages over 600,000 acres of community pastures of 

our own. But with the trend of privatization and valuable asset 

sales from this government, there’s a real worry that these lands 

will also be put on the auction block. Is the Sask Party 

government also considering the sell-off of the provincial 

community pasture lands? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — No, we’re not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Excellent pasture 

managers have been on the range for decades, ensuring the 

lands are grazed properly and keeping them in top shape for 

both the cattle and the endangered species. These managers and 

their families are integral members of the nearby communities. 

Now their livelihoods are at risk, and the patrons are concerned 

about how they will be able to manage without them. They 

stand to lose a vital component of the success of these pastures, 

putting them at risk. 

 

At their annual meeting on May 29th, the Stock Growers 

Association passed this resolution: 

 

That the SSGA lobby on behalf of producers to see that 

any changes in management of the PFRA pasture system 

be passed on to provincial or patron management. 

 

To the minister: with the abandonment of this essential 

management by the feds, will this government take the time to 

ensure, as the patrons are requesting, that the lands will 

continue to be properly managed? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

knows or ought to know that the time frame for the transfer of 

these pastures is not one that we control. It’s controlled by the 

federal government. We believe that farmers and ranchers are 

the best stewards of our agricultural land. Any pastures that are 

sold . . . And I repeat for I don’t know how many times, they 

may be sold or they may be leased, and there’s no, as was 

alleged by the member in her first question, there is no reason 

that any patron can’t afford to be involved in one of those or the 

other. 

 

Any pasture that is sold though will be complete with a no 

break, no drain conservation easement that will follow the land, 

regardless of ownership, in perpetuity. Species at risk will 

continue to be protected on these lands as it is on all privately or 

publicly owned land in Saskatchewan. Although this new-found 

interest in agriculture from the NDP is touching, it’s 

ill-founded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is well aware that 

the speed of the sale is entirely within his control. He can keep 

these lands as long as he wants. But he’s the one that’s in a rush 

to sell them. He’s aware of the concerns that the patrons have. 

He’s also aware of the concerns of the public. He has received 

over 8,500 emails in the last two months about this issue. The 

patrons and the public are saying, what is the rush? Why can’t 

the minister slow down the process to ensure that a suitable 

win-win solution be found to replace the current situation? 

 

In addition to the SSGA [Saskatchewan Stock Growers 

Association], SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] also passed a resolution two weeks ago which 

requested this government to retain ownership of the pastures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the Sask Party on full speed forward with the 

ill-advised plan to sell off these lands, will the minister take 

these resolutions seriously? Will he work to keep our province’s 

community pastures as the vital component of our livestock 

sector that they are today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are 

warming my heart with their new-found interest in agriculture 

and rural Saskatchewan and agricultural producers. But here’s 

an interesting quote from a long-time NDP supporter and 

former director of the previously compulsory Wheat Board 

here, Ian McCreary, where he says in The Commonwealth, 

which is the NDP’s own in-house membership magazine to 

their membership, he says this, and I quote: “There are many 

reasons why progressive people in rural Saskatchewan no 

longer support the NDP.” And the quote continues: 

 

. . . the Romanow administration made cuts which 

disproportionately affected rural people. Over fifty rural 

hospitals were closed. We withdrew from the national 

farm income support program during the lowest farm 

income period in the grains and oilseed sector. The rural 

road network, taxed by a rapidly centralizing elevator 

system began a rapid process of decline. 

 

And he goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 79, The 

Representation Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General, first reading of Bill No. 79, The 

Representation Act, 2012. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 78, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 

2012 now be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these very important amendments to The Social 

Workers Act will, amongst other things, allow qualified clinical 

social workers to diagnose mental health disorders. Prior to 

2002, qualified social workers were allowed to diagnose mental 

health disorders. However, that situation changed with the 

proclamation of section 22 of The Psychologists Act in 2002 

which restricted diagnosis only to qualified medical 

practitioners and members of the Saskatchewan College of 

Psychologists. 

 

By granting qualified social workers registered with the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers or SASW the 

authority to make mental health related diagnoses, we can 

improve client services throughout our province. These 

amendments can create a framework which will then allow our 

government to work with the SASW and other partners on 

regulatory bylaws and the accreditation requirements to ensure 

social workers who wish to diagnose are completely qualified to 

do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one example of how our government is 

working with our many partners to improve capacity across the 

board. So I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not making 

this change for the sake of change itself. Currently there are 

only 78 psychologists and 36 psychiatrists working in the 

Saskatchewan mental health outpatient services. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers has told us 

that they’re up to 50 social workers who may currently qualify 

to perform diagnoses. Permitting these individuals to diagnose 

will increase the capacity of the system. Alberta and British 

Columbia allow qualified social workers to diagnose, and their 

model works very well. Ontario also permits diagnostic 

privileges as defined and managed by that province’s 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in mental health at child and youth services alone, 

70 per cent of clients have behavioural disorders that could be 

diagnosed by qualified social workers if this privilege is 

granted. As the most common professional group, the ability of 

social workers to diagnose is necessary if we want clients to 

receive the help they need, when they need it. 

 

The Minister of Health has informed me that the wait times to 

see a psychiatrist in one of the regional health authorities can be 

as high as three to six months. As a government we are 

committed to lowering wait times throughout the health care 

system, throughout government actually. This initiative is 

another example of our commitment to lowering the amount of 

time citizens of this province have to wait for very important 

services. 

 

The advantages of the amendments are many. They include 

earlier access to treatment, greater flexibility in how providers 

can be used to diagnose treatment of mental health disorders 

while ensuring the highest ethical and safety standards are met. 

 

Ministry of Health officials, the Saskatchewan Association of 

Social Workers, and the Saskatchewan College of Psychologists 

all agree the current situation is hindering access to mental 

health services, particularly in smaller health regions and rural 

and remote areas of the province where there are no 

psychologists on staff. Authorizing qualified clinical social 

workers to diagnose conditions such as depression, 

post-traumatic stress disorder, intellectual disabilities, or autism 

spectrum disorder will help people in these regions to get the 

mental health services they need much faster. 

 

Accreditation or endorsement requirements will be established 

within the SASW’s regulatory bylaws. This will ensure that 

social workers giving diagnostic responsibilities are completely 

qualified to do so. 

 

These amendments will also make sure that the SASW is fully 

accountable for the monitoring and enforcement of diagnosis 

within the social work profession. Mr. Speaker, most clients 

who enter the mental health system never actually see a 

psychiatrist or a psychologist. In these cases the responsibility 

for diagnosing, treating, and referring those people could be 

undertaken by social workers who are authorized to diagnose. 

As I mentioned, there are 114 psychologists and psychiatrists 

working in the mental health sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 114 people is not enough to meet the growing 

demand for diagnostic services in a growing province. That’s 

why we’ve introduced these amendments to add up to 50 

qualified social workers to increase capacity. As you can see, 

the amendments will improve our mental health services system 

and, most importantly, improve the lives of our most vulnerable 

citizens. These people deserve the best services and treatment 

options we can find, Mr. Speaker, and these amendments will 

go a long way to ensuring we do just that. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to move the Bill 78, The 

Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 be read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 78, The Social Workers Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure . . . I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased to have the opportunity to respond on behalf of the 

official opposition after seeing the bill. And obviously, if I 

could follow the minister’s comments in the intent behind the 

bill, as how she wants to allow some of the social workers the 

ability to change, in all the regulations, the ability to diagnose 

some of the mental health conditions that may occur from time 

to time when they’re exposed to different families, different 

people — the social workers are — that they’re able to diagnose 

some of the challenges that they may have, whether it’s a 

mental illness or whether it’s an addiction problem or other 

issues that she made reference to that the social workers might 

be able to get involved. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously it’s important to note that the 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

social workers play a very important role in the chain of service 

and support toward those families that do need our assistance. 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, coming from an area where there is 

a lot of exposure to the social income support programs in 

northern Saskatchewan, to be able to see some of the changes 

that the minister is alluding to at the outset, one might think that 

this is going to be of help, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the real problem, the crux of the problem, I think quite 

frankly, is going to be the after care, Mr. Speaker. Because what 

we’re seeing time and time again, Mr. Speaker, is that when 

you have bills of this sort that are coming forward — Bill 78 

allowing social workers to look at identifying and certainly 

diagnosing some mental health conditions that some of their 

client base might have — now, Mr. Speaker, the client base 

itself, the problem that we have within the NDP opposition is 

that as you have more ability to diagnose, Mr. Speaker, then 

obviously you’re going to uncover more and more problems. 

 

And we can see from the actions of this particular government, 

the Sask Party government, that their intent is to not provide 

those services even after diagnosis. So when the minister talks 

about improving service and improving opportunity and 

improving the ability to respond to some of these cases, Mr. 

Speaker, my only argument I would point out is I want to make 

sure that people out there know that if you have the ability to 

diagnose, what happens following diagnosis, Mr. Speaker? The 

logical step is going to be for treatment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the minister talks about treatment after the fact and 

then you see some of the evidence of the Sask Party 

government where they have actually cut back a lot of 

programs. They have cut back. They have let go of a lot of 

social workers. They have taken a lot of the support 

mechanisms away from some of the social workers, Mr. 

Speaker. And I look at some of the comments of the social 

workers’ association. And obviously, you know, the social 

workers that work for the government aren’t going to be very or 

highly critical because they’re professional people. Their job is 

to not get into politics obviously, Mr. Speaker. So they will do 

their very best to avoid making any controversial comments, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the point I would make here, Mr. Speaker, is that the social 

workers, the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers 

president, Joanne Schenn, said in a news release the group is, 

and I quote: 

 

“. . . very pleased and challenged by the trust” placed in it 

by Draude [of course I’m doing the quote here, Mr. 

Speaker] “by proposing the extension of diagnostic 

privilege to the profession of social work.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at that statement and Ms. Schenn, 

being the president of the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers, really quite frankly hit the nail on the head. She’s 

pleased that they have the confidence and the trust being placed 

in the social workers that she represents as the president. But, 

Mr. Speaker, she’s also challenged by the trust. And that’s 

really what’s really, really important, Mr. Speaker, because 

you’ve obviously got to be able to respond to a huge issue of 

trust when they’re giving the trust to the social workers and all 

of a sudden they have the ability to diagnose. 

There’s only about 50 of them that I’ve heard the minister speak 

about. There’s only about 50 of these social workers that have 

the diagnostic ability and that she wants to remove any 

impediments for these social workers to be able to diagnose 

freely. Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously it’s a credit to the social 

workers that are out there, that have spent many hours on the 

road, that have counselled many families. They have the 

additional duties now of being able to or should be able to 

diagnose some of mental health conditions that may be 

happening with some of their client base. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s a lot of extra work. It’s a lot of extra 

responsibility. But I believe the hidden message made by Ms. 

Schenn is that the trust placed in it is a huge, huge undertaking 

by the social workers. Because obviously I think that the social 

workers out there will tell you that this Sask Party government 

is cutting programs. They’re cutting vacancies within the social 

workers that are out in the province. They’re cutting program 

support to the client base that the social workers are supposed to 

work with. Now you have the added responsibility of 

diagnosing some mental illnesses, but really there’s no services 

available after diagnosis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I look at the comment made by Ms. Schenn. And from my 

vantage point, what I interpret when she says, there’s the trust 

placed in us, a trust that people will certainly look to the social 

workers for answers and for solutions when, Mr. Speaker, they 

can diagnose. But many social workers will know there isn’t the 

support services at all that the minister was speaking about 

when she said, when once the diagnosis is done, we’ll try and 

— as the words that she pointed out — improve the lives of 

those being diagnosed, when we in the opposition know that’s 

absolutely false. They will not do anything, Mr. Speaker, to 

help those people that have been diagnosed. 

 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of people out there 

that really have some mental health issues and some challenges 

out there. And it’s great to be able to finally diagnose some of 

those problems, but there’s no services and no supports out 

there to address them and, as the minister so callously said, to 

try and improve the lives of these people that have some mental 

illness or some mental challenges, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to give you a good example, Mr. Speaker, of what I 

mean, of what I mean, the fallacy of this particular minister and 

this government, Mr. Speaker. And this bill, Bill 78 relies on 

the professionalism and the integrity of the social workers that 

work for the government throughout our system, Mr. Speaker. 

And rightfully so you should, you should really support the 

integrity and the professionalism of social workers. These are 

ladies and gentlemen that have worked for many, many years. 

They are trained, Mr. Speaker, to be able to do a wide variety of 

things, and the training is pretty dramatic at times. 

 

And certainly I think, Mr. Speaker, when I say dramatic, I mean 

there is family breakups. There’s children being involved. 

There’s safety issues. But these social workers are indeed 

trained for those circumstances, and they go through a great 

deal of rigour through their training methods. And that’s the 

important point that I would make, that it’s not an easy program 

to graduate from, and it’s not a very easy job to be good at. 



2168 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

So the social workers themselves have a tremendous challenge 

in front of them. And I think the worry that they have is they 

have the ability to now diagnose illnesses, as the minister spoke 

about. There’s only about 50 of them. But the worry that they 

have: once we diagnose a problem, where’s the aftercare? 

Where’s the support mechanisms? Where’s the respect for some 

of the work that we’re doing in diagnosing these patients to 

make sure that they get the proper treatment, Mr. Speaker? And 

I can tell you that when the minister uses the words, to improve 

the lives of those people that have been diagnosed, we in the 

opposition know, Mr. Speaker, that that’s not going to be the 

case at all. 

 

And I want to give you a good example, Mr. Speaker, a really 

good example: Wesley Smith. Mr. Smith is a gentleman from 

the Meadow Lake area. And, Mr. Speaker, from November 

20th, 2012, last week in the Northern Pride, it shows on the 

first page Mr. Smith being evicted from his home. He’s being 

evicted from his home, Mr. Speaker. Why? Because his mother 

moved into a lodge and his two sisters that he was living with in 

this home — there’s four of them living in this home, I’m 

assuming — that they have been moved to a group home. And 

now Mr. Smith who, according to the newspaper, Mr. Speaker, 

“Wesley is 51 years of age and has intellectual disabilities.” 

That was a quote in the Northern Pride, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I can almost guarantee you that some social worker in 

Meadow Lake may have identified Mr. Smith as having certain 

challenges, and income being one of them, and having a home 

is another. And what does she now do? What do the social 

workers do in the case of Mr. Smith, Mr. Speaker? This is a 

very public document, the Northern Pride. It’s a newspaper that 

is delivered around the Meadow Lake area. And Mr. Smith now 

doesn’t have a home. And the headline, Mr. Speaker, says 

“Falling through the cracks.” “Meadow Lake man forced from 

his home.” That’s the subtitle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly the point that I’m trying to make in reference 

to this particular bill. It’s fine to be able to afford some of the 

social workers who I spoke about earlier that have years of 

experience and went to school specifically for their jobs. It’s a 

very daunting challenge to be a social worker in this day and 

age. They go to school for that. They have some professional 

ethic, and they have years of service, many of them. They know 

what they’re doing. 

 

And now when you have the added responsibility of diagnosing 

some of your client base, and there’s only 50 of these social 

workers, Mr. Speaker, that have the proper skill level and the 

proper skill set to be able to diagnose, the question that I think 

they would want to ask this minister, this government, this 

Premier, this Sask Party government is, following the diagnosis, 

how do we ensure that the proper services and the proper 

support mechanisms are in place for some of the client bases 

that we have diagnosed as having some intellectual challenges? 

That’s the real question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think when social workers assume this responsibility, 

instinctively they want to be able to respond to some of the 

challenges that some of the people that they’ve diagnosed, that 

these challenges are being met. Instinctively they want to be 

able to do that. But, Mr. Speaker, they can’t do that because 

they know and we know that this current government is not 

going to put the proper and necessary service supports in place 

for many of the people that may have been diagnosed with a 

number of potential mental illnesses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I look at this example of Wesley Smith, Mr. Speaker, 51 

years old, and according to one of the spokespersons, he has 

some intellectual challenges. And now Mr. Smith has no home, 

Mr. Speaker. He has no home to go to. And was this any of his 

fault? Was this Mr. Smith’s fault that the home that he was 

living in is being taken away? When you’re 51 years old and 

you have certain challenges and all of a sudden you’re being 

forced to move from your house and you don’t understand why, 

well, Mr. Speaker, that’s our point here in opposition. 

 

And I think that’s a subtle point in some of the comments of the 

social workers’ association president when she said, we’re 

challenged by the trust placed in us. And to me I interpret that 

as saying it is fine to provide the diagnostic ability for some of 

the social workers that have the skill set and the mindset to do 

so, but the aftercare and the programs following that diagnosis 

is where this government is failing these people on a huge basis, 

Mr. Speaker. It is a huge problem for them, and the social 

workers know that. The opposition know that, and most of the 

people of Saskatchewan know that. 

 

And that’s exactly why some of the comments and the question 

by my colleague from Saskatoon Centre today that spoke of 

another example of how some of the people that are being 

forced out of their social housing units for a number of reasons 

that we can’t seem to understand as opposition, and they don’t 

understand, Mr. Speaker. That is where they have lived for a 

long time. That is their home. That’s the roof over their head. 

And all of a sudden you get a call saying you have to leave this 

particular home after a certain date, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s 

very callous, and it totally disregards the value of a human 

person, of a human life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly I think the point made by the president when 

she talked about the issue of being challenged by the trust 

placed in them because they know that trust is something that 

the social workers take very seriously. They’re very 

professional in how they do their work. They’re very 

confidential in how to deal with claims and with the client base, 

Mr. Speaker. And then you see examples of Mr. Smith here, 

who has clearly identified a need for help. And, Mr. Speaker, all 

he gets is a notice to vacate his home. There is no follow-up or 

follow-through to Mr. Smith’s circumstances. There’s no 

respect for the fact that he’s being evicted from his home, and 

the other example that my colleague mentioned this morning. 

 

So the whole notion, and my whole argument here today on this 

particular bill, Bill 78, is, how do you provide social workers 

with the ability to do further diagnostic work on identifying 

mental illnesses within their client base, knowing full well that 

you have no intention whatsoever to provide the supports for 

those people once they have been diagnosed? And that’s the 

crux of the issue, Mr. Speaker. And that is one of the most 

important things that we in the opposition want to point out, 

that the weaknesses behind what this Sask Party does. They do 

a little bit of gerrymandering in the electoral process. They 

throw in a few little rules and regulations, Mr. Speaker. They 

dress up some of the bills like Bill 78 to try and make them 

appear like they’re doing something to help those with 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2169 

intellectual challenges. But in fact, Mr. Speaker, they have no 

desire and they have no wish and nor will they have any 

intention of dealing with some of these issues that many of 

these people face once they have been diagnosed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are other organizations 

that are involved with this particular bill. And as the opposition 

caucus, we want to make sure, we want to make sure that we 

hear from some of those people, from some of these groups, and 

that we encourage advocates to come forward to say what 

weaknesses exist in this bill; what should we do better to 

strengthen this bill? 

 

We are concerned as an NDP opposition that the aftercare, the 

support mechanisms, and all the work that needs to be done 

with these individuals after they have been diagnosed by the 

social worker, that there is proper care, that there’s proper 

supports, and that there is a matrix of ongoing supports to make 

sure that this person, whatever the diagnosis may be, has the 

proper supports and is able to function well within society, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s the point that the minister very, very quickly brushed 

over when she talked about trying to improve the lives of some 

of these people. Well the question we have is, upon diagnosis, 

what specific measures, what specific programs, what specific 

funding are you putting in place to complement what you’re 

trying to do through Bill 78? And from what we see from our 

vantage point, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing on all three of 

those fronts. 

 

So the question we have to ask the minister is, why are you 

allowing 50 social workers the diagnostic ability to identify 

some mental illnesses of some of their client base when you 

know very well there’s no supports planned to address some of 

those challenges upon diagnosis? And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what we call on this side of the House a crying shame and the 

fact that, why do this when you’re not going to do the proper 

follow-up and follow-through in the aftercare, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So I would point out Bill 78 is rife with problems. It glosses 

over the challenge, Mr. Speaker. And some of the social 

workers that are going to be given the diagnostic ability or have 

the skill set to do so, are they going to be compensated for 

doing this? And what happens if there’s a problem with a 

missed diagnosis or a misdiagnosis, Mr. Speaker? What’s the 

follow-up and follow-through on that front? 

 

And we noticed from the press release, Mr. Speaker, that there’s 

another group that’s involved. The registered psychiatric 

nursing association did not support the changes when consulted 

about it. So, Mr. Speaker, the Registered Psychiatric Nurses 

Association said, well we don’t like it either because it appears 

that this is something that infringes upon their traditional area in 

terms of being able to provide some of that aftercare and 

certainly the diagnostic services. And there are many 

psychiatrists and many support groups and many professional 

people that are involved in this particular process. Well they 

want to be able to work very closely as a group of people that 

know this industry well or this business or their field well — I 

shouldn’t use the word business — but their field well, that 

they’ve gone for training for this. 

 

Well how does that dynamic now affect their profession, Mr. 

Speaker? How does the registered psychiatric nursing 

association establish a relationship with the social worker union 

to be able to work their way through this? Well that answer is 

not in any part of the bill, Mr. Speaker. So when the psychiatric 

nursing association was consulted about this bill, the first 

question they said, well we weren’t consulted and nor was our 

issues taken seriously. So as a result of that, they did not 

support any of the changes. 

 

So there’s a huge host of problems with this particular bill as 

once again we see the Sask Party getting up and talking about 

the changes to a bill that’s supposed to be able to support 

people on the social assistance more by giving the social 

workers diagnostic ability when really, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

action plan following that. Because people out there are going 

to say what? The 50 people that do have the diagnostic ability, 

are they going to be compensated fairly? Is there going to be 

protection in case there’s a missed diagnosis or a misdiagnosis? 

What is their relationship with, social workers’ relationship now 

to the psychiatric nursing association? Do they have an ongoing 

dialogue? 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now once they have the client diagnosed, what kind of support 

mechanisms are in place? And that’s exactly my point, Mr. 

Speaker, about gentlemen like Wesley Smith here. Front page, 

the Northern Pride out of Meadow Lake, “Man forced from his 

home.” And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been identified in this article that 

he was forced from his home even though he has some 

intellectual challenges, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly why the 

Sask Party government, people are beginning to really wonder 

where exactly their intent is when it comes to the social agenda 

of our province. It seems they brag about a lot of money that 

they may have in highways or the economy, Mr. Speaker, but 

people out there are being left behind. There’s a great amount of 

people being left behind, and Wesley Smith is a good example 

of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I go back to my earlier point. Fifty social workers have 

the ability to diagnose people that may have some intellectual 

challenges. Whether those challenges may be addictions and 

maybe mental health challenges, there’s all kinds of different 

areas that one could go to. And again, Mr. Speaker, there are 

some issues that we have to be very aware of. 

 

So on that note, on Bill 78, my colleagues have a lot more to 

say about this. We are going to ask groups that are out there to 

join us as the opposition caucus by giving us confidential 

information. We don’t have to use your name or anything of 

that sort, that for protection for your purposes, whether you’re a 

social worker or a family going through this, that if you’d like 

us to simply ask the question, we can certainly do so. But what 

this bill is doing in a nutshell, it is now allowing social workers 

to be able to diagnose certain mental health problems that some 

of their clients may have. 

 

And we are arguing in the opposition for five points, the main 

point being, upon diagnosing a mental health illness from one 

of the client base, does the social worker have the confidence 

that this government is putting in the necessary supports to 

address their illness? And, Mr. Speaker, from where we sit, we 



2170 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

know that there’s absolutely no intent of the Sask Party to deal 

with those issues whatsoever. 

 

And the second point is that there are real human faces, like Mr. 

Smith out of Meadow Lake, front page of the Meadow Lake 

Northern Pride, “forced from his home.” And that’s exactly our 

point, is that how could you turn around and talk about 

improving diagnoses, and then when you turn around and you 

boot some of these people out of their home that they’ve lived 

in for many, many years, as the example of Mr. Smith here, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Secondly the social workers’ association, how do they establish 

a relationship with different groups that may be involved with 

this particular field? And a good example is the association of 

psychiatric nurses. They want to be able to speak their mind as 

well in terms of what these changes may have on their 

particular field of expertise. And then you create some friction 

between the two groups, Mr. Speaker. So there’s all kinds of 

problems with this particular bill. 

 

And I remind people out there that you’ve got to be very careful 

of what the Sask Party appears to be doing because their intent, 

Mr. Speaker, is far from helping anybody that has any particular 

challenges, as they’ve identified in the client base of some of 

the social worker people, that in the end they have no intent of 

trying to fix those problems up. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have a lot more to say on this 

particular bill. We will certainly continue to solicit information 

from different groups. And I can tell you that we have a lot 

more to say on this bill as we sit in the spring sitting. That 

information will be forthcoming. And, Mr. Speaker, there are 

problems with this bill that we will certainly identify over that 

time. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 78. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 78, The Social Workers 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move the second reading of The Traffic Safety Amendment 

Act, 2012. 

 

The Traffic Safety Act administered by SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] is the framework for the laws and 

regulations involving driver’s licence and the use of vehicles in 

Saskatchewan. It is designed to help keep motorists safe on our 

roads. 

 

The first piece of these amendments, Mr. Speaker, speaks to our 

government’s commitment to increasing the safety of highway 

workers in Saskatchewan after a work zone collision this 

summer cost a young flag person, Ashley Dawn Richards, her 

life. 

 

Our government takes the safety of both workers and motorists 

in construction zones very seriously, which is why SGI has 

been working with the ministries of Justice and Highways and 

Infrastructure to develop ways to make these areas safer. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure made changes that will see rumble strips being 

used in prioritized work zones, and gates that narrow the 

approach to work zones being installed. These measures are 

intended to ensure motorists are aware they are nearing a work 

zone and to help slow traffic to 60 kilometres per hour in work 

zones when highway workers are present. 

 

In additional to those changes, SGI worked with the Ministry of 

Justice to increase the fines for speeding when passing a 

highway worker to triple the base fine for speeding. These 

increases make Saskatchewan’s fines for speeding in 

construction zones among the highest in the country and will be 

a deterrent to motorists speeding in areas where highway 

workers are present. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the number of injury collisions in 

work zones are increasing. Speeding, while not the only factor 

in work zone collisions, is an offence that law enforcement 

officers say they see all too often in these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment that we are proposing will allow 

for the use of photo radar, only in work zones where highway 

workers are present, to charge drivers exceeding 60 kilometres 

per hour when passing a highway worker. This will build on the 

measures already implemented and will allow for increased 

enforcement of these traffic laws. The ability for law 

enforcement to use photo radar will likely increase the 

perceived risk of being ticketed, which can increase compliance 

levels and reduce the speed of traffic in those areas. This of 

course is our primary goal. 

 

With the record amount of investment this government has put 

into highway infrastructure over the past five years, Mr. 

Speaker, there is more highway construction going on across 

the province than ever before, and these changes will help keep 

those workers safe. 

 

In addition to the amendment concerning photo radar, Mr. 

Speaker, we are also proposing changes to section 280 of The 

Traffic Safety Act. Section 280 currently gives law enforcement 

the ability to seize any vehicle, if the officer believes it is being 

driven unlawfully or poses a danger to other drivers. Mr. 

Speaker, the intent was for this section to be used only in rare or 

extenuating circumstances when offences are urgent or 

dangerous or when the owner of the vehicle is not available and 

the vehicle poses a threat to other drivers. However, vehicle 

seizures under the section of this Act have increased 

significantly since 2005. Often these seizures are related to 

impaired or distracted driving offences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are already other sections of the Act which 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

were developed through the public consultation and legislative 

processes that specifically address those offences. These 

amendments will still allow law enforcement to seize vehicles 

in cases where parked vehicles pose a hazard or threat to others 

and in other very specific instances which will be determined 

through the regulatory process. But, Mr. Speaker, we want to 

ensure that vehicle owners are charged with provisions in the 

Act that are specific to their offence and that the offence is then 

accurately reflected in the driver’s safety rating and insurance 

premiums. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will remove the licence 

plate sticker requirement for Saskatchewan vehicles. This is a 

housekeeping change designed to reflect SGI’s current practices 

and standards. As law enforcement no longer relies on licence 

plate stickers alone to validate vehicle registration, this change 

will help to eliminate redundancies, save costs, and streamline 

the renewal process for both SGI and its customers. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to move that Bill No. 72, 

The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 be read for the second 

time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments 

has moved that Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 

2012 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to stand on behalf of the official opposition to offer 

some comments on Bill 72. And, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

spoke about the challenges that many of the construction 

industry faces when we want to ensure that there are safe areas 

around construction zones. 

 

And there’s no question, as you are aware, Mr. Speaker, that 

there was a loss of life this past summer. And it’s a very tragic 

loss, a very tragic loss. A young lady obviously was killed in 

the construction area. And, Mr. Speaker, we obviously, within 

the opposition caucus, want to make sure that workers and the 

public aren’t in any danger. And every measure that we can 

undertake to ensure that we can reduce that danger down to an 

absolute minimum, we of course in the opposition would 

applaud that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s really, really important to also identify that as we move 

forward on this front that the opposition will do what they can 

to not only add to the agenda but to add to the comments to be 

able to strengthen that protection for workers and for the public 

overall. I think, Mr. Speaker, in the construction zones, I think a 

lot of people are still in this mode that they’re allowed to travel 

as quickly as they want through construction zones. And it’s 

obvious that this message needs to get through. And of course 

the best way to do that is to ensure that the fines are heavy 

enough that people simply don’t forget, and the next time they 

go through a construction zone, they know if they’re speeding 

that there could be a huge financial cost to them. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, that from the perspective of improving 

safety in the construction zones and safety all throughout our 

highway system, Mr. Speaker, I would say that the opposition 

obviously wants to do that. We obviously want to make sure 

that the right measures are put in place because, Mr. Speaker, 

this is something that needs our ongoing attention and our 

utmost co-operation. 

 

I think one of the things that’s really, really important is that 

there was a lot of media this past summer as a result of the loss 

of a young lady’s life. And not getting into any of the detail, I 

just know that I heard her boyfriend at the time — I don’t 

believe it is her husband — he was speaking about safety on the 

radio and certainly going through his loss. It’s something that 

really, I think, woke up a lot of people in Saskatchewan when 

he spoke about being safe and paying attention and so on and so 

forth. Because it’s a life that was needlessly lost, Mr. Speaker. 

And we need to do all we can, as I said at the outset, to improve 

safety rules and regulations and, of course, fines around 

construction areas and all throughout our highway system in 

general, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that in terms of the minister’s very weak effort at 

trying to qualify her government’s commitment to highways, 

Mr. Speaker, where she talks about unprecedented highway 

work. Mr. Speaker, we know that as we look through some of 

the work that has been done, it isn’t unprecedented. There’s 

been construction happening in Saskatchewan over the many, 

many years. And we’re actually seeing a lull in some of the 

activities on highway construction. 

 

And we also know that there’s a huge problem in construction 

in general because a lot of the people that are involved with 

construction are beginning to give the Sask Party a lot of grief 

because they know, as an example, that some of the 

construction subcontractors that are working on our highways 

aren’t being paid on a timely basis, that there’s a lot of 

problems there. They’re asking questions about how much more 

money is being left or being held back from some of our 

construction industry. 

 

But all these issues are certainly coming to the forefront 

because many of them really want to get some good answers to 

some of the questions that the minister was talking about in 

some of her opening comments on Bill 72, that the whole effort 

to once again brag about their record spending on highways, 

Mr. Speaker. We know in opposition that there’s a lull in that 

construction and that we’re going to see a decrease under the 

Sask Party’s watch because, quite frankly, they’re starting to 

become broke. 

 

And that’s one of the things that’s really important, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we needn’t try and push their political agenda 

through bills of this sort. We in the opposition are taking it very 

seriously, that we don’t look at this opportunity to improve 

safety in the construction zone as an opportunity to brag about 

the Sask Party’s construction work. Because quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to highways, they’re lagging far behind 

many of our Western Canadian provinces, and that much, 

much, much more work needs to be done to not only support 

and defend the construction industry of our highways system, 

that they’ve got to start spending what they’re telling people 

they’re spending. Because people are starting to wonder exactly 

where the money is going and how much are they actually truly 

spending on highway construction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

Now one of the things that I see as one of the fundamental 

points that we would want to ensure that people out there know 

is that there is an . . . Any evidence that some of the areas of our 

highway system is in quick need of some very safety orientated 

work, that you should let the opposition know. Let the 

opposition know because we know that when it comes to safety 

on our highways, the number one fundamental principle is that 

the highways themselves should be in good driving condition, 

the best driving condition as possible. 

 

And I’m talking about the integrity and the strength of the road, 

Mr. Speaker, because I travel quite a bit as an MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly]. My riding and my hometown is 

probably the furthest from any other MLA in the Assembly. 

And I do that trip on a pretty regular basis, Mr. Speaker, 

because Ile a la Crosse, northwestern Saskatchewan’s my home. 

That’s where my family is and my friends, and I am planning 

on living there forever. But the problem is, Mr. Speaker, as you 

head further north, some of the road conditions do become quite 

treacherous, and there’s a lot of problems with highways in 

general all throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. And I made 

reference to that on numerous occasions. 

 

So what the minister should do that’s alluding to the bill is that 

the Minister Responsible for SGI should just simply do two 

things on this bill. Let’s have focus on safety in a construction 

zone, which I think it’s important that we do. And number two, 

that she not take the opportunity to brag about her government’s 

highway commitments when that’s something that’s furthest 

from the truth, Mr. Speaker. Because there’s a lot of highways 

that still need to be fixed, and we’re seeing a lot of the 

construction companies getting more and more frustrated with 

this government because there’s a lot of games being played 

with how the money’s being allocated, and what amount of 

money’s being held back as a result of some of the work that 

has been done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can remember the twinning between Prince Albert and 

Saskatoon being announced by then the Hon. Eldon 

Lautermilch who was a minister of Highways then. And that 

was a great opportunity because I think it was the NDP that just 

finished twinning the North Battleford to Lloydminster 

highway. And of course the next highway we started working 

on was the Prince Albert-Saskatoon twinning. And I can tell 

you that a lot of people are pretty happy with that. And I 

remember Mr. Lautermilch speaking about the safety issues and 

that this was the best way to spend our money was to ensure 

that we had double-laning. And that really improved the quality 

of the road and really improved the safety. 

 

So I think one of the things that I want to speak about is that 

Mr. Lautermilch, when he was Minister of Highways, didn’t 

brag in the Assembly for days on end here like the Sask Party 

does. He simply identified that it was an economic issue, it was 

a safety issue, so let’s twin the road between P.A. [Prince 

Albert] and Saskatoon. And guess what, Mr. Speaker, that work 

of course has continued under the Sask Party because it’s the 

right thing to do. And I’m glad that they followed the leadership 

of Mr. Lautermilch because the vision that he had in relation to 

that twinning project was exactly the whole basis of this 

particular bill, Bill 72, was the safety of the people of 

Saskatchewan, the driving public. And I think we want to make 

sure that we continue sending out that message. 

So, Mr. Speaker, by and large Bill 72, if it’s meant to strengthen 

safety within the construction zone, to remind people to slow 

down when you’re going through what they call the orange 

zone and to be very, very careful out there because it is 

sometimes very treacherous — treacherous in terms of the 

winter driving conditions and some of the road conditions. And, 

Mr. Speaker, if you’re speeding through some of the areas that 

you shouldn’t be, like construction zones, you are adding to the 

safety risk of the workers and public in general. 

 

Now last night when I arrived in the city here, Mr. Speaker, I 

was . . . I think it was just before Davidson, but we hit some . . . 

There was two vehicles on the side of the road, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t know what they were doing but they these vehicles were 

not clearly marked. They were two bigger trucks and one of 

them didn’t have taillights at the back vehicle. And certainly, 

you know, if one wasn’t paying careful attention you could 

easily see how an accident could occur because there’s no 

markings that these vehicles were stopped there. There’s no 

safety feature to show that they’re pulled over to the side, and it 

was just simply paying very close attention to the driving 

conditions that we were able to, you know, to avoid an accident 

last night. 

 

So I think you got to be able to follow some of the rules very 

clearly. And if vehicles are parked in the construction zone, like 

I went to last night, Mr. Speaker, then obviously if the 

construction zone is clearly marked, people know it should be 

down to 60 and you pay very close attention. 

 

And the other issue, Mr. Speaker, is at night, you know, when 

you do have construction zones, how are they marked? Are they 

clearly marked? Those are some of the things that we want to 

find out whether this bill involves some of those issues. And 

that’s why we’re going to take the time to look at that bill. 

 

So there’s a lot of different ways that we can improve safety on 

the highway, Mr. Speaker. And I would suggest that a good 

start is making sure that there is all these features and there’s 

always information available when you’re travelling through 

construction zones. Because we should not take safety for 

granted because obviously this past summer we’ve seen that 

unfortunate death. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a few more things we want to say on 

this particular bill. But in the future, we would remind the Sask 

Party to stop bragging about some of the work that was 

announced 10 years ago. And if you want to take highway 

safety seriously, then, you know, put your money where your 

mouth is instead of simply spouting off a number that you do 

from time to time. Because we know, quite frankly, that that 

money’s not being spent on our highways and that a lot of the 

people that are working and constructing some of these 

highways are starting to speak up and send us information and 

that the public of Saskatchewan will not be pleased about once 

they hear that information. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, is that there are many, many 

highways that offer terrible driving conditions and pose a huge 

threat to the safety of Saskatchewan residents, and yet the Sask 

Party doesn’t seem to say anything about those highways, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

So on that note, I’ve quite a few more things to say on this 

particular bill, and I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 72. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

privilege to rise and introduce for second reading, Bill No. 77, 

An Act to amend The Horse Racing Regulation Act and to make 

consequential amendments to The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act and The Revenue Collection Administration 

Regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past October I announced that the provincial 

government would eliminate the parimutuel tax it collects on 

horse racing wagers, effective March 31st, 2013. The 

amendments I am introducing today will implement this 

change. Under The Horse Racing Regulation Act, the province 

collects a 10 per cent parimutuel tax from each wager placed on 

horse racing in the province. The tax is also applied to wagers 

made in Saskatchewan teletheatres on horse races conducted 

outside of the province. 

 

Operators of horse racing tracks have been responsible to 

collect and remit the tax. Traditionally the revenue collected 

from this tax has been returned to the industry in the form of 

grants to track operators to support track operations and purses 

for the participants. The amount of tax collected depends on the 

amount wagered. In 2011 the total parimutuel tax collected was 

857,000, all of which was returned to the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past summer members of the Saskatchewan 

horse racing industry sought to have the parimutuel tax 

repealed. We considered their arguments for repealing the tax 

and we are now acting on this consultation. Our government 

remains committed to fiscal responsibility and I believe the 

repeal of the parimutuel tax is a win-win for both government 

and the horse racing industry. Eliminating the parimutuel tax 

will allow the horse racing industry to determine how to use the 

funds for the benefit of the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this change is another example of our 

government’s commitment to create a positive economic 

environment by reducing taxes when it’s fiscally responsible to 

do so. This change will provide the necessary business 

environment for horse racing to continue to operate in 

Saskatchewan. By supporting the continuation of horse racing 

in Saskatchewan, these changes will also support employment 

opportunities for those individuals involved in the horse racing 

industry such as groomers and trainers. 

 

Together with the amendments to The Horse Racing Regulation 

Act, this bill also contains consequential amendments to The 

Revenue and Financial Services Act and The Revenue 

Collection Administration Regulations. The Revenue and 

Financial Services Act and The Revenue Collection 

Administration Regulations both contain provisions regarding 

the enforcement and the collection of parimutuel taxes by the 

province. Because the parimutuel tax is being repealed, 

amendments are necessary to both pieces of legislation to 

remove those provisions. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks and move 

second reading of Bill No. 77, An Act to amend The Horse 

Racing Regulation Act and to make consequential amendments 

to The Revenue and Financial Services Act and The Revenue 

Collection Administration Regulations. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments 

has moved that Bill No. 77, The Horse Racing Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

am pleased to stand today to talk about the Bill 77. And the gist 

or the primary focus of Bill 77, as the minister alluded to, was 

the fact that the parimutuel tax Act — basically the taxes that 

they collect from some of the betting on horse racing — was 

one of the issues that she wants to eliminate as a result of what 

the industry wanted, is what she basically indicated to the 

Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, she mentioned the figure of 700-and-some 

thousand that they would collect from some of these wagers 

that people would have on horse racing. Now the big question 

that we would have in the Assembly is that what part of the 

industry, what part of the 700-plus thousand dollars that the 

industry used to be able to get as a result of this tax, how much 

has the Sask Party backfilled that money? Have they backfilled 

it all, or none of it? 

 

These are some of the questions that we think we know the 

answers to. But, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people are trying to find 

out exactly what the intent of the Sask Party is on this front 

because we know that the 700-and-some thousand dollars that 

they did collect from the taxes on horse racing bets, that none of 

the industry got any of the money. I believe they basically 

eliminated the tax on the horse racing and turned their backs 

against the industry. 

 

Now I know that the industry themselves will continue working 

with the Sask Party to try and find some solution. But what we 

would say on this side of the Assembly is that before you create 

an action such as losing a revenue base for an industry, even if 

it’s horse racing, that you ought to have a plan in place to be 

able to backfill that money so that the industry that uses that 

money isn’t put into this situation where they don’t have the 

necessary means to continue operating their industry. 

 

Now we think that’s pretty simple and straightforward from the 

opposition’s perspective. So the question that we would have 

for the minister on Bill 77: what concessions did you give the 

industry to ensure that the revenues that they lost as a result of 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

this tax being eliminated on horse betting? What did they ask 

for and what did you give them to ensure that this wasn’t going 

to be a problem for their industry in general? 

 

And those questions, Mr. Speaker, we need to certainly ask the 

minister and at the appropriate time, through Committee of 

Finance, we will certainly ask those questions at that time. But 

we also want to be able to talk to the industry and those people 

that are actually making bets because right now I think there’s a 

lot of confusion within the horse racing industry. I think it’s a 

very important part of what people like to do. I think horse 

racing has been around, betting on horse races has been around 

Saskatchewan for years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s some of the things that we want to be able to look at in 

terms of getting the right information to the public of 

Saskatchewan so that they could figure out whether this 

government is doing anything good or anything bad to that 

particular horse racing industry. And I can tell you that 

information needs to come forward to the opposition and we 

will certainly be making our contacts as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this cash grab that the minister spoke about 

— the parimutuel tax that they used to collect and give to the 

industry — now is there another revenue stream that the 

government is collecting as a result of them taking the 

parimutuel tax, as she indicated, taking that tax and eliminating 

it? Is there some backdoor taxation that they’re putting in place 

that they’re pocketing from this particular industry? We don’t 

know that information, Mr. Speaker, and that’s one of the 

reasons why we would like to ask these questions during 

Committee of Finance. 

 

[15:15] 

 

One of the things that I think is important is that when you look 

at the parimutuel tax, the elimination of this tax on horse racing, 

which actual group asked for it? Like what was the breakdown 

in the industry itself? Was there a certain sector of the industry 

that liked this versus other sectors that may not have liked this? 

What is the breakdown of who was impacted the worst and who 

was impacted the best? You know, these are some of the things 

that we need to find out as an opposition because obviously, if 

you’re a horse trainer or if you’re a jockey or if you’re involved 

with the actual on-field activity of this industry, does it hurt you 

in any way, shape, or form, losing that kind of revenue for your 

industry? 

 

And I think that’s obviously got to hurt because if you go 7, 

$800,000 loss of revenues in any one year, it’s of course going 

to hurt a lot of organizations and a lot of fledgling businesses as 

well. So I wouldn’t really chalk up the horse racing industry as 

fledgling, but I’d certainly say that I don’t think they can take 

hits of this sort on a continual basis. Because obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, you don’t want to see this industry go away because 

some people really enjoy their time as adults, and this is an 

adult entertainment service in terms of being able to bet on 

horses. And I think a lot of them certainly would like to 

continue doing that. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of questions that we 

would ask. How many different organizations are impacted by 

this? I think the people of Saskatchewan and certainly the 

opposition want to know how many operations are out there. 

How many people are employed by this industry? Who are 

some of the bigger players? What their season involves. And 

these are some of the issues I think are very valuable to the 

Assembly, if we can get those answers from the minister during 

Committee of Finance because we need to get those questions 

in front of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Bill 79 I think has a lot of different issues that we can speak 

about at length, and we want to be able to take that time to be 

able to share as much of the information so the public out there 

can also join the debate and join the information flow to the 

NDP so they can certainly argue some better points and 

stronger points in the Assembly as it relates to the horse racing 

industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s the biggest thing is that, that 

as I look at the horse racing industry itself, this industry has 

been operating for a long time. It’s been, like I mentioned at the 

outset, there’s been a lot of people that have been involved with 

this industry over the years. And what prompted the changes? 

Because obviously if there are changes to the tax that the 

government collects, is there any other revenues that the 

government has received from this industry? And if so, the 

minister needs to identify that as well because you’ve been 

operating this industry this way for many, many, many years. 

Then all of a sudden you make a huge change that impacts their 

bottom line by 7, $800,000. There should be an accounting 

process in place for the industry themselves. 

 

You know, and when the minister says the industry likes this 

concept, Mr. Speaker, I would really like to see what the 

industry truly had to say about this. And if they asked for some 

concessions in exchange for losing that kind of money, what 

were those concessions, and how much revenues will they bring 

in if there was any concessions afforded to them? 

 

Now if my memory serves me correct, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

horse racing industry themselves had asked for some VLTs 

[video lottery terminal] to be placed at some of their operations. 

And I’m not sure if that was a concession given to the industry, 

but I’m sure at one time I heard in the news that they were 

asking for VLTs to be placed at some of their places of 

operations because that would really help their income. Now 

whether that was afforded to them or not, I don’t know. Do they 

get the revenue stream from some other lottery corporation or 

some other gaming agreement that they may have struck with 

the horse racing association? Was there any revenues lost to any 

other organization when the horse racing industry was given a 

concession? We don’t know those answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s the important thing, is to be able to ask those 

answers in a timely fashion and to invite the public, to tell the 

public to come on down and give us the information — those 

that may actually do the betting, those that may work in the 

industry, those that may actually be owners of some of the 

operations that are out there, and some of the horse owners as 

well. We need to hear some of that information as to what the 

government is proposing to change. And once that information 

is available to us, we can certainly ask the minister and the 

government, the Sask Party government, to provide those 

answers in a timely and consistently honest fashion. 

 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would propose that there’s a few other 

issues on this bill that we need to take further study on. And I 

would remind the people that are out there in Saskatchewan 

right now is that what happens in the fall sitting . . . There’s 

only another seven days left, and it’s something that we enjoy 

doing as opposition because we can expose the Sask Party for 

their mismanagement of our finances and the fact that their spin 

factory is really misleading a lot of people on a lot of fronts. It’s 

our time in opposition to be able to expose all that — that’s our 

role of government — and we’ll continue doing so. 

 

But in the fall sitting, it gives us the opportunity for the 

government to introduce their bills and the intent behind the 

bills, gives us an opportunity in opposition to give a first look at 

these bills. And then over the next several months we’re going 

to be going to different organizations that are impacted by these 

changes to see if they agree with this and what are some of their 

concerns. And then when the spring sitting happens in March, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s when we’ll come back with a lot of this 

information, and we’ll counter some of the misinformation that 

the Sask Party provides to the public on many, many occasions, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s kind of what the whole intent is: the first initial 

introduction of the bill and of course our initial comments on 

the bill, and then we’ll go back and research the bill for the 

spring sitting. And following the spring sitting of course these 

bills will certainly, if the government’s proposing them, will 

pass, and they’ll be proclaimed. But hopefully the opposition 

will have enough information to embarrass the government or 

make them change their mind on some provisions. And that’s 

the role of us as opposition, is to hold them to account and, Mr. 

Speaker, we will certainly do that. 

 

So again on that note, on this particular bill, Bill 77, I want to 

make sure that people out there are offered the opportunity to 

provide that information. We look forward to working with you. 

And on that note I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 77. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 77, The Horse Racing 

Regulation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 65 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 65 — The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to enter the debate today on Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The 

Securities Act, 1988 and to make consequential amendments to 

other Acts. 

 

I want to just start by talking about The Securities Act, 1988, the 

Act that is going to be . . . is proposed, some amendments. The 

Securities Act, what does that original Act do? The Securities 

Act, 1988 ensures the securities market is fair and protects the 

investing public. It is administered by the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission, securities division. So the 

commission regulates people trading in or advising about 

securities in exchange contracts in Saskatchewan. Securities are 

forms of investments such as shares, bond, debentures, mutual 

funds, and investment contracts. An exchange contract is a 

futures contract or an option that trades on an exchange under 

standardized terms and conditions. And a trade is defined as 

“any transfer, sale or disposition of a security for valuable 

consideration . . . but does not include a purchase of a security 

. . .” 

 

And the 1988 Act requires that all persons selling or advising 

on securities or exchange contracts be registered. There are 

initial and ongoing requirements that dealers, advisors, and their 

employees must meet, including capital bonding and insurance 

requirements, membership and compensation or contingency 

funds, record keeping, and educational qualifications and 

experiences. So that’s a little bit about The Securities Act, 1988 

which is being amended or proposed amended through Bill No. 

65 that we’re discussing here today. 

 

In the minister’s comments in his second reading speech, he 

pointed out there are three main purposes or three purposes of 

this Act. The first one is “. . . to introduce a regulatory 

framework for financial products known as over-the-counter 

derivatives.” What exactly is an over-the-counter derivative? 

It’s “. . . an agreement where the price, value, delivery, or 

payment obligation is derived from an underlying interest.” And 

what are over-the-counter derivatives used for, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you might be asking yourself. Over-the-counter “. . . 

derivatives are used to transfer the financial risk that an 

underlying interest poses to a company, an institution, or an 

individual to another entity that is willing to accept that risk.” 

 

The minister in his comments pointed that over-the-counter 

derivatives shouldn’t be confused with derivatives that are 

traded on an exchange: “When traded on an exchange, 

derivative contracts are standardized and traded anonymously 

through secure electronic means.” The minister argues that 

“Such products are well regulated and an essential element of a 

strong global economy.” 

 

But with over-the-counter derivatives, some of the problems, 

the issue that this bill is said to be addressing is that 

over-the-counter derivative trades are not standardized or 

cleared in the same manner as derivatives that are traded on an 

exchange. “They are executed only through bilateral 

negotiation.” And actually the minister uses the word “. . . 

opaque nature of the . . . [over-the-counter] derivatives market 

has limited the ability of provincial market regulators to 

effectively monitor them and deter improper market activity and 

conduct.” 

 

Obviously you do want to deter improper market activity and 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

conduct. We look back to 2008 and the global economic crisis, 

the meltdown basically that impacted so many people, where 

people lost their life savings in some cases, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, their retirement savings, their kids’ education funds, 

their whole . . . everything that they’d been saving for. Many 

people, many people were hurt by the crash in 2008. 

 

The minister actually points out in his remarks that 

over-the-counter derivatives did in fact play a role in the 

financial crisis. And he says that although: 

 

 . . . they are not considered the primary cause of the crisis, 

they made it more difficult for regulators to understand the 

scope of the crisis and the interactions between market 

participants. In 2008 the . . . [over-the-counter] market and 

the complexity of . . . [over-the-counter] derivative 

contracts was compounded by a lack of transparency. This 

made it challenging for regulators to identify the risk 

before the crisis. This is in contrast to the trading of 

[other] derivatives on regulated exchanges which did not 

experience any significant failures during the financial 

crisis of 2008. 

 

So the one thing . . . The minister also points out that following 

that crash, because over-the-counter derivatives did in fact play 

a role in it: 

 

. . . Canadian firm counterparties are based . . . [in other 

jurisdictions like] the European Union and the United 

States, are posed to impose new regulations on . . . 

[over-the-counter] derivative markets. This means that 

Canadian entities may have to adhere to new requirements 

in those jurisdictions as well. 

 

So this bill is before us because “. . . regulatory inaction is not 

an option given the commitments Canada has made as part of 

our role in the G20 . . .” 

 

So we have to take a look. Obviously Saskatchewan is part . . . 

We have our economy here. We’re part of a much larger 

Canadian economy and part of the international economy 

obviously. And so it is imperative that we have that big picture 

view of what other jurisdictions are doing on issues like this. 

 

The other piece that . . . There’s actually two other pieces that 

the minister references in his remarks. He talks about: 

 

In addition to the framework affecting . . . 

[over-the-counter] derivatives . . . this bill also provides 

that certain confidential records and information gathered 

by officials with the Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority may not be publicly disclosed. 

 

So what does this include? 

 

These include records relating to examination of market 

participants and self-regulatory organizations, review of 

reporting issuers, continuous disclosure records, 

investigations into alleged contravention of securities law, 

and enforcement proceedings. [So obviously] Protecting 

the confidentiality of these records is critical to ensure the 

effective enforcement of securities legislation . . .  

 

That’s very important. 

 

The third piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that “. . . these 

amendments will provide the fine collection branch of the 

Ministry of Justice with the authority to enforce and collect 

financial compensation orders.” The minister says that: 

 

These orders are made by Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority against individuals or companies that have 

contravened securities legislation through activities such 

as fraud. Order is made following a formal proceeding that 

hears and reviews evidence and quantifies the amount of a 

financial loss. The amount of the order is to be paid to an 

individual who has suffered financial loss on the account 

of the illegal activity. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So we see these three pieces, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We see some 

regulation in over-the-counter derivatives. We see providing 

certain confidential records and information gathered by 

officials, a framework for that, and we see some opportunity for 

fine collection when someone breaches the rules, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So I know that I have colleagues who will also be discussing 

Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988 and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts, and I’m sure 

that they have much to say on this particular Act. So with that, 

I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 65. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 66 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 66 — The 

Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 

(SAGES) Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s my 

pleasure to rise today to speak on the debate on the Bill No. 66, 

The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 

(SAGES) Act. 

 

This is a fairly brief Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that creates a 

new grant for people who can afford to save money for their 

children’s education. And basically what the minister pointed 

out in his comments when he introduced the bill on November 

19th was that it would be 10 per cent of . . . The government 

will provide a grant “. . . at a rate of 10 per cent of the 

subscriber’s annual contributions up to a maximum of $250 per 

year . . .” So this is for people who can afford to set aside 

$2,500 in an RESP [registered education savings plan] that they 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

would also get a grant from this government of $250. And it’s 

an incentive that I think was something this government had 

indicated they would be introducing last year. 

 

Now the minister indicated that it will be administered by 

Human Resources and Skills Development Canada, or HRSDC, 

who are supportive of this grant and have agreed to help 

administer it on behalf of the government. And it will be done 

collaboratively, so that’s one way of some savings, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in order to ensure that this program is efficiently run. 

 

He indicated in his comments that the ministry “. . . consulted 

with the Government of Alberta; the Canadian Scholarship 

Trust Foundation . . . and registration education savings plan 

advisory group called RESPAG.” And he said those groups are 

all supportive of this grant. 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, apparently the minister didn’t 

consult with the Canadian Federation of Students because they 

have some very critical comments about this type of incentive 

for university tuition costs. And I’m going to share some of 

those comments with you now. 

 

What they describe, RESPs . . . This is just in general, the 

reviews on RESPs, and of course the SAGES grant is one that 

encourages RESPs or registered education savings plans. So in 

and of themselves, RESPs are really already a grant payable to 

those people who can afford them because it’s a tax revenue 

that’s forgone. So it’s tantamount to a grant. And although it’s 

not a direct grant, it’s an indirect grant. 

 

The only people that it’s useful to are families wealthy enough 

to set aside thousands of dollars each year for their children’s 

education. And one of the points they made is that if every 

parent participated, the maximum investment in an education 

savings grant, it would cost the government $3 billion each 

year, the federal government, for this type of grant. So 

obviously the federal government realizes that it’s not every 

parent that’s going to be able to take advantage of this, and 

therefore although it appears to be something that’s available to 

all Canadians, it’s not being taken up by all Canadians for a 

number of significant reasons. 

 

So the other comments that were made by the Canadian 

Federation of Students come from spring 2012, and I’ll just 

make a couple of comments about that, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that the costs for post-secondary education is rising every year, 

and the problem with the RESP programs is that it creates a 

disproportionate advantage for wealthy families. And the kind 

of thinking that drives this kind of program is found by a quote 

from the learning bond. And the proponents there have a 

statement that says — this is just amazing that someone would 

say this these days, Mr. Deputy Speaker — through savings 

incentives . . . This is a quote: 

 

Through savings incentives and supports such as financial 

literacy, low-income earners are encouraged to save for 

their future goals. With the right incentives, the poor can 

and do save. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find that to be a fairly insulting 

comment, and it really strikes me that these people that are 

making these kinds of comments have no understanding how 

poverty works, and I think it’s very irresponsible of them to 

make those kinds of comments. The research on RESPs shows 

that high-income families benefit way more from this type of 

program than any low-income households do. And put together, 

the RESPs and the Canadian education savings grant, which is a 

federal grant similar to what SAGES [Saskatchewan advantage 

grant for education savings] will be, represents a 

multi-billion-dollar system of financial aid geared primarily to 

those families that need it the least. And that’s a shame, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Students with financial need . . . And this is the CFS, the 

Canadian Federation of Students’ position that “Students with 

financial need would be better served if the money currently 

spent on the RESP and CESG programs were reallocated into 

needs-based grants.” And I don’t think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there would be any reason for this bill to be treated the same 

way or not to be treated the same way. Needs-based grants 

make way more sense for those children and young people who 

can’t afford to go to university than for wealthy and affluent 

families getting these grants on the savings that they’re able to 

afford simply because they are high-income families. A number 

of children are being left out by this type of bill. 

 

So I certainly think there would be a lot of concerns that our 

caucus will have in relation to this bill, and I think other people 

are going to want to comment on that as well. So at this point 

though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the extent of my comments. 

The bill itself is pretty straightforward. There is a lot that we 

cannot comment on because all of it seems to be driven by 

what’s going to be in the regulations. So once again in the 

House, we won’t have any opportunity to comment on that. 

Those go through the executive arm of government, and 

unfortunately the public won’t have much say in it either. 

 

So this is not a bill that I think we can be very happy about, 

however it does provide advantage for some students, so I guess 

that could be one way of looking at it in a positive light. At that 

point I think I would like to adjourn debate on this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 66. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 67 — The 

Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 

on the debate on Bill No. 67, the community planning 

professional Act, 2012, an opportunity to make some comments 

about the proposed changes that I guess the association or the 

professional planning community development planners have 

requested some changes. 



2178 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

But before I get into talking about the changes in the bill, of 

course we always want to make comments on, we want to make 

sure, where are these changes coming from? Who’s requesting 

them? And I know in the minister’s comments, he referred to in 

the second reading comments some of the areas where he’s 

received letters from the association. He refers to someone at 

the university and some of the changes that . . . And I will talk 

about those changes as I go through discussing. 

 

But I want to go, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to kind of talk about 

the process and sometimes ensuring that we make sure that we 

debate the bills and the process of the official opposition to 

make sure there is an opportunity to debate the bills. But also 

we know that when we leave here, we’ll be going to talk to 

different organizations, different groups on certain bills that 

come forward before the House. And we have an opportunity to 

ask some questions, whether it’s this process directly on certain 

bills, how the changes — whether it’s name changes, whether 

the regulations will change — and exactly how will that impact 

Saskatchewan residents. How will that impact the professional 

organizations, groups? How will that impact the industry? How 

will that impact the institutes? 

 

So when we go through discussing these, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and trying to make sure some of the questions are asked and 

making sure that we talk with individuals that have, I guess, an 

interest in changes that are made through legislation to this 

House . . . And sometimes they are housekeeping situations 

where they make sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to truly do them. 

They were a request of the industry, and it makes sense. But 

sometimes there’s concern because sometimes individuals, 

groups are not consulted with. 

 

This government currently that we have sitting, the Sask Party 

government, hasn’t been very open with consultation, talking 

with groups, organizations with some of the bills they’ve come. 

They’re kind of a surprise to people. So we’re very cautious. 

And I know my colleagues ask, you know, questions, and we’ve 

got individuals wanting to know, exactly what are they up to? 

 

And like I’ve said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sometimes there are a 

simple process. They might be housecleaning items, but 

sometimes they go a little further than that. We don’t know 

who’s requesting them. And it’s about the trust thing. And 

everyone wants to trust their government, that they’ll bring in 

legislation that’s going to benefit the province. But sometimes 

it’s surprising who benefits and the benefits that come out of the 

legislation that’s being passed here. And we will look at those. 

 

I mean we’ve had arguments and we have disagreements, and 

that’s why I think the venue is here clearly for us to ask the 

questions and to make clear some of the concerns that . . . I 

guess people in the province elect, whether it’s the official 

opposition or the government, but they want them to bring in 

legislation that works. They want them to make sure the official 

opposition does the job it’s been asked to do by the people 

elected by those individuals, by the community. 

 

So when we look at this, The Community Planning Profession 

Act, Bill 67, some of the requests that we see here, it’s not only 

the associations asking for a name change, you know, and 

asking that it be, you know, registered professional planners, 

which has been requested as well. When we look at that, we 

look at part of, I guess, some of their exams or to be qualified as 

a registered professional planner, there is a process. 

 

And I know I’ve seen comments by the minister. He says he has 

a letter that he’s received. We have not seen that letter. So it’s 

going to be good for us to make sure that we find out the 

details, the letter, the association, we find out, is it something 

that they want? It probably is. But sometimes we have to make 

sure we do the due diligence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ensure 

that we don’t miss things. 

 

Sometimes you go through the bills and you go through very 

closely. And sometimes you may not scrutinize the bills as 

closely as one maybe wants to because of the time and the 

pressure. And it’s a busy place, and a person means well. And 

you’re trying to cover everything off, but sometimes you need 

to go back and speak to the association. You need to speak to 

the community planners out there to make sure that this is 

something that they want, they’re comfortable with, whether 

you talk to the universities. Any time they make comments that 

the minister and his . . . comments on a bill like this that’s 

proposing some changes, you want to make sure that we’re 

covering off. 

 

And the minister refers to some of the agreements and that with 

the new changes will be in compliance. And, you know, some 

of the areas he was talking about was the labour mobility 

obligations under the agreement on international trade and the 

New West Partnership Agreement, that these changes would 

fall in compliance with the proposed changes. They’re not 

going away from or going to cause grief, according to the 

minister. We have to make sure that that’s exactly the case by 

asking some questions, whether it’s here debating the bill, 

whether it’s in committee. And at some time when we’re done 

with this, it’ll go to committee. But we want an opportunity, I 

think, and it’s clear, to discuss some of the issues. 

 

But having said that, you know, they’re going to go through a 

process. And they want to be registered professional planners, 

and they want to have, I guess, a professional organization that 

represents their industry. And if there is errors or problems and 

I guess some of the things found guilty of — you know, 

misconduct, conflict of interest — they want to be able to deal 

with this. And I think the provisions in here will give them 

some of that leeway that they’re requesting. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now we’re going to have to go through this a little closer and I 

think, you know, line by line. And we’ll be asking some of 

those questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make sure that we’re 

doing our due diligence, to make sure that there aren’t any areas 

we’ve missed. And we’ll try to do our best. And I mean of 

course government, when they make the changes, comes 

forward with ideas and changes. And I guess they’re saying 

they’ve been requested to do these changes, whether they’re 

names, whether it’s exams, whether they’re going to be, you 

know, a registered professional planner. 

 

So the work that our community planners do truly in our 

province, the growth . . . And I know my colleague from 

Athabasca, he made comments on the second reading and his 

response to it to get into debate, when he entered the debate. 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2179 

And he clearly talked about the growth, and he talks about the 

differences between the current government and the NDP 

government — our plan, the vision, when you talk about real 

growth. And yes, we want to have growth. We have to make 

sure that growth in communities, with the planning, it’s a 

crucial position. 

 

And just looking at some of the documents that are here and 

some of the changes that they’re proposing, and again I always 

say that this is the government proposing these changes, 

amendments, the way they see it being requested of them. But 

sometimes they will also add them in on their own. And I think 

they might come up, and the ministry might say, well we would 

like this change in there at the same time. Maybe somebody’s 

lobbied them, somebody’s mentioned it to one of the MLAs, so 

they’d bring that information forward. And sometimes it enters 

onto the actual amendment that’s being proposed or the bill 

changes. And sometimes it’s more than just a name change, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It could be something that really, later on, 

would wake up individuals who are saying, well that’s not 

exactly what we asked for. There’s been things changed, added 

to. 

 

So we got to make sure that and I think we’ve got to have some 

time as individual MLAs to see if we can get a response from 

individuals out there who are in the professional, who are in the 

community planning. Are these changes that the government’s 

proposing with legislation, are you okay? Are you comfortable 

with this? Are there anything that you would like us to request 

of them to add in or take out? And we have to do our due 

diligence. And you know, we will do that, and we’ll make sure 

that we’re doing our role. But having said that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there are many challenges. We know that. 

 

And you know, you talk about smart growth and you talk about 

the planning. And the organization here, you know, professional 

planners, they do an excellent job. We know that. And of course 

sometimes if it’s housecleaning and it’s areas where they want 

to bring forward, we want to support it. And there’s no reason 

for us not to work with government when legislation is brought 

forward for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And you know, I know my colleagues, they express their 

concern sometimes on some of the bills that come forward. But 

I also know we can work together as we’re asked to sometimes, 

representing the province to make sure bills are passed in a way 

that’s making sure that the due diligence is done on it, but also 

sometimes certain bills come through where on both sides it’s 

beneficial for our Saskatchewan residents and the good people 

in our province to see that. 

 

But sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re very concerned that 

the way some of these bills come forward, and we have to make 

sure that we cover them off. We have to make sure that we’re 

doing our due diligence. And we get a chance to look at the 

speaking notes, and you look at certain bills. And I think my 

colleagues, as we go through these bills — and we will — we’ll 

ask certain questions, clarification. We’ll make sure that, okay, 

well if those letters are available, can we have copies of them? 

There’s different things, ways we can do that. 

 

The organizations may send us as critics those letters. We are 

cc’d them to make sure that we understand that . . . And 

sometimes, you know, we make contact with those 

organizations to clearly say, the organization will say, we’re 

actually in favour of these bills. This is something we’ve 

requested. We would like the opposition to please work with the 

government to pass the bill. And we have done that and done an 

excellent job of that. And I think the people want us to do that. 

We have a role sometimes and, you know, difference of opinion 

when you talk about some of the challenges that Saskatchewan 

people are facing, but overall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 

sometimes the key is working together to benefit Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And some of these bills, like I said earlier, are name changes, 

and some of them, you know, want to be very clear the intent of 

the amendments that are being proposed, the changes. We want 

to make sure that those changes are truly going to benefit the 

people of the province or the industry or anyone that will be 

impacted by certain bills. And some bills carry, I guess, more 

change that we’re not aware of at the time. And until they 

impact some of the Saskatchewan people and the residents and 

people that are truly impacted by some of the legislation and the 

bills that we pass . . . And there are many examples of that 

where people didn’t realize such changes had happened, that 

legislation was being introduced, a bill, a change, amendment, 

or whether it’s a name change or sometimes there are things 

that get put in a bill that organizations, groups weren’t aware of. 

 

And like I said, it’s clearly that sometimes it’s government’s 

idea or might be an MLA talking to somebody in their 

constituency or sometimes, you know, the partner. And 

sometimes the political arm plays a role in that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where politics gets involved. And we see some 

changes that aren’t good for, you know, whether it’s the unions, 

whether it’s protected lands, we see some of the changes that 

have been proposed by the current government as challenging, 

whether it’s elections. 

 

We look at some of the changes that, you know, the government 

and the Justice minister brought forward was really upsetting to 

a lot of people, and some of the challenges. And that’s 

something that we have to be very careful on when we’re 

bringing in changes like that, that it impacts so many people. 

When you want to try to make sure that we’re representing 

people and getting people out to be involved in our province, 

whether it’s elections, whether it’s . . . It doesn’t matter what 

service individuals want to use in our province. So it’s 

challenging to see sometimes the bills that this government 

brings forward. And it’s the way they’re brought forward, you 

know, that’s very concerning. 

 

But looking at Bill 67, The Community Planning Profession 

Act, I looked through it a little bit. And I looked at the first 

comments that were made by the minister and by the member 

from Athabasca. He referred to some areas where he was very 

concerned about making sure that we have the information, the 

proof, and we make the contacts. 

 

And hopefully those that are out there in the industry want to 

contact the official opposition. We encourage that. Individuals 

who hear some of the stuff that we share in this legislature 

about some of the changes, we encourage them to come forward 

to hear, you know, some of the comments going on, debating 

the bills that are going on here and some of the legislation that’s 



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

going to impact them. We encourage people to come forward to 

hear it but also to respond to us as critics, as MLAs, and not 

only to the official opposition. Contact their local MLA if it 

happens to be a Sask Party MLA. Contact them if you’re 

concerned about a certain bill. That’s their obligation to bring it 

forward through their venue to their members, to the minister 

who is responsible for making the amendments or changing the 

bill. So there is a process for all of us, I think, in our province to 

get involved in this. 

 

But at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know my colleagues 

will have more to say on this bill. And as we go through the 

process, we will discuss the bill more. It also will go to 

committee, and I know we can ask questions. And we’ll do our 

homework over the next while, when the session is done, to 

make sure while we’re away doing some of our work that we’re 

getting the details that we need to make sure we can work with 

the government to move these to committee. And then, you 

know, if need be, they will be the law. But at this time, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I am prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 67, 

The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition Whip has moved to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 67. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 68 — The Justices 

of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la 

Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 

68, An Act to amend The Justices of the Peace Act, 1988. And 

again, a relatively straightforward piece of legislation we think, 

but of course there could be unintended consequences. So as my 

Whip had said, we’ve got lots of homework to do to make sure 

that we understand these pieces of legislation as well as we can. 

 

It was interesting because as I was going through this, I found 

out something I didn’t know about justices of the peace. I 

always thought they could do marriages. Apparently they can’t. 

That’s the number one frequently asked question, can they do 

marriages? No, a marriage commissioner can, but not a Justice 

of the Peace. So there you go, something I learned today. 

 

But there is more to it than that. And seriously, Mr. Speaker, I 

understand that there’s about 160 justices of the peace in 

Saskatchewan. So this piece of legislation is a critical one for 

them because what I understand, it talks about determination of 

salary and benefits, and how do we arrive at that. As the 

minister had talked in his second reading speech, that it’s done 

by regulation now, but they wanted to make it, bring in the 

current practices into a more formal arrangement into the 

legislation. 

 

And so it’d be based on what the other judges are getting, and it 

would be a certain percentage of the annual salary of a judge of 

the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. And that’s prescribed in 

the regulations made by the commission. And that seems 

relatively straightforward, and we understand that they’ve met 

with the group who represents the justices of the peace. 

 

But it is important that we take time to talk about this and 

people are aware and those people watching . . . or hopefully 

this will be brought up in the media and people have an opinion. 

It’s an important principle that there be some arm’s length 

between those people setting the laws, that being us, and those 

people applying the laws and judging. And that’s an appropriate 

thing that they’re being arm’s length. 

 

But clearly there’s always a debate in the public around those 

who are servants of the public, the public servants, what is a 

fair, what is a reasonable wage and how we do . . . Especially 

those who we want to ensure that we continue to trust with 

respect. And those are the judges, justices of the peace that we 

reflect on who are they and the work that they do, and that they 

are paid adequately so that the judgments they do and the work 

that they carry out is done with the credibility and integrity that 

of course we would expect that would be the case. 

 

Clearly this is what this speaks to, and we’ll have to know more 

about it. It would be interesting to know what are the cost 

implications of this. It would be interesting to know, when we 

think of justices of the peace, we don’t think of full-time 

workers. A senior Justice of the Peace may be working more 

than those who are on a part-time basis. These 160 people are 

spread out throughout the province because they do an 

important role of being . . . so people can have access to justice 

in their own communities. 

 

So it would be an interesting thing to know more about this. 

Where are the justices of the peace throughout the province? 

How many are full-time? How many . . . What is the cost 

implication of this? And you know, they do have a transition 

process for justices of the peace so that nothing is lost, that they 

don’t actually end up being paid less than what they were being 

paid before. So that’s an important criteria, but it is one that we 

will ask. 

 

And we want to make sure that when we talk about the costs of 

the court system, that it’s a reasonable one. Because on one 

hand we absolutely want to ensure that people have the 

confidence in the justice system and that it’s doing the best 

work and as quickly and as effectively as it can, while ensuring 

everyone’s rights that are involved, that they are making sure 

that the people’s rights are being heard. But at the same time, 

what’s a reasonable cost? 

 

And this is one that I know governments have wrestled with for 

many, many years because clearly you want to make sure 

people are paid adequately, and it is fitting to their level of 

office, their stature in our society, that their pay is recompensed 

to that. But on the other hand, as we know, we are the keepers 

of the purse here, and people do not want us to be extravagant 

and get too far out ahead of this. 

 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2181 

[16:00] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, you know, it’s interesting to 

know a little bit more about who the justices of the peace are. 

And you know, it’s quite a system actually. And I do appreciate 

the opportunity just to reflect on this a bit for those folks at 

home because they may be wondering who are these, who’s the 

Justice of the Peace in their community and how do you get a 

hold of them and what do they usually do. 

 

Well you know, what functions do justices of the peace 

perform? This is a handy-dandy document from the Provincial 

Court system. They administer oaths for criminal charges laid 

by the police or the public; confirm or cancel police-issued 

processes, and those might include promises to appear, 

appearance notice, or recognizance; reviewing and signing 

court-issued processes, that would be summons or warrant for 

arrest, that type of thing. Again that speaks to the need of the 

court system to be nimble and be able to respond quickly. And 

I’d imagine without these 160 folks that it could grind things 

down pretty quickly.  

 

Reviewing and issuing subpoenas compelling witnesses to 

attend court; administering oaths for affidavits, affirmations, 

declarations; considering applications for search warrants; 

releasing or remanding accused persons who’ve been arrested 

or are being held in custody. And they can also perform certain 

court functions in the absence of a provincial court. These 

include accepting guilty pleas from and sentencing accused 

persons charged with provincial regulatory offences and 

granting a judgment. 

 

So you have two different levels. You have the Justice of the 

Peace, but then you have senior justices of the peace, and those 

would be the ones who would be doing more the higher level 

work. 

 

Interestingly, in Regina and Saskatoon specifically designated 

and trained senior justices of the peace have authority to 

conduct trials under various provincial statutes including traffic, 

liquor, and wildlife offences. So that’s interesting as well. And 

I’m not sure . . . It would be interesting because we’ve seen 

more work in terms of the labour area, and that’s when we have 

to talk more about offences around occupational health and 

safety and that. They’ve not really referred to that here, but 

clearly liquor offences and wildlife offences. And those are 

important because we know that, and we’ve seen that over the 

past decade, the growth particularly in charges laid under the 

wildlife legislation. 

 

But the one that really is, that does stand out the most for me is 

conduct trials for offences under various municipal bylaws, 

including noise and domestic animal violations. Now 

sometimes that seems like a minor thing but noise, I know, is a 

big, big deal. And we’ve seen . . . Actually I think the minister, 

one of the ministers has been talking to Alberta around noise 

from loud vehicles. And I think that’s an important area, if 

you’re living in an urban setting and . . . It could be anywhere 

really. If there’s loud vehicles, we have to be able to do 

something about that. And so this is something a Justice of the 

Peace would be able to do. 

 

Myself, I think we could do just general noise bylaws. And I’m 

anxiously waiting to see what happens in the city of Saskatoon 

around some of the bars and late-night establishments that are 

very, very loud. I think they’re louder than some motorcycles. If 

you get the music going inside those bars, I don’t think it would 

take an awful lot to stand across the way, across the street, and 

measure the noise. So I’m very interested in making sure these 

justices of the peace are there so we can have some of these 

bylaw violations and be taken to court. 

 

Frankly, you know, Mr. Speaker, in my 10 or more years as an 

MLA, I see this as an issue on Idylwyld where there are bars 

that are so noisy, and we have not been able to take them to 

court. And I’m looking forward to seeing if we can do more 

about noise. And I think this is an important issue for our 

communities. And again if we can have the court system work 

effectively, and this means utilizing the justice of peace system 

in that process, that would be very, very helpful. 

 

And again domestic animal violations. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 

you would know, a few years ago we had some service animals 

in here because of the issues around harassment of animals. 

Now interesting now, harassment of animals can be both a 

provincial issue and it can be a municipal issue. It would be 

interesting to know. And this may be something because we’ve 

just heard last week about the cats that were in the bag, in the 

knapsack that some poor guy drove over, and there were some 

issues on that, whether that’s a municipal issue or a provincial 

issue. But again there were people who emailed me about that 

issue, very upset about that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are real, real issues, and a Justice 

of the Peace can perform some real important duties in their 

communities. So it’d be interesting to know. 

 

And as I get into this . . . And it’s always interesting as you 

prepare for each bill that we have before us, which is at the 

provincial level, which is at the municipal level, and how do the 

justices of the peace work within those areas. 

 

Interestingly it does talk about, as I said earlier, about 

performing marriages. Because maybe I’m not the only guy 

who made that mistake. Not that I’m looking for somebody, but 

I just found that interesting here that they can actually . . . that 

they actually can’t perform marriages. So if anybody’s worried 

about that, that’s a marriage commissioner. 

 

Now we go through what the other parts are, about hiring and 

how do the qualifications . . . and all of that kind of thing. So 

it’s important. It’s a very important job, and I would not have 

thought that there were 160 justices of the peace in 

Saskatchewan. But of course, as I said, not all of them would be 

full-time, but many of them would be. It would be interesting to 

know the impact of this legislation when you’re talking about 

salary, whether this is, what kind of increase in the cost. What 

does this mean for the justices? Will they be seeing much of an 

increase? It sounds like a bit of a red circle program where if 

you’re making below . . . If you’re making more, you won’t 

have your wages cut, which only makes sense. But at the same 

time I’d be curious to know how many people actually would 

see an increase in this as well and what kind of an impact that 

would have. 

 

So I just want to review what the minister said because that’s 



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

always very important, that whenever we take a look at second 

reading debates, what did he say? And that we make sure, that 

we really make sure we reflect on that because, as we know, 

that these speeches are carefully given, carefully worded 

because at some point they may end up coming back and being 

used potentially as part of a court case. Because this is the 

interpretation we have of the legislation because we know as 

legislation is certainly wordsmithed in such a way so it can 

withstand court challenges. But we need to know a bit more 

than that, and that’s why we have ministers giving second 

readings. And so what he talks about, what he talks about is the 

guarantee of financial security. He goes on, he says, and I 

quote: 

 

The process, Mr. Speaker, is now inadequate, given that 

courts have ruled the principles of judicial independence 

applies not only to judges but also [to, and he calls them] 

JPs. One element of judicial independence is the guarantee 

of financial security to judicial officers such as JPs. 

Financial security embodies three requirements. Firstly, 

salaries could be maintained or changed only by recourse 

to an independent process. Secondly, no direct 

negotiations are permitted between judicial officers and 

the government. And finally, salaries may not fall below a 

certain minimum level. 

 

And I think that, I think that’s very clear and very critical 

because in that case you have . . . And you know, particularly 

when we talk about the wildlife fines, that type of thing, or 

liquor fines, we know that’s, on one hand we may argue that it’s 

not a big deal. But it really is. It truly is. And we think that it’s 

important for the judicial system to have that independence. 

That makes our criminal system, our judicial system have the 

integrity it does. And if we interfere from the government 

perspective by overtly setting salaries at a high level for some, a 

low level for some, you know, maybe perhaps really cutting out 

some, cutting down salaries, this could be a big deal. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I heard this morning a group of 

Guatemalan women have actually come to Toronto to raise a 

case about a Canadian company because they had no faith in 

their own justice system or judicial system in Guatemala 

because it can be easily intimidated; it can be easily 

manipulated. And the easiest, the most direct way to intimidate 

or manipulate a judicial system is through their wages, is 

through their wages. And because we all have to make a living, 

we all have to have economic security. And I agree with this 

very much so, because in order to have integrity of the justice 

system, there has to be economic security and independence. 

 

And so it’s interesting to see that justices of the peace are now 

being considered part of that group. When we talk about judges, 

we’re also referring to justices of the peace. And while we may 

often not have thought of that in the case, but clearly as we do 

more and more of this work that we’re bringing them along 

because they’re an integral part of the justice system. They 

make sure things flow quickly. They can do a lot of things that 

would bog down the court system if we had only judges doing 

all the kind of work that I described earlier. We would have a 

problem. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I just want to reflect too on what the 

minister talked about, “senior JPs are most responsible . . . have 

most of the responsibility.” And they can “conduct trials for 

provincially regulated offences . . . [such] as bylaw and traffic 

safety matters.” And he goes on to say, “In recent years, the 

work of these JPs has taken pressure off our Provincial Court 

and improved timely access to the criminal justice system.” 

 

And again a very, very critical part when we talk about timely 

access. That’s one of the things we would hope that if you are 

going to court . . . Nobody wants to be part of the court system, 

either as a victim or someone who’s charged. Clearly if you can 

handle your matters in ways otherwise, that’s the thing you 

want to do. But sometimes we find ourselves in the court 

systems, and we hope that it can be done in a timely and 

effective manner, and making sure justice is carried out with all 

the due diligence to make sure that nobody’s rights are being 

trampled on, but at the same time there’s not an undue pressure 

of living a crime or, you know, wondering about what’s going 

to happen with this or that, that they can be done in relatively 

quick fashion. 

 

He goes on to talk about, “The framework introduced through 

this bill achieves judicial independence,” and then he talks 

about an independent commission that will be set up to “review 

and make recommendations regarding salaries and pension 

benefits for JPs.” And then following the initial one, it will be 

established as a percentage of the salaries of the Saskatchewan 

Provincial Court. Now going forward they will be adjusted 

accordingly with any adjustments to the salaries of Provincial 

Court judges. 

 

And he also talks about senior justices of the peace being 

brought into the public employees pension plan. And again 

maybe this is something that we need to think about. And it 

would be interesting when we have this discussion in 

committee. Who are these justices of the peace? 

 

[16:15] 

 

You know, we often have this mindset of older folks, you 

know, just doing a little bit of work. But it sounds like now it’s 

getting to be more and more a bit of a career. And I’m not sure 

because I don’t know any JPs myself, so I don’t know what 

these folks, these 160 people, you know, what their 

demographic is. Are they older folks? Are they younger? Are 

they people who are looking at careers when they are in their 

20s and 30s saying, I’m going to be a Justice of the Peace? I 

don’t know. It’d be interesting to know the career ladder. Do 

many justices of the peace end up as judges? I don’t know. 

 

So it’s going to be an interesting conversation when we get into 

the committee. I’m finding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to be in 

many of these committees. I’ve just got a lot of questions. I’m 

kind of curious about who these folks are because there’s 160 of 

them, and that’s a fair number. And I don’t know whether 

they’re full-time, part-time, what they are. But they do an 

important job. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, this is relatively 

straightforward, it seems. But it’s one of those things that’s 

critical about the success of our court system, as I said, to make 

sure it’s independent, it’s fair, it has integrity, and people view 

it that way and the people who are in that system are valued and 

know that they have the respect of their communities. 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

And at the same time, as I said, it’s up to us to make sure we do 

our due diligence, that we’ve checked this out a bit, find out 

more about it. But I know that many folks here will have many 

questions about this bill and other bills and so . . . But as I said, 

I always enjoy getting up and speaking as I learn a little bit 

more every day, even though it may not be the most valuable 

thing of the day, but I do think it’s important to challenge some 

of the stereotypes we have. And I’m glad I learned a little bit 

about justices of the peace. 

 

And with that, I would like to now adjourn Bill No. 68, move it 

to adjournment. Adjourn Bill No. 68, An Act to amend The 

Justices of the Peace Act, 1988. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 68, The Justices of the 

Peace Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Vermette: — A little excitement over there. Thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in the debate on Bill 69, The 

Information Services Corporation Act. Actually this is one that 

I think that we could probably want to speak to in length with 

concerns from where I’m hearing from constituents all over 

about the concern the way this has come through. And we’ve 

got a lot of information I’m going to go through today to talk 

about: reports from the Crown Investments, the minister’s own 

words, different committees. Going right through, there is a lot 

of concern about this bill. 

 

When you’re trying to sell off a Crown corporation, a lot of 

promises, commitments that the current government made and 

truly is now . . . you know, didn’t talk about those issues when 

they were campaigning on the doorsteps, and you didn’t hear it 

in their platform. You didn’t hear it door to door that, you 

know, we’re selling off the Crown corporation, you know, ISC. 

That’s very concerning to a lot of people, and I’ll get into the 

details why that is. And this is a start. Very concerning. 

 

We’ve seen some of the stuff that the current government, the 

Sask Party government has already done with getting rid of 

Crown corporations, taking steps to I guess weaken the Crown 

corporations and then say, oh no, we’re the champions of the 

Crown corporations, which is false. We see the finances and the 

mess it’s in. And the government can sit here and spin the way 

they want. I understand that. 

 

But the people looking at this are starting to notice some things. 

If things are so good, why are we selling off things that are 

making the people of this province good, good, good profits? It 

makes good business sense to retain a company or an asset that 

is making the people of our province money, that help us pay 

for education, that help us pay for bridges. And you know, 

maybe they should keep this Crown corporation and not sell off 

anything. Clearly maybe they could use those dollars in a 

commitment to Prince Albert for a second bridge, which Prince 

Albert really needs. And maybe the members from Prince 

Albert could do a little bit of work on lobbying and, you know, 

advocating for Prince Albert because they have said very little 

or nothing about the bridge. So maybe that’s an area where they 

could go. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, I want to 

get into I guess different areas of this. And if you look at the 

information, I guess, corporation that Saskatchewan people 

have come to rely on, there’s many different parts, components. 

And the government is now trying to propose that through this 

legislation, it sees this as an, I guess, an opportunity to get some 

money for the Finance minister so he can, I guess, go around 

and put up billboards saying that he has a balanced budget. If 

that’s really what they want to do with a Crown corporation, 

where the people have said very clearly, Saskatchewan people 

do not want the Crown corporations sold off. They want them 

protected for a reason. They give a lot of benefit back to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And you know, we used to have of course under the previous 

NDP government, utilities that, you know, bundle . . . they 

talked about the cheapest bundle of utilities in all of Canada. 

And we see exactly what this government, since they have 

taken over, has caused. And we look at the different areas that 

this government wants to brag about and talk about and pat 

themselves on the back, put up billboards. That’s fine. 

 

You know, you can do all that if you want to spin, and they’re 

good at that. You know, that’s the one thing I’ll say about the 

Sask Party government — they like to spin. They are truly the 

PR [public relations] spin of the world. They truly are good at 

it. I give them credit. Well I didn’t want to say, like the member 

from Carrot River . . . I don’t like using “the universe,” so I 

didn’t want to use it. But I know I don’t want to connect that. 

 

But it’s amazing to see some of the areas where this 

government is going. It’s concerning to a lot of people. You’re 

having discussions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with citizens that 

really I think enjoy the province. Some of them are struggling. 

Some of them are wondering, well why — in a time of 

protection, you hear the Sask Party saying they’re not going to 

get rid of our Crowns — are they actually going ahead and 

moving on getting rid of our Crowns? So people are very 

concerned about the information that, you know, Information 

Services Corporation takes care of. 

 

Clearly, clearly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, the member 

from Moose Jaw North can say that people like him. And we’ll 

see if he’s one of the ones that aren’t speaking up for Valley 

View over there and for a community that are having issues just 

like the P.A. bridge. And you know, you think about speaking 

up. They want to speak up now and they want to make 

comments from there. It’s too bad they’re not back in their 

home constituency arguing and fighting for the people that they 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

should be arguing with, and for, with this government, for the 

way that this government is dealing with some of them. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I would remind those members to make sure maybe 

they go back home and maybe would be a little louder in their 

community saying, opposing what the government’s trying to 

do in that community of Moose Jaw. 

 

Now clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, concerns are not only from 

business people. There’s a lot of different organizations. Groups 

are watching this file closely. And there’s a good reason why 

they’re watching this, because clearly the people of this 

province in 2011 and, you know, the members opposite, clearly 

the people have said, yes. Go ahead. We voted you in. Run the 

affairs. The member from Athabasca always says, you know, 

always constantly makes the remark about, you know, we said 

just take care of everything. You know, don’t make a mess and 

don’t mess it up, you know, very clearly. He also says a few 

other things that, you know, I won’t comment on. But having 

said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly, clearly his concerns are 

probably echoed by a lot of people watching what’s going on 

now, that you have a government that has been given a lot of 

trust by the people, and to watch what this government has done 

when it comes to promises that they’ve made to people. 

 

And they like to put out photo ops and press releases and say 

they’re going to do certain things. And I think about the 

Wollaston Lake road, 2008 February. They make a big 

announcement — the road will be completed. I just want to 

show the different things that go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

want to use . . . I want to refer to the bill and Bill 69, but I also 

want to make it very clear the commitments that a government 

makes and whether that’s on the doorstep to the people of 

Wollaston Lake, what a . . . You know, that is not respect when 

you make an announcement and you put out a press release 

telling them they would have a road completed in February of 

2008; your road will be completed in 2012 construction year. 

 

They were here in this legislature — chief and council, their 

senator, their elders, some of the youth — concerned about their 

community and about this government’s commitment to doing a 

road where after the by-election in June of 2008, they never 

heard any more. So they wonder sometimes what’s going on. 

What’s the frustration? So I can see their concern for their 

community members when it comes to safety. Take the politics 

out of it. It’s the right thing to do when it’s about safety. It’s 

about taking care of community members. And yes, you have to 

look at the economics, and I know the government says 

different priorities. Well is this a priority of the government to 

get rid of, you know, the Crown corporation? 

 

So I’m really concerned about that when the government 

decides that on some of its commitments that it writes . . . and it 

puts out a press release and photo ops. It likes to do that. The 

government likes to do that. The ministry, the Premier likes to 

do that as well. So here you go. 

 

I’m just using an example. You take that money that you save if 

you keep the Crown corporation as a Crown corporation, and 

you utilize that money for the Wollaston Lake road to make 

sure their community members are safe. So you can save that 

money, instead of selling it off and it’s gone. We can get this 

money in every year. It showed a good profit back to the people 

of our province. Why would you want to jeopardize that? 

So here’s an opportunity for the government to say, you know 

what? We’re going to rethink this. Maybe it’s time we don’t sell 

off, you know, ISC. Clearly we’ll keep it because we’re going 

to utilize those dollars that we were getting each year and we’re 

going to build a road to Wollaston Lake. We’re going to build a 

second bridge in Prince Albert. The people of Prince Albert 

deserve that. It’s there; let’s do that. And let’s hope, you know, 

we’re going to deal with the situation and the issues that the 

community of Moose Jaw’s dealing with. There’s a lot of 

people going to be impacted, and we’re going to use those 

dollars to make sure the people in Moose Jaw are dealt with 

fairly. So the government could use those dollars rather than 

selling off, you know, the information . . . You know, you look 

at that type of stuff very clearly. 

 

And you know what? We could use that to build addiction 

treatment centres. We could use that to make sure, you know, 

people are never turned away, not like some facilities. Some 

ministers say well, people will never be turned away in certain 

situations. But unfortunately here’s situations where addictions, 

people are turned away. So if it’s health care facilities, addiction 

treatment, assistant education with addictions, and maybe it’s 

time that this government start using some of that money to deal 

with those issues instead of selling them off for a one-time . . . 

to fix their so-called . . . They can put up a billboard to say, it’s 

a balanced budget. Here you go. We put up another billboard. 

To me it is the wrong thing and the wrong message to send to 

the people of our province. 

 

You know, you think about it and you understand some of the 

situations that the people back home in Saskatchewan are 

dealing with — addictions, and you’re dealing with poverty and 

you’re dealing with the youth suicide and you’re dealing with 

some of the serious issues, housing. And you have a 

government who I really feel is missing the opportunities to 

deal with some of the situations. They talk about the growth and 

they talk about all the money that they have and they talk about 

all these areas. So utilize that money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Instead of selling off our Crowns, utilize that money. Retain 

those dollars to keep in this province. Those are the people of 

the province who own these Crown corporations. 

 

They’re the ones that should benefit from the cheapest bundle 

of utilities. Clearly we should have that. But clearly we should 

also make sure that we keep the Crown corporations and the 

money and the assets for the people of this province to deal 

with some of the situations that many of our communities are 

facing. 

 

You know, it’s not just northern Saskatchewan that’s suffering 

with some of the topics and issues I’ve shared and some of the 

challenges. It’s rural areas that are dealing with it too. They 

have a lot of the same challenges that we’re facing in the rural 

Saskatchewan. And the government can cheerlead all it wants 

on some of the things that they’re doing. Yes. And I’ll give 

credit sometimes where the government needs it. There’s 

nothing wrong with that. It’s the right thing to do. When a 

government does good things for the people of the province, 

you have to agree it’s a good thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But when you see some of the things and the neglect that this 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

government has done to a lot of people in our province and the 

neglect under this bill, by trying to sell off this bill, by not 

telling the people what they were up to in 2011 . . . They didn’t 

mention it on the doorsteps. It’s in no pamphlet. There’s no 

pamphlet; there’s no platform . . . They didn’t mention one 

word, you know, that they were going to sell off Crown 

corporations. Oh, I think they went the other way when they 

were questioned. And those members know what they talked to 

individuals on the doorsteps when they were campaigning. 

They know what they said. Go back and search the 

conversations you had with the people in the province that you 

asked for their support. Did you tell them? 

 

And you know, you look at cost. And I’m going to go into cost. 

You could utilize the money from not selling this Crown 

corporation. You could save the money for our seniors so they 

don’t have to be charged $5 more for a prescription. Maybe you 

could use those moneys for that. You could use the money for 

the ambulance, $25 that seniors have to pay. Then maybe we 

don’t have to charge them when they’re in a long-term care 

facility for their personal hygienic products that they need. 

They don’t have to pay the $240, whatever was requested of 

them to pay per year. 

 

These are things that people expect, and when you have Crowns 

that make the money . . . And we don’t want the government 

going in and taking special dividends from our Crown 

corporations so that they can again put up billboards and say, 

yes, again we have a balanced budget. And you know, it was 

interesting to see today in question period again, you know, the 

critic for finances. Clearly he truly has a good understanding of 

what’s going on, which is good for us but not good for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

You can spin it and you guys, as a government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they can spin it how they want. There’s a lot of people 

suffering. And they can talk about all the different people that 

are off the tax rate, you know, that aren’t paying tax any more. I 

mean, I listen to them. And they can make all the comments in 

the world about there’s more work to be done, but there’s 

people back home that are truly suffering in the rural, in the 

urban, in the North, First Nations communities, many Métis 

communities. There’s a lot of people are not doing so good. 

And this so-called growth and this so-called balanced budget 

billboard and the spending, there’s a lot of people that are not, 

truly are not benefitting. 

 

So I would suggest that maybe the government scrap the idea of 

selling our Crowns. Come clean with the Saskatchewan people. 

Come clean with the people that are needing the services. Come 

clean with the people that are needing services in their 

community. 

 

And you know, I think it’s important to talk about the 

addictions, you know. There are so many concerns. And I 

mean, we’re going to get a chance to talk about certain bills and 

bills that are introduced. 

 

But when you see some of the spin that members opposite are 

coming out with, I mean, I realize they need the backbenchers 

— and I know my colleague always says this — get the 

backbenchers to get up and speak and fight for. And I 

understand and I know that we get a lot of it. But you know, he 

makes up some good . . . He makes clear points on some of the 

issues that are facing some of the people. He makes it very 

clear. Moose Jaw. He raises some interesting issues over there 

that the members should be fighting for. Prince Albert, second 

bridge. Very clearly he mentioned some of the areas where 

nobody’s from there are fighting. So I wonder why he’s doing 

that. Because somebody needs to hear their concerns. 

Somebody needs to have a good understanding of what’s going 

on. And trust me, he says it all the time. Keep doing what 

they’re doing; the people will judge you. You’ll come. We 

understand that. 

 

You didn’t tell them you were going to sell off our Crown 

corporations. There’s a lot of surprises that have gone on, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. This bill is just one of those surprises that have 

come out. They didn’t talk about that in their campaign. They 

never talked on the doors. But there’s been so many surprises 

coming — certain bills coming forward, things they want to sell 

off, things they want to do, their own agenda. 

 

Here’s truly, I guess, what I’ve heard from some people who 

have been supporters of the Sask Party. That’s amazing to 

watch, you know. There are truly supporters, and I realize, you 

know, business world and everything else. Even in our own 

families we don’t all have the same political beliefs. Some of 

us, you know, come to the agreement we can disagree on our 

politics. And that’s fine and that’s okay, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

But at the end of the day the people ask the government to take 

care of them, to do the right things, and don’t come up with 

surprises. Don’t mislead, don’t say, well we’re not going to sell 

these off, you know; our intent is to keep them. 

 

And you know, I’ll give some quote. It’s interesting because I 

want to, you know, mention a quote, the 2008 ISC annual report 

and the minister back then: 

 

My priority for the future remains the same: to ensure that 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations remain publicly 

owned and provide high quality services at a low cost. 

This is a promise our Government made to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and it [will be] . . . a promise we will keep. 

 

Like it’s interesting to see some of the comments that the 

minister can make. So in 2008 there’s a promise they made to 

the people; they’re going to keep them. So all of a sudden here 

we are. The election’s over and why are we dealing with this? 

Why are we debating this bill? Why are people talking about it 

in the coffee shops? Why are people wondering what’s going 

on? Like why are people starting to understand that, whoa, this 

isn’t what we asked for? And I tell you, when you have 

individuals who are truly supporters of a certain political party, 

or thought, well maybe times we’ll support this government and 

give them another term, now they’re starting to question 

themselves. And you know, and I’ve had people who are 

supporters and told me they are true supporters, are concerned 

about the way they’re handling of this bill and many other bills 

that they’re proposing. Surprises, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

situations that they’re bringing forward that the people didn’t 

ask for, didn’t want. So they’re wondering why. 

 

Well you know, my colleague, the member from Athabasca, 

makes it very clear. You know, he’s passionate about showing 

how things are — the difference between the Sask Party and the 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

NDP — clearly. And you know, you look at some of the 

information. Privatization you talk about, when you look at the 

Crowns the way they’re going, what protection is there? I mean 

they say they’re going to retain so much of the Crown that the 

government will retain. What guarantee do we have that the 

government won’t sell it off? I mean if they’re not disclosing 

stuff to the people that elected them and they don’t have to 

disclose that to them, then clearly you think they’re going to 

right now protect a Crown corporation that they’re willing to 

. . . So what guarantee is there? There’s none. 

 

So you know it’s very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 

members over there can say what they want. You know, they 

get a little sensitive when you talk about the people that are 

supposed to support them and trusted them and believed that 

they would do the right thing. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know even 

some of the members opposite, whether they’re in the 

backbenches, they must look at some of this. They’re not in on 

the plan, but they must look at this. And I hope they look at this 

and they’re saying, this isn’t what we campaigned on. This isn’t 

what the people wanted. These are surprises that the people 

didn’t ask for, don’t want, and are very concerned. And they are 

very concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When you talk about privatization of our Crown corporations 

— which have made us millions of dollars, which have 

benefited us, and which go back clearly to deal with the 

situations that are affecting our Saskatchewan people in the 

rural areas — we see what the government’s willing to do and 

the programs that the government’s willing to cut. All for the 

reason . . . And clearly they say because they want to make sure 

they can say again for another year, they have a balanced 

budget. So they can put up the billboards; so they can spin it, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s a balanced budget. Who suffers 

for that? How many people have to suffer for a small few to get 

to spin it that they have a balanced budget? Well people are 

suffering out there. Grandparents, youth, seniors. Again, 

whether the cost, the affordability, housing, when you look at 

the housing in northern . . . You look at the poverty numbers 

that have come out clearly. You look at some of the numbers 

coming out and this government wants to brag about having . . . 

and, you know, advertise billboards. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a problem. This 

government is not connected to the people. They may have been 

elected by the people, but for some reason they have left them 

behind, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’ve left the people that 

elected them behind. They’re not doing what they were asked to 

do, and they know that. And that’s why you have them every 

now and then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they want to engage into it. 

 

Well how come they’re not speaking up? How come they’re not 

back home speaking up? Because nobody seems to hear them. 

They’re not saying anything. They’re quiet. They’re so quiet. 

Why is that? Why are the members opposite so quiet in their 

own areas? Because they’re told to follow the party line. 

They’re told what to do. 

 

Well let me tell you one thing. Those members back over there, 

members opposite, the people will get a chance to send you a 

message. You can laugh. You think it’s funny when people are 

suffering, when the people are suffering and people aren’t doing 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They can laugh and they can say all 

they want. They may have their so-called mandate, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but the people will send arrogance a lesson. And they 

will teach them. You’ll see. You’ll see . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . That’s good. You just keep, keep preaching 

about it. That’s fine. You keep saying your message, keep 

spinning it. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s clearly, clearly the concerns that 

people have about messing around with the Crown corporations 

on so many areas. Information is something they want to 

protect. People hold information very near and dear to their 

hearts . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. You know, 

clearly, why doesn’t the Sask Party do the same thing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? How come they don’t understand that? How 

come they can’t see the media, they can’t see individuals? You 

can’t tell me that they don’t see this, they’re not hearing it. 

Clearly people are concerned about the Crowns. 

 

So let’s take this back a little. Let’s go back a little bit about 

areas of need. When we have people in the province who have 

needs, and they have a Crown corporation and they expect a 

government to do the right thing with the Crown corporations, 

to protect them, to make sure that nobody messes with those 

Crown corporations, that’s all they’re asking. They’re saying, 

be upfront, utilize the services, and respect us. 

 

So what does the government do? It thinks it can sell off 

whatever it wants. And people are concerned that this is just the 

start. This is their test case to see where they go. Well the 

people are going to . . . And I encourage the people, send a 

message to the MLAs of the Sask Party. If you’re living in a 

constituency where you have a Sask Party MLA, send them a 

message. Tell them, what are you guys doing selling off our 

Crown corporations, to even consider it when you never 

campaigned on that? You made promises you weren’t going to. 

How is it that now you can sell off Crown corporations? I don’t 

know how you get away with it. I don’t understand it. 

 

But take them for granted. And that’s what I think, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Some of the members are doing that and I think they 

will pay a price. They can sit here and say what they want. Oh 

well, we’re 49. That’s fine. Keep with that. Run with it. Do 

what you want with it. But at the end of the day, you’re here 

representing the people. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve 

been asked to represent the people in this province who want to 

make sure our Crown corporations are protected, who want to 

make sure services are provided to all Saskatchewan. Whether 

you live in a rural, an urban, the North, whether you live on 

First Nations community, people want to make sure that the 

services are there. And how do we make sure those services are 

there? With revenue. 

 

It’s interesting how the changes are going on with some of the 

proposed changes of legislation. Now I know sometimes you hit 

a nerve with members because they figure their plan, their idea, 

and they talk and they spin. And I watch their growth plan. 

Why is it that they had to take money from our Crown 

corporations, SaskEnergy, SaskPower, wherever they’ve been 

taking? I mean the colleague of mine who’s a critic for, you 

know, finances, clearly said it today. The amount of money 

that’s been taken in special dividends from our Crown 

corporations, the government wanted to, you know, spin it that 

it has a balanced budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A balanced 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

budget to do what? 

 

Now when you see them doing this type of spin and they’re 

going after the assets, the rainy day fund, you look at the 

amount of money that this government’s after. You know, some 

of the comments that some of my colleagues said, they’re 

hunting for money. I’ve heard different comments all over: 

they’re on the hunt for dollars, they’re on the hunt for money, 

and they’re going everywhere and anywhere and they’re 

looking at anything. 

 

And you know, people are concerned when you start selling off 

our Crowns. Where will it end? Where will it end? Well we 

have to make sure that we protect, you know, the Crown. ISC 

has to be protected. There’s no provisions in here. This is just 

the start of it. You have comments from ministers, promises, 

commitments to the people that they would not sell off the 

Crowns, and here we go. We’re introduced to legislation so that 

they can do what? Sell off a Crown. 

 

[16:45] 

 

That’s just the start, so that they can again do their spin that 

they have the only balanced budget. Well you know what? I 

think even the rest of the provinces are watching this file 

closely because I know the Provincial Auditor has been 

watching it closely. And I think one of these days we’re going 

to have to show the public exactly where we’re at, not use the 

accounting practices we’ve been using. But we should be in 

compliance with the rest of the province and Canada to show 

that the public gets to see it dollar for dollar and see where 

we’re at, that you can’t manipulate it and they can pass on. 

 

You know, I think about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you 

talk about the whole plan. And this government has been in 

here for years, and people are saying that now. I’m listening to 

them. They’re not new any more. They’ve been here for years 

and years and years. How many more years do they want to be 

here? Well keep doing what you’re doing and I guess you will 

understand what the people are saying when they say, protect 

our Crowns. Do not give us all these surprises you’re giving us. 

Three more politicians that millions . . . More politicians for 

what? People are asking that. It’s amazing. You know, they say 

clearly it was not in their campaign promise. Oh you look at all 

the different things going on, that the surprises that people are 

seeing. 

 

And again I go back to this legislation that they’re proposing, 

Bill 69, just to see how that is coming out. Clearly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, people are very concerned and some of them are 

getting angry. And I’m watching them, and I’m wondering, 

what’s going on? How come? Well because they never told us 

that when I supported them. I voted for them this time, you 

know. I thought, well hey it would give them . . . Things were 

going good. They looked good. But you know what? It’s that 

PR, spin shop, whatever you want to call it. You get it going, 

you keep things going. PR is amazing, and it is. 

 

And you know what? But watch out when the people start to 

figure it out. When the people of our province . . . And I believe 

that most people in our province and the people that I have met 

and talked to and shared are very genuine. They’re caring. Our 

elders teach us to do that. Our community members, our 

seniors, they tell us to show respect and work together as a 

province. Be proud. 

 

But when you see some of the challenges that are facing our 

rural, northern, our urban, our First Nations, our Métis 

communities, it’s appalling and it’s shameful. It’s a disgrace to 

see some of the conditions people are living in today, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It is, it’s a shame, a province that’s as wealthy 

as we are, clearly. And you know, you have a government who 

wants to say it has the only balanced budget in all of Canada. 

And that’s fine if they want to put up billboards and all that. 

How about the children that are suffering? Education, we’ve 

seen the challenges. Addictions, we’ve seen the suicides. We’ve 

seen the mental health challenges that individuals are having. 

We’re seeing the housing. There are so many challenges facing 

many Saskatchewan people, and it isn’t just Aboriginal. It isn’t 

just north. It isn’t just rural. It isn’t just urban. There’s a lot of 

people who are suffering under the management of this 

government. 

 

You know, you get to pick and choose the priorities. 

Governments pick and choose the priority. They’re supposed to 

talk with the people. Well you know what? I’ve heard a lot of 

people tell me, oh the minister was here. The government came. 

They said they heard us. That’s all they said. They heard us. But 

there’s been no action on those files. Hear the people, what 

they’re saying about the Crowns. Protect the Crowns. Hear 

what’s going on in the coffee shops, in the streets, supporters 

that supported your government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

government of the day, members of the Sask Party. 

 

You know what? Take the people for granted and see what will 

happen. You know what? I mean they’re talking and there’s 

more people talking about it, and they’re not happy. They’re not 

happy the way the government’s dealing with some of the files. 

And we see about the surprises, you know. The film tax credit, 

we see how that went on. It was amazing to watch what went on 

there. You know, clearly, the way the Chamber of Commerce of 

Saskatchewan was treated in this Assembly, their Assembly, 

you look at some of the way people are treated who oppose this 

government, and you know what? We should be passing 

legislation. And I think some people talk about that — bullying 

— make sure people can come to their legislation and talk 

freely. 

 

And when the government makes a plan or changes things 

without consulting, talk to the people, that the people can come. 

And you know, a government should be willing to say, we 

made a mistake. We’re sorry. We’re going to correct it. 

Unfortunately people are seeing exactly what’s not happening 

with the current government who has the so-called balanced 

budget. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go back to this 

Crown and the protection. And I have a lot more to say about 

this because there are so many people talking about it and 

concerned, even back home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I’m not done. I’ll be back this evening, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, and I’m going to enjoy coming back now because I want 

to get some ammunition over supper, and a break. Now you see, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the challenges that our people are facing, 

you know. And I just want to show examples of surprises that 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2012 

this government has brought forward where people have not 

shared. We look at Tourism Saskatchewan — used to be an 

arm’s-length organization. The industry was totally surprised. 

So we looked at that, and look at the industry. Another surprise 

of a government, Tourism Saskatchewan. You look at what this 

government’s willing to do, even with an arm’s-length industry 

throughout Saskatchewan who truly showed that it was the 

industry driving what Tourism Saskatchewan was doing. 

 

And yes, government funded a lot. I think there were something 

like almost, I don’t know, 11, maybe $12 million that comes in 

from government. I may not have the number exactly right, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but I’ll tell you what. There was a lot of 

money used for advertising, PR work. And people are very 

concerned that the government of the day took over that 

organization, Tourism Saskatchewan, who were doing an 

excellent job with a board and an independent board at arm’s 

length, that was doing a good job and represented the industry 

fine, was taken over. And the people are concerned of the way it 

was done, and we heard a lot of people speaking out and a lot of 

concern about the way it was done. It was done without anyone 

being aware of it, without consultation. That’s just another one. 

 

You know, we see some of the other thing that government’s 

willing to do, surprises — the LeRoy regional park. You know, 

you look at that one. In secrecy again. Another plan, you know, 

prepared to do with secrecy. And it’s interesting to see, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, what this government’s willing to sell off, 

support, without consulting the public, without consulting the 

industries a lot of time. They just want to do their own initiative 

and their own agenda — that conservative agenda, Sask Party 

agenda. Some people call them cousins. But you look at what 

they’re doing. 

 

But I think, you know, not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

should be looking at what they’re not doing, what they’re not 

doing, and the individuals that are falling through the cracks. 

And my colleagues have talked about some of the individuals 

when we look at immigration, some of the health care, some of 

the individuals that fall through the cracks. And we’re trying to 

make sure that that doesn’t happen. 

 

So we’re looking at different areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 

could utilize the money if you don’t sell off this Crown, Bill 69. 

If you were to keep this Crown and keep the assets, the money 

that it makes every year — and it makes millions for this 

province — you utilize those dollars, not only for a second 

bridge for Prince Albert. You know, you could utilize it for 

medications, for the immigrants, for everything to cover off 

things. So there’s a lot of things we could do with that money 

— education, housing. There’s so many. The list goes on — 

addictions. You know what? You can look. 

 

The only place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the government 

seems to really focus on saying is, you know, nobody’s turned 

away. We see where that is. There’s only one area where 

nobody will be turned away. You know, it’s quite surprising to 

me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the whole process of privatization 

. . . On one hand we say, the government says, it’s not 

happening. How do you start off? You start off small. You start 

off selling off bits and pieces of a Crown corporation. You sell 

off small parts of it. The people don’t notice it. And you think, 

oh well, they’re not noticing so we’ll sell this off. 

And you might weaken our Crowns. And if you weaken the 

Crowns enough, you know, the people might start saying . . . 

But do you know what, what I’m finding? People are not happy, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when this government looks at selling off 

the Crowns. Clearly. Clearly, they do not want the government 

to sell off the Crowns. Clearly, they’re saying no to selling off 

any part of our Crowns. 

 

Now I don’t know how the government misses that. Do you 

need, do you want a letter campaign? Maybe people could write 

letters to all their MLAs. Maybe they could sign petitions to all 

the MLAs. Maybe those people in Prince Albert who would like 

a second bridge could send letters to their two MLAs saying, 

could you save our Crowns and utilize the money to build us a 

second bridge? 

 

Maybe there’s other areas where we can use the dollars, 

whether it’s addictions. You want to educate and, you know, 

we’re making legislation and changes. Maybe we can use those 

dollars that we save from not selling off our Crowns and we 

could use them to do education and addiction services and to 

make sure nobody is turned away when they go to addiction and 

treatment. Maybe that’s what we can do instead of making sure 

. . . That’s one area we should make sure, this government and 

the province. And we as a province should make sure nobody’s 

turned away when it comes to addictions. And that’s something 

where we should be looking. 

 

So you know, you watch some of the things going on and you 

watch some of the priority of this government. And you know, 

it’s sad to see some of the suffering that’s going on in our 

province. You know, you have . . . Members opposite may have 

their own area that they want to go and they want to cheerlead 

certain things. And sometimes, you know what, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? It is a sad reality. Sometimes it’s the right thing to do 

for people. A government has to do the right thing. It isn’t about 

politics. It shouldn’t be about the way people vote. But 

unfortunately this government has shown its own agenda, and 

by proposing Bill 69 to sell off our Crown corporations, people 

are not happy and they will not be happy. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know I have more to say. And I 

know my colleagues have a lot that they want to say. This is a 

bill that warrants a lot of discussion. There’s been a lot of hard 

work done by many people who have worked for government, 

many people who have worked government, have had a career 

in government to protect our Crown corporations. And I see 

SOS [Save Our Saskatchewan Crowns]. It’s a good 

organization that’s trying to save our Crowns. And you know, 

it’s clear that this government has an issue that it’s going to 

have to address with the people. And I can’t wait till that 

happens. But you know, I have more to say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I’m going to. 

 

Now this bill proposes retaining 40 per cent. Now there’s no 

guarantee that they have to. Like it’s almost like saying, you 

know, giving examples. Trust us. We won’t sell off all of it. 

We’re going to save 40 per cent. Clearly, clearly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, how can you be willing to sell off 60 per cent of a 

Crown where the people asked you not to? But you’re going to 

say, we’re going to keep 40 per cent but there’s no guarantee 

we’re going to, if we need the money for next year because we 

want to have another billboard that says we have a balanced 



November 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

budget because we really don’t want the people to know. We 

want to take special dividends. We want to sell off assets of the 

people to make it look like, you know, the books are balanced 

again. You know what? People are going to get tired of that. 

And I think the Provincial Auditor’s going to start clearly, and I 

think she has like, you know, my colleague, the Finance critic 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, the Assembly 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2157 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2157 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2157 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2157 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2158 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2158 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2158 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2159 

 Northern Economic Summit 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2159 

 Women of Distinction Award 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2159 

 New Project for Broadway Business Improvement District 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2159 

 Saskatchewan Philanthropists Honoured 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2160 

 Yorkton Regional High School Robotics Team 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2160 

 Tisdale Hero 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2160 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care for Refugees 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2161 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2161 

 Housing Needs 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2162 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2162 

 State of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2163 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2163 

 Community Pastures 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2164 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2164 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2165 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2166 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2166 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2170 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2171 

 Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2173 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2173 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2175 

 Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2176 

 Bill No. 67 — The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2177 

 

 



 

 Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2180 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2183 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


