




















































Hansard: November 27, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 19B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2249 

 November 27, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — It now being 7 o’clock, 

I call this House into order. I recognize Regina Rosemont.  

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter back into discussion here this afternoon. I 

enjoy the energy that I see opposite here in the Assembly here 

this evening. 

 

Again we’re speaking as it related to . . . I’ll continue my 

speech that I’ve already began as it relates to Bill No. 69, An 

Act respecting Information Services Corporation. Now it’s in 

fact anything but an Act respecting ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]. It’s an Act in fact to sell ISC, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I was speaking a little bit before about the broader context 

of what’s causing this government to go on the hunt for cash 

and start looking at our public assets. And it’s the budgetary 

pressures that have been created by the government opposite 

that have caused this review of assets and this hunt for cash. 

And now we have a government that sadly is looking to 

liquidate assets and in fact cause us to lose revenue streams 

many, many years, many decades, many generations forward. 

Very short-sighted approach we see from this government. 

 

Our Crown corporations that have been built by Saskatchewan 

people, owned by Saskatchewan people, and deliver returns to 

Saskatchewan people, in the case of ISC not just the services 

and the information that it protects, the services it provides to 

the public but also the $15 million a year, Mr. Speaker, that it 

provides directly back to our treasury, paying for roads, paying 

for highways, paying for infrastructure. 

 

And we can talk about all those needs and all those 

components, whether it’s in my community of Regina or 

whether it’s in a community north there in Prince Albert, when 

we’re talking about infrastructure. And in fact we were having a 

discussion here today where this government has chosen to go 

at trying to repair vital infrastructure in our northern artery in 

Prince Albert, that being the bridge, and a very piecemeal, 

band-aid approach where they’re not willing to cover the costs 

of the bridge repairs that are required and not willing to give 

that community the piece of mind and economic certainty that 

they deserve to have. 

 

And it speaks to the very short-sighted nature that a government 

that currently has put itself into a financial position that it can’t 

even provide the proper repairs to a bridge in Prince Albert is 

now eliminating by way of a short-sighted sell-off, an asset — 

ISC, one of our Crown corporations — something that delivers 

$15 million to our province on an annual basis. So a very 

short-sighted sell-off that serves one purpose: allows this 

government to do its best, I guess. I don’t know if they’re 

actually, I don’t think they’re tricking too many people, Mr. 

Speaker, but in fact to continue to suggest that somehow its 

finances are in a rosier position than they are. Saskatchewan 

people recognize that our finances are anything but a rosy 

position when they recognize this. 

 

Just today in fact the financial mid-year came out and shows 

that debt of the province is going up over $1 billion this year 

alone, Mr. Speaker. When they recognize the actions of 

government, actions of government that includes a fire sale of 

assets which includes not only ISC which we speak of, a Crown 

corporation for which that government had promised it 

wouldn’t sell, Mr. Speaker, and also the sale of land — assets 

that this government has that could be such a important tool to 

allowing us to do the meaningful development and address 

some of the pressures of affordable housing that should be a 

priority to this government — but also the very short-sighted, 

direct sell-off of over 300 affordable homes or affordable social 

housing units. If you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, a net loss by 

way of housing at a time where the current stock is inadequate 

and we need to be doing all we can to be increasing supply. So 

it’s these sorts of short-sighted manoeuvres that are the context 

for this sell-off. 

 

We see in the mid-year report, I guess, some other tricks, 

budgetary games that were put forward here today where that 

government has actually punted or deferred infrastructure that 

was supposed to be built here this year, Mr. Speaker, on to next 

year, just so they can manipulate and make some sort of a 

budgetary statement that supports their boastful ads that they 

ran on billboards across the province, Mr. Speaker, but taking 

infrastructure that’s needed now, putting it onto the books next 

year, and then needing a way to pay for it. And that’s where we 

see a fire sale of assets like ISC, like land, like affordable 

homes to try to address that problem. 

 

So the sad reality is that something that has served 

Saskatchewan people very well — Information Services 

Corporation, a Crown corporation that’s owned by the people of 

this province — is being sold off for nothing more than to sort 

of hold up the public relations lines put forward by that 

government, the boastful claims that they’ve put forward by 

way of a budget and really trying to just continue to 

manufacture a pretend balance on paper, Mr. Speaker. But of 

course Saskatchewan people recognize the realities before them. 

 

Now the Bill No. 69 and the sell-off of Information Services 

Corporation certainly represents broken trust with 

Saskatchewan people. It represents a broken promise to 

Saskatchewan people. And I think that this is something that the 

government opposite should care about because it earned a 

mandate last year from Saskatchewan people. And instead of 

taking that mandate and working to deliver on the goals that it 

had been elected to achieve, they’re now moving in a direction 

that is anything but what they had promised. 

 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

This is a government that had made claims for many, many, 

many years that that they wouldn’t sell off Crown corporations. 

They had made claims that they were supportive of our Crown 

corporations. Now the record is becoming clear on this 

government and the record is certainly anything but that. And 

we’ve seen that over the past few years with, some call it 

creeping privatization that is going on. In many ways it’s very 

deliberate, and it’s really not creeping at all, Mr. Speaker. When 

you look at 10 per cent of the power of SaskPower now being 

obtained through purchase power agreements or directly 

through a privatized approach — a more costly approach, one 

that provides us less control over our future, Mr. Speaker — 

that’s direct privatization within the Crowns. 

 

We also see within that Crown sector — the Crown sector that 

this government pretended to support, that they pretended to 

care about, pretended that they wouldn’t privatize — we’ve also 

see the direct raid on the dividends of the equity of that Crown 

sector, stripping that equity, pulling it from the Crown sector at 

a time where those Crowns needed those dollars most to expand 

their networks and serve our growing communities and growing 

province, Mr. Speaker. And of course that’s in direct, in stark 

contrast to the proper stewardship that we should be providing 

those Crown corporations. 

 

We also see the direct collaring of that Crown sector by way of 

nonsensical and ideological policies such as the Sask-first 

policy that collars the Crown corporations and prevents them 

from operating in an independent financial manner, from having 

the solid financial basis that they require to serve Saskatchewan 

people, and has as well prevented them from being able to 

divest risk and make some of the investments outside of 

Saskatchewan and bring back the benefit back to Saskatchewan 

people, which is directly at the heart of this discussion around 

ISC, a valuable asset to the people of the province by way of 

the services it provides, by way of the information that it 

protects, by way of the way it interfaces with business, by way 

of how it connects to homeowners, by way of the fact that it’s a 

monopoly, a monopoly on something that we require, both 

businesses and homeowners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it also gets to the point that this is something that delivers 

$15 million or in fact more than $15 million on an annualized 

basis to the province of Saskatchewan, being sold off in a very 

short-sighted manoeuvre to hold up pretend claims around 

budgetary balance and causing us to certainly have less, well 

into the future. 

 

And when we had something that provided us both effective 

control of land titles in this province, effective interface with 

business and homeowners, some control over costs to both 

homeowners and to businesses, and as well the protection of 

that vital information that Saskatchewan people and businesses 

were entrusting to ISC, that’s all at risk. But so is the revenues. 

 

But so is the opportunity that’s been presented, where ISC in 

fact is in demand by some other jurisdictions to in fact utilize 

our product and to contract, for us to bring that benefit back to 

Saskatchewan people. And I used the example recently where 

the minister was claiming that no other jurisdiction wanted to 

do business with a Crown corporation. Of course nothing’s 

further from the truth. And if members opposite would simply 

have recognition of how global economics are working — our 

global marketplace around the world and certainly in our 

province as well, Mr. Speaker — they’d recognize the role that 

state and Crown corporations and companies play within the 

global marketplace. And for government members opposite to 

sort of pretend that somehow, somehow that other, other 

jurisdictions don’t want to do business with a Crown 

corporation is simply untrue. Simply untrue, Mr. Speaker, and 

not a factual representation of the balanced economy that we, 

that we see in our province and in around the world. 

 

It’s also directly contradicted by the fact that we have the 

Yukon, Mr. Speaker, and a delegation from the Yukon that 

were looking to do direct contracting of ISC’s services here in 

the province, wanting to purchase services from our province, 

to pay money to the people of Saskatchewan for us to bring 

back those dollars that we could then invest back into 

Saskatchewan people and into infrastructure and into services. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sounds like a good idea. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Sounds like a pretty good idea, the 

member from Nutana says, and I agree with her. This is sort of 

the approach that our Crown corporations should be able to take 

in an independent fashion, and one that identifies all of the risk 

around them and makes decisions that are in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people: bringing back, being able to serve, yes, 

the Yukon with our land title system and be able to protect their 

data, but for us also then to be able to bring back revenues from 

the Yukon in exchange for the contracted services that we’d be 

providing them, and using those dollars to build the schools that 

we require in this province, to build the highways that we 

require, to work towards building the bridges that we require. 

And I know up in Prince Albert this is such a critical issue, Mr. 

Speaker. And a government that’s taken either an ideologically 

rigid approach to selling off this asset or simply is engaged in a 

quick fire sale of assets, looking for all the cash that it can 

obtain and draining basically the assets that we have as a 

province to do so and giving up some of the certainty and 

control we have over the future. 

 

And as I say, this represents to Saskatchewan people nothing 

more than a broken promise. This is a government that has gone 

out and gone to great lengths to pretend somehow that they 

weren’t going to privatize the Crowns. Now they’re doing it. 

They’re doing it directly. They’re selling a Crown corporation 

that they said they weren’t going to sell. 

 

They’re also privatizing large portions of some of our Crown 

corporations such as SaskPower, where now a major component 

of our power production is private power and chosen not 

because it was more affordable, not because it was in our better 

interests into the future, but because it was an ideological 

decision that private power was the only way to go when we 

know there were better options, more affordable options, more 

effective options, more efficient options that retained control 

here in Saskatchewan for many years forward. 

 

[19:15] 

 

You know, in fact in many ways when I look at what’s going 

on, not only in our Crown sector but in many of our ministries, 

where we have a government that’s taking this simplistic 

approach to contracting out and privatizing, I recognize that 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

they’re tying the hands of future governments and they’re tying 

the hands of the public purse. And the sad reality is whoever 

occupies that chair of Premier into the future, whoever occupies 

that role as government, is going to be stuck with the 

unenviable task of having businesses coming forward with 

contracts to the Government of Saskatchewan where in effect 

they hold all the power in that exchange, and very limited in 

being able to properly negotiate effective contracts and services 

in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And it’s a government that’s very willing to contract out and 

give up a lot of control that we should have as Saskatchewan 

people, to give up the certainty of the next generation. We see 

this in health care. We see this in SaskPower. We see it in the 

direct sell-off of ISC. We see it in the financial stewardship of 

this government. And it’s very much this contracting-out 

culture that’s certainly permeated those benches, and it’s taken 

a very simplistic view of how we achieve our future, and in fact 

ties the hands of future governments and hamstrings, in effect, 

Saskatchewan people and communities. 

 

And let’s just speak about that, Mr. Speaker. Right now this 

government is selling off a Crown asset that returns $15 million 

a year to our treasury, to the people of the province. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I know a lot of municipalities across this province who 

require infrastructure to meet the demands of aging 

infrastructure but also to meet the demands of growth. And we 

have a government who seems to pretend to promote a growth 

agenda but then is eliminating our ability to make the 

meaningful investments that we must into those communities 

and into the people all across our province in all regions, a 

government that’s very much denying us of the effective 

certainty and control we should have of our future. 

 

But getting back to why Saskatchewan people are so outraged 

with these actions, they’re rightfully outraged, Mr. Speaker. 

And when we have calls coming in from Canora and Wadena 

and Yorkton and all over the province, Mr. Speaker. Rhein, all 

sorts of communities all across the province that we’re having 

phone calls, Kamsack. So many communities all across the 

province that are phoning us and saying, where did this 

government earn their mandate to sell off our Crowns? When in 

fact did they tell us that they could, that they were going to sell 

off our Crowns? Because in fact they said they didn’t hear that, 

and they’ve told . . . When they’ve called in, they’ve said in fact 

that MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] opposite and 

candidates opposite who earned the mandate, in fact came 

forward and suggested something else. They said that they 

wouldn’t sell off the Crowns. 

 

They looked . . . In fact we’ve heard from members that have 

looked in the eyes of members opposite and have had members 

opposite promise to Saskatchewan people and to their 

community members that they wouldn’t sell off our Crown 

corporations. Not only did they look Saskatchewan people and 

their constituents in the eyes and promise they weren’t going to 

sell our Crown assets, they also put it into their documents, their 

platform, making that promise and that commitment to 

Saskatchewan people. The reason I guess that they would be 

putting that promise forward would be that it’s important to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The other reason I would have hoped that they would have 

placed it there was because in fact that’s how they felt, because 

in fact it was true. And it’s a great disappointment for 

Saskatchewan people to see the broken trust that’s occurred by 

way of the sell-off of Crown assets, the privatization that’s 

going on in many of our Crown assets. And certainly it 

represents a broken promise from a government that suggested 

that they certainly weren’t going to be selling off our Crowns. 

 

I can pull through this budgetary document I’ve flagged and in 

fact — sorry, it’s not the budgetary document; it’s the platform 

of the Saskatchewan Party — and I’ve flagged in about eight 

different locations where in fact that government makes claims 

that it wasn’t going to sell off our Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So you can fault Saskatchewan people for feeling as though 

they’ve been betrayed. You can understand why they feel as 

though they’ve been betrayed because, Mr. Speaker, when you 

break your promise, when you break your word, you’ve been 

betrayed or you’re betraying somebody. And that’s exactly 

what we’ve seen here in the actions of this government. 

 

I recognize on page no. 44 — it was referenced actually by the 

Minister of Highways — page 44 from the platform, it says, 

“Support for public ownership of the Crowns has been 

reconfirmed over the last four years.” Now that sounds 

supportive. It doesn’t say anything about desire to privatize, as 

we see this government now currently doing. In fact it says the 

opposite. 

 

So you can understand why some families in Canora are 

rightfully upset when they went back and referenced their 

platform, and it says, “Support for public ownership of the 

Crowns has been reconfirmed over the last four years,” and then 

this government does the opposite. You can see why they’d be 

upset, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If I look back to even The Promise of Saskatchewan, which was 

a booklet put out by the then opposition leader, and I quote, “A 

Saskatchewan Party government will maintain Saskatchewan’s 

four major utilities . . .” as government Crown corporations. 

Now that’s maybe more telling because in that quote there it 

just lists the four utilities. Different than the message we heard 

in the last election where there was this blanket statement of, 

just trust us with your Crowns, where we go back and we see 

that in fact if you go back to the Premier’s The Promise of 

Saskatchewan document of 2004, his commitment at that point 

was only SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 

 

And so I guess on that front the Premier’s being consistent. 

Maybe on that front he feels that he’s been clear, that the many 

other Crowns and treasury board organizations in this province 

are up for sale under this government. It begs the question, what 

else is up for sale? What else will be liquidated by this 

government? A government that’s put itself in a very precarious 

— I shouldn’t say, put itself — put Saskatchewan people in a 

very precarious financial position and are now on this ravenous 

hunt for cash to simply prop up its pretend story of budgetary 

balance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we recognize the inconsistency when we go back to 2004. 

When I look in this document, there’s example after example of 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

the commitment to the Crowns. In fact it speaks on page 44 

about responsible management of the Crowns. In there it 

doesn’t say anything about privatizing or selling off our 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t say a word about those actions 

which now this government is doing. That was only a year ago 

that they went to Saskatchewan people and earned that mandate, 

looking Saskatchewan people in eyes only to betray and break 

that trust just a little under a year following, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It goes on on page 18 and speaks about what they’ve heard. 

And this is in the 2005 Saskatchewan Party policy guide. And 

there they talk more about our Crown corporations and a level 

of support towards our Crowns. Now I might go back and 

reference, it’s a little later in this speech. But in fact there’s 

been previous speeches as well by the Premier, back to 2002 as 

it relates to our Crown corporations, a new role for 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations, and we can spend some 

time going through that document. 

 

But what we see is a lot of inconsistency from the government 

opposite for many years as it related to the Crowns. In fact one 

election they came to Saskatchewan people and said, well we’re 

going to privatize your Crowns, and they lost the election. And 

then they sort of tightened up their language and started singing 

a new tune. And what I think Saskatchewan people had 

believed was in fact the new tune they were singing was one 

that they believed, one that they were going to deliver on, one 

that they weren’t going to break their word on, Mr. Speaker. 

But it’s been anything but that. 

 

If we continued, I can go through example after example of 

inconsistencies many years prior about where that government 

stood on Crown corporations. But I know one thing that wasn’t 

inconsistent, and that was when this government went before 

Saskatchewan people last election, they made no mention of 

privatization. In fact they certainly portrayed to Saskatchewan 

people that the Crowns would not be privatized under their 

watch, and so you can understand why people across this 

province are feeling betrayed. 

 

So we see in the sell-off of ISC, the sell-off of a Crown asset 

that serves Saskatchewan people, that has a public interest, that 

keeps information confidential, that keeps information private, 

and that is in fact a monopoly, Mr. Speaker, and any time a 

government’s contemplating selling off a monopoly that 

impacts homeowners, that impacts businesses, the government 

certainly shouldn’t be stepping in that direction. We should be 

retaining that ability to provide proper services to Saskatchewan 

people, ensure proper rates, ensure protection of that 

information, and ensure, as in this case, that we continue to 

derive the dividend and revenues that come on an annual basis, 

$15 million a year. 

 

In fact I would suspect that some of the members opposite who 

represent different parts of the province, I know all of their 

constituencies care about ISC. All of their constituencies have 

interests. Whether it’s the businesses down in the Bakken field, 

in my good friend from Weyburn-Big Muddy’s riding or 

whether it’s the new homeowner in Canora or whether it’s the 

new homeowner up in the member from Walsh Acres’s riding, 

all of these individuals interface with ISC. And they care about 

what it costs. They care about the service they receive. They 

care about the information that’s protected. 

I also know the member from Prince Albert probably cares 

about the $15 million a year that we receive as a province from 

ISC. And I know the reason for that is because I understand that 

member’s been sort of elbowed out of cabinet, elbowed out of 

inner circles, Mr. Speaker, over there. And now the problem is, 

the problem, Mr. Speaker, extends beyond the fact that the 

member from Prince Albert is no longer in that space where 

he’s able to offer a voice or be an advocate or speak on behalf 

of Saskatchewan people, but what he should recognize is those 

revenues are in part some of the solution to the challenges he 

has in his riding — by way of the bridge infrastructure that we 

need to be stepping up and repairing, by way of the second 

bridge that’s being called for by his community — and we’re 

giving up some of the revenues that are vital to us as a province 

to make those sorts of investments. And the members opposite, 

the members opposite are getting a bit worked up, so they’re 

maybe recognizing the importance of it. 

 

And I know, I suspect actually the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, he’s probably got phone calls from some of those oil 

companies making some of those investments down through the 

Bakken Field who care very much about the integrity of that 

system and the effectiveness of that system and the cost of that 

system when they’re making those investments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just in following up sort of the resource sector that we . . . 

certainly they are a proud resource sector in this province. And 

highlighting a voice of those, of our resource sector, I’d like to 

comment on a letter that’s been received from the professional 

surveyors of Canada to the government. And I quote, and this 

was received on November 9th, 2012, and: 

 

We have become aware of the Saskatchewan 

government’s actions in having a financial valuation 

prepared for Information Services Corporation. This 

valuation, along with proposed legislation changes, would 

facilitate the sale of ISC to private industry. Professional 

Surveyors Canada has concerns with respect to these 

actions by your government. 

 

So that’s a letter to the Premier of Saskatchewan, the 

honourable . . . I quote, “The Hon. Brad Wall.” And that’s from 

the land surveyors of Canada, the association calling on this 

government to hold onto this asset, to not privatize this Crown 

corporation, and for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The letter goes on: 

 

From an economic point of view, the divesting of a Crown 

corporation that makes money and provides income to the 

government raises concerns. How is the public good 

served in the long term by this divestiture? 

 

And I guess I could look across to members opposite who 

maybe could just simply answer this question. Maybe it’s a 

question that the Minister of Finance should be tasked with 

answering, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll quote again. This is the 

comments. This is coming from the land surveyors of Canada, a 

national body representing many who are involved in our 

resource sector here in this province. And I quote: 

 

From an economic point of view, the divesting of a Crown 

corporation that makes money and provides income to the 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

government raises concerns. How is the public good 

served in the long term by this divestiture? 

 

[19:30] 

 

You know, I think the answer is that it’s not, Mr. Speaker. This 

doesn’t serve the long term. This isn’t about the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. This is a short-sighted, reckless sell-off 

with a government that’s scrambling to hold up its pretend story 

of budgetary balance, doing all that it can to spin a message that 

supports its boastful claims made at budget time, Mr. Speaker. 

And of course this has long-lasting consequences to the people 

of this province. The quote goes on: 

 

As you know, ISC houses the land titles system and 

registry. It houses the survey plan processing system and 

the associated directory. These services and the 

information contained within belong to the Government of 

Saskatchewan and therefore belong to constituents. The 

sale of ISC to a private entity would adversely affect the 

impartiality of services to the public and to our members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, impartiality, questioning impartiality is something 

that should be of huge concern to this government. Any time 

that you’re getting into concerns around conflicts of interest, 

Mr. Speaker, and the fact that this is a consequence of the 

decision being made by government opposite, creating the lack 

of impartiality and also conflicts of interest should be of 

concern. 

 

It also goes on to speak about the fact that this is a public asset, 

owned by Saskatchewan people, of which Saskatchewan people 

should have a say in deciding. This from a government who 

pretended last year and promised the Saskatchewan people that 

they wouldn’t sell our Crown corporations, that they wouldn’t 

privatize our Crown corporations. And now we see them break 

their word. We see them break the trust with Saskatchewan 

people, from a government that went and looked Saskatchewan 

people in the eyes on coffee row, on door to door and made 

promises to Saskatchewan people that they wouldn’t privatize 

our Crowns, now being broken by that government opposite. 

 

The letter goes on: 

 

Both the controller of surveys and the registrar of titles are 

employees of ISC. They are also statutory positions. To 

paraphrase the appropriate legislations, these positions are 

not to be influenced in any of their statutory obligations. 

Within a Crown corporation such as ISC, there is public 

accountability over the influence of statutory positions. 

With a private corporation, that accountability is severely 

diminished at the best and non-existent at the worst. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only is this government privatizing a Crown 

corporation they promised Saskatchewan people they wouldn’t, 

they also pretended to Saskatchewan people and promised to 

Saskatchewan people that they’d be accountable. And they’ve 

been anything but. We see that in our finances, the lack of 

accountability. Now we see it right here. And I’ll quote, with a 

private corporation, which this government is selling, ISC, 

putting it into a private structure: “With a private corporation, 

that accountability is severely diminished at best and 

non-existent at worst.” 

Mr. Speaker, why would any government pursue an agenda that 

creates, as was stated in the paragraph that I stated first, that 

there’s conflicts of interest; in the second paragraph, 

highlighting the fact that accountability may be non-existent, 

Mr. Speaker, non-existent? How is that acceptable from a 

government that should be expecting better transparency, better 

accountability for Saskatchewan people? Not to mention that 

not only are they creating conflicts of interest, not only are they 

creating a lack of accountability as stated by the land surveyors, 

they’re giving up revenues, dividends well into the future that 

can fund services and infrastructure here in our province. This 

is a lose-lose proposition, Mr. Speaker, and one that represents 

a broken trust with the people of this province. I’ll continue on, 

and I’ll quote: 

 

Selling a Crown corporation that has a monopoly over 

services that are being kept for the public good is always a 

concern. Areas of monopoly services and statutory 

obligation are quite correctly kept in direct control of the 

government. 

 

This gets to the whole point, Mr. Speaker, that this is about a 

public good. This serves a purpose. This is a benefit to 

Saskatchewan people. It’s a protection to many within this 

province. And the land surveyors of Canada have rightfully 

stated their concern with selling a monopoly that possesses 

information of the public good and serves the public good. 

 

I’ll continue on here, quoting: 

 

Keeping ISC as a Crown corporation ensures that [and the 

list goes on] the public is upheld before any consideration 

of profit, and certainty of titles and property boundaries 

are maintained, which is one of the cornerstones of the 

Torrens land titles system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are two very important points that were 

made by the land surveyors of Canada, that the public good is 

upheld before any consideration of profit, highlighting the fact 

that this does serve a public good, this corporation. And in fact 

these changes eliminate that public good from being served. 

 

And then it also talks about the certainty of titles. Are titles 

important, Mr. Speaker? I don’t know if titles are important to 

your constituents. I know they’re important to mine. I know that 

when a business makes an investment — when they purchase 

land, when they purchase title, when they incorporate — this is 

important to them. What it represents is property rights in many 

cases. It represents investment. It represents an asset for them. 

And this in fact suggests that the privatization undermines the 

protection of their interests, their property rights. It also matters, 

Mr. Speaker, to the homeowners in my constituency. It also 

matters to the landowners all across this province.  

 

The member from Melfort is shouting across the floor, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s interesting because he’s shouting across the 

floor now, but in the fall, Mr. Speaker, he went before 

Saskatchewan people with a platform that promised not to 

privatize our Crown corporations. Now he and that government 

are doing something different. And they’re putting at risk the 

lost revenues, but they’re also putting at risk our land titles 

system. And if you think of that piece of land and what’s that 

meant to so many families and to so many in this province — 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

whether it’s that first home or whether it’s the homestead, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s the land that’s been acquired or whether 

it’s the property rights of a business — this is putting an awful 

lot at risk into the hands of private companies. 

 

And I believe that at cornerstone of our economy and of our . . . 

what we should be providing to Saskatchewan people is 

certainty by way of their property rights. And to have a 

government that’s actively, knowingly moving down a path that 

puts that at risk, the property rights of Saskatchewan people — 

their right to the title, their right to their investment, their right 

to their asset, their right to their business, their right to their 

land, Mr. Speaker — is good reason why we’re getting so many 

phone calls from all across this province with concern, with 

outrage around the sale of this asset. Many are phoning in with 

questions. Many are phoning with questions. Others are 

phoning with concern. 

 

Many Saskatchewan people are simply . . . that don’t know the 

concerns around the certainty of their land title are simply 

concerned over the broken promise that they had. And promises 

have been broken in Weyburn. They’ve been broken in Moose 

Jaw. They’ve been broken in North Battleford. They’ve been 

broken in Sask Rivers, Mr. Speaker. There’s been this promise 

to not privatize our Crown corporations have been broken in 

Prince Albert. They’ve been broken in through Moosomin, Mr. 

Speaker, all across this province. And that’s where 

Saskatchewan people have concerns. Up through Carrot River, 

Saskatchewan people have had the promise broken that was 

offered by that government, Mr. Speaker. The certainty of the 

land title to property owners, landowners, and businesses in 

through the constituency of Carrot River are important to those 

individuals, to those businesses, Mr. Speaker. Putting that at 

risk is something that we should all be rightfully concerned 

about. 

 

And we have an opportunity in this legislature for each of us, 

for each of us to weigh in to this discussion and to recognize the 

risks that are being put forward by this legislation. But I’ll put 

on the record again: “The Saskatchewan Land Surveyors 

Association is concerned that keeping ISC as a Crown 

corporation ensures that the public good is upheld before any 

consideration of profit.” Mr. Speaker, on some matters we 

should be focused more on the public good, and that’s 

something I concur with. 

 

The second point is that “. . . the certainty of titles and property 

boundaries are maintained.” Mr. Speaker, that’s important. 

That’s about land rights. It’s about property rights, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s about the investments made by many, the sacrifice by 

many. And I concur with the surveyors, land surveyors of 

Canada on this issue. 

 

I’ll go on and quote: 

 

Land titles and surveying are the basis of underpinning the 

fabric of society for the safety and economic well-being of 

Saskatchewan residents. Thanks to the good governance in 

Saskatchewan, the public, together with the government 

and surveyors, have benefited from a modern, responsive, 

and accountable land titles and plan processing system. 

We feel strongly that the evolution of the system and the 

system accountability should remain in public hands. 

I’ll finish that off: “We feel strongly that the evolution of the 

system and the system accountability should remain in public 

hands.” That’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker. That’s strong words 

from the land surveyors of Canada speaking about our interests 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

It goes back, and I’m going to quote this one other item because 

it’s so key to this debate. And it’s so important that members 

opposite recognize these words and recognize the path their 

being led down by government. “Land titles and surveying are 

the basis of underpinning the fabric of society for the safety and 

economic well-being of Saskatchewan residents.” The 

underpinning, for “ . . . underpinning the fabric of society for 

the safety and economic well-being of Saskatchewan residents.” 

 

That’s what’s being placed at risk, Mr. Speaker. We’re placing 

at risk our economic interest. We’re placing at risk our land 

titles system. We’re placing at risk property rights of 

Saskatchewan people and businesses. We’re placing at risk or 

in fact simply stepping aside from the revenues that we’ve 

received on an annual basis and giving up that benefit. We’re 

giving something up that’s been built by Saskatchewan people. 

We’re entering into a new environment that, as stated by the 

land surveyors of Canada, brings about a host of accountability 

problems, Mr. Speaker, and a host of conflicts of interest, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Why would any government in good faith, Mr. Speaker, as it 

relates to the land title of your home or your business, enter into 

some sort of new arrangement, the sell-off of our Crown asset 

that puts at risk that land title? That’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. Why 

would any government, Mr. Speaker, that has a revenue stream 

of 15 million, $15 million a year to reinvest back into our 

province, give up that revenue stream, to forfeit that revenue 

stream in a short-sighted, quick, liquidated sell-off, Mr. 

Speaker? That’s wrong. And why would any government, Mr. 

Speaker, choose to enter into an agreement, a sell-off of a 

Crown corporation that brings about, with complete 

forewarning from the land surveyors of Canada, conflicts of 

interest as well as reduced accountability? Mr. Speaker, why 

would any government move forward in that direction? Well 

it’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on so many, so many fronts, Mr. Speaker — whether it’s the 

forfeiture of revenues to our future to make the investments that 

we need in your community and mine, Mr. Speaker; whether 

it’s the bringing, the introduction of many new conflicts of 

interest at a time where we should be reducing conflicts of 

interest at a time where we should be working towards greater 

accountability, great transparency — we have a government 

that, as stated by the land surveyors of Canada, are actually 

bringing on reduced accountability to Saskatchewan people and 

a government that’s actively putting at risk the land titles that 

Saskatchewan people have purchased, invested in by way of 

homes, by way of businesses, by way of corporations, by way 

of farm land, homesteads. Putting that at risk, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s wrong. 

 

Why are they putting it at risk? Well they’re tight on cash, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re tight on cash, and they’re unwilling to be 

straight with Saskatchewan people. They’re tight on cash, and 

they want to continue to do their public relations spin, Mr. 

Speaker, to try to pretend and prop up the expensive billboards 



November 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

that they ran earlier in the year, Mr. Speaker. Well those 

billboards are becoming pretty expensive, Mr. Speaker, for the 

people of this province. That continued relentless effort by this 

government to hold up a public relations line and to engage in 

budgetary games, as opposed to serve the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people, is costing all of us. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And it’s evidenced in this letter right here. And I’ll quote, 

continue to quote: “Professional Surveyors Canada asked the 

government of Saskatchewan to seek timely input from public 

and professional users of ISC’s services prior to considering the 

sale of ISC.” You know that’s a fair comment, Mr. Speaker — 

consultation. Consultation. So what they’re asking for, Mr. 

Speaker, is that they should consult with the people that are 

impacted. Well I guess that’s the land surveyors, Mr. Speaker, 

but I guess it’s also every one of my constituents and yours. 

 

And this government’s failed to consult. In fact they promised 

something else. You can understand many are feeling betrayed 

by a government that promised not to sell off our Crown 

corporations. And now we’re doing just that, a government that 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You know, and they joke about 

it as a surprise, Mr. Speaker. It’s an unwelcome surprise to 

Saskatchewan people. A surprise that isn’t wanted. 

 

And I know my constituents, and I know folks all across this 

province, Mr. Speaker, are not interested in seeing their land 

title being placed at risk, as stated here in this letter, Mr. 

Speaker, from the land surveyors of Canada. They’re not 

interested in losing and forfeiting $15 million a year in revenues 

— revenues that are needed to be invested back into our 

classrooms, to build schools, to build bridges, to build 

highways, Mr. Speaker — to give that up in a short-sighted 

move that we currently see being contemplated or pursued, Mr. 

Speaker. And they’re not interested, Mr. Speaker, in a 

government that’s actively pursing an agenda of . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Yes. It’s being 

increasingly difficult to hear the member speak. There’s 

conversations on both sides of the House that’s going on. If we 

keep ourselves to a minimum, it would be appreciated. I 

recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I do 

appreciate, in sort of in closing in this discussion, being able to 

make sure we all do hear the concerns that Saskatchewan 

people have about the sell-off of ISC. I’ll recap those for all of 

us. 

 

And I think it’s important for, this is an important opportunity 

for members opposite that occupy those backbenches to finally 

have a say, Mr. Speaker, to finally speak to cabinet and to 

government and say, listen. This isn’t what we’re all about. We 

said we were going to do something else. And this is where I 

call on and I urge those members opposite because I suspect 

there’s some people back there who would be interested in 

keeping their word. I suspect the member from Coronation Park 

would be interested keeping his word. I suspect the member 

from Melfort would be interested in keeping his word. I suspect 

the member from Saskatoon Meewasin would be interested in 

keeping his word. I suspect the member from Shellbrook would 

be interested in keeping his word. I suspect the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote would be interested in keeping her 

word. I suspect the member from North Battleford would like to 

keep his word. I suspect the member from Moose Jaw would 

like to keep their word. 

 

And what we have here instead is a . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . And you know, this is an interesting thing, an interesting 

thing. The member from Moose Jaw North chooses to shout 

across and heckle again from his seat, Mr. Speaker. This is, 

again, the same member that sits all too quiet when the interests 

of Moose Jaw residents, the Moose Jaw economy are being 

decided. And that member doesn’t say boo, but heckle from his 

seat . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the member says, is 

that all I have? 

 

Well I would suggest that without your word, without your 

word, to the member opposite, you have little else. And when 

you’re a government that came before Saskatchewan people 

with a platform — Mr. Speaker, back just about a year ago, and 

went to residents in Moose Jaw and in Shellbrook and in 

Melfort, Mr. Speaker, all across the piece, but in Moose Jaw — 

and suggested that the Crown corporations weren’t for sale, Mr. 

Speaker, that they would protect our Crown corporations, and 

now they’ve broken that trust. They’ve broken that trust with 

the members from Moose Jaw, broken their word, Mr. Speaker. 

I can understand why the people of Moose Jaw are upset with 

that member. Not just because he’s a voice that doesn’t speak 

on matters such as Valley View, Mr. Speaker, not just because 

he’s a member that doesn’t speak up on matters such as job loss 

in SaskPower, not just because he doesn’t speak up about 

SaskWater, Mr. Speaker, but because he broke his word and he 

broke his trust with Saskatchewan people, as have all members 

on that side of the Assembly as it relates to the privatization of 

our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll recap once again, Mr. Speaker, why we hear from all 

across Saskatchewan, people having concern and why they 

should be concerned about the privatization of this asset. We’re 

forfeiting revenues well into the future, Mr. Speaker, that we 

need. We’re forfeiting revenues that we need here in the 

province, $15 million a year, Mr. Speaker. We further, as 

evidenced by the land surveyors of Canada, we’re bringing on a 

lack of accountability by way of this sell-off. We’re reducing 

accountability when we should be going in the opposite 

direction. That’s what the land surveyors of Canada say. What 

else do they say, Mr. Speaker? That this creates a host of 

conflicts of interest, Mr. Speaker — conflicts of interest. 

 

Further to that it speaks about, the land surveyors have spoken 

about the fact that it puts the land title itself that an individual, a 

company, or a person that they’ve acquired, that they’ve 

invested in, that they’ve purchased, puts that at risk. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a critical cornerstone of our economy. It’s a 

critical cornerstone of society and to our province being placed 

at risk by this government because it’s looking for cash, on the 

hunt, doing what it can to prop up its budgetary pressures, Mr. 

Speaker. And they’re unwilling, Mr. Speaker, to be straight 

with Saskatchewan people about the true state of our finances 

and now we’re on the hunt, liquidating assets like ISC. 

 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2012 

And I guess the concern, Mr. Speaker, is that not only is this 

decision short-sighted, one that we’ll oppose in every way we 

can, we’ll work with Saskatchewan people; one where we call 

on members opposite to stand up and be heard as well and to 

serve their communities and to serve their constituents, but it 

also raises the concern about what’s next? What’s next when 

you look at the list of Treasury Board organizations, Crowns, 

public entities that we have here in Saskatchewan, of which that 

government promised as well that they wouldn’t privatize? And 

now we see that broken trust, that breaking of that word, Mr. 

Speaker, and rightfully so, Saskatchewan people are frustrated. 

Saskatchewan people are concerned, and Saskatchewan people 

are worried, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ll be the voice for Saskatchewan people on this one. We’ll 

be the voice for people in Moose Jaw. We’ll be the voice for 

people in North Battleford. We’ll be the voice for people in 

Prince Albert and in every region of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

because our members to date haven’t said a word on this issue, 

something that Saskatchewan people care about very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker. I’ll have a lot more to say about this bill, Mr. 

Speaker, the short-sighted sell-off, the privatization of one of 

our Crown corporations and the broken trust that it represents to 

Saskatchewan people, but at this point in time I will adjourn 

debate on Bill 69. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The member from 

Regina Rosemont has moved adjournment on debate on Bill 69. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — It is the pleasure of the 

House to . . . It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader, this House now stands adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 

the House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. This House 

now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 19:52.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2249 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


