




















































Hansard: November 05, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 7A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1743 

 November 5, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce a constituent of mine, Amanda Hoehn, who is 

seated in your gallery. Amanda works for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance in Melville, and in the AgStability department. She 

grew up on a farm in Rama before the family moved to Canora 

area where she attended high school. Amanda currently resides 

in Melville with her husband, Derrick, and it’s really good to 

see her in her legislature. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, would like to take the opportunity to 

introduce Theresa Maximnuk who I had the opportunity to get 

to know and work with in the Minister of Agriculture’s office, 

and now is there with Minister Stewart. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to 

their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 

 

Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, it’s my great pleasure today to introduce 26 grade 7 

and 8 students from Grant Road School right here in Regina. 

Give us a wave everybody. 

 

Accompanying them is Mr. Mark Wilson, who is their teacher. 

Now Mark is married to Chelsey Vargo who works right here in 

the legislature, so this is the place that he knows well. Also 

accompanying the group is Ms. Falene Eckert, who’s an 

educational assistant. I want to thank them very much for 

coming. And I encourage all members to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time, I would like to introduce to the 

Assembly Ms. Kathy Burianyk, who we know of as a Clerk of 

the committees but is now sitting at the Table to gain a little 

experience in what actually happens in the Chamber here during 

the day. So I’d like the members to welcome Kathy to the 

Table. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on expanding cellphone coverage in 

the Prairies as follows: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known as 

Patuanak and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

these major centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition today that 

I’m presenting are primarily from Patuanak, but this petition 

has signatures from all throughout the land. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 

present a petition concerning the need for a publicly accessible 

asbestos registry. 

 

Whereas the Government of Saskatchewan has lists 

respecting public buildings that contain asbestos; whereas 

these lists must be accessed individually through freedom 

of information requests pursuant to The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act; whereas 

asbestos that is not properly encapsulated poses a public 

health risk; whereas the availability of information about 

asbestos allows individuals to make informed decisions 

regarding their health and safety. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take immediate action to increase protection of workers, 

patients, students, and the public by passing Bill 604, the 

asbestos right-to-know Act, which will make a list of 

public buildings containing asbestos available to the 

public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Summer Snack Program 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today I rise to congratulate the Saskatoon & District 

Labour Council on another successful season of their summer 

snack program. The end of August saw the program wrap up its 

24th year of serving lunches to hundreds of Saskatoon kids and 

families in need. 

 

Kelly Harrington, who is president of the Saskatoon & District 

Labour Council, described how important this program is 

within the communities that use it. She says, “The kids are 

hungry when they come. They eat a lot. They look forward to it 

and they run out to the cars and help us unload the food.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the summer snack program serves breakfast in 

Optimist, Pleasant Hill, Meadowgreen Parks, and Westmount 

School. This year it added a fifth location with the help from a 

grant from the city of Saskatoon in Confederation Park. While 

the program’s main focus is providing food, it also provides 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

mentorship from the coordinators who bond with the children. 

There are sometimes a few tears shed and a few hugs 

exchanged in the final days of the program. 

 

They’ve also noticed a difference in the people utilizing the 

program. More adults are coming. Kelly really noticed a 

difference in 2008 when she says, “. . . when the housing 

market went sky-high and rent was incredibly high. Since that 

time, we’ve had a lot of adults actually utilize the program. 

Prior to that, it had been mainly children.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the Saskatoon & District Labour Council’s 

summer snack program on its 24th successful year serving great 

food to those who need it. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Ukrainian Canadian Congress held their 18th annual Nation 

Builders and Community Recognition Awards luncheon in 

Yorkton just yesterday. 

 

The UCC [Ukrainian Canadian Congress] Nation Builders 

Award was established in 1995 to recognize individuals who 

have provided outstanding service or exceptional community 

involvement. Mr. Speaker, the Nation Builders Award 

recognized four individuals who have left a legacy and provided 

an exemplary role model for the Ukrainian community. 

 

This year’s recipients were Adrian Boyko, former president of 

the UCC-Saskatchewan Provincial Council and vice-president 

of UCC National; Julian Sadlowski, educator and first 

Ukrainian elected mayor of North Battleford; Steve Pillipow, 

cancer survivor and founder of the Canadian Prostate Cancer 

Network; and finally but certainly not least, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Canora-Pelly, the Deputy Premier, our own Ken 

Krawetz was also a recipient. Ken was recognized for his 

instrumental leadership in the unanimous passing of Bill 40, 

The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial 

Day Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Community Recognition Award recognized 

seven individuals who made meritorious contributions in youth 

achievement, leadership, volunteerism, and cultural 

preservation and development. The award winners were Doris 

Makowsky, Gerald Yaholnitsky, Wayne Hydeman, Jean 

Saranchuk, and my seatmate, the member from Regina 

Dewdney. Mr. Speaker, our own Gene Makowsky was also 

recognized for his leadership as a football player, educator, and 

community ambassador. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating our 

seatmates and these outstanding other individuals. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Co-operating to Build a Better West Conference 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend I 

was honoured to attend the Co-operating to Build a Better West 

conference in Saskatoon where several hundred co-operators 

from Western Canada learned about the exciting directions 

co-operatives are heading in Canada’s Western provinces. 

Co-operatives are diverse organizations that speak to their 

community needs because they are owned and controlled by 

their members who live in those same communities. They are 

democratically controlled, and profits go right back into the 

further development of the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t express enough how inspired I am as a 

result of the resourceful and dedicated people I met this 

weekend. These individuals and groups are committed to 

protecting and encouraging growth of co-operatives, especially 

during this time of economic and population change here in 

Western Canada. In particular I was struck by two speakers at 

the conference. One of these was John Ralston Saul who has 

been described as a prophet by Time Magazine. Mr. Saul is an 

award-winning essayist and novelist who challenged the 

co-operators present to be more aware of the fundamental 

co-operative nature of our shared Canadian history. 

 

The other person of note was Mary Nirlungayuk from 

Kugaaruk, Nunavut who described how co-operative businesses 

in the northern communities have thrived and flourished where 

other businesses have not dared to venture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to congratulate this year’s winners of 

the Saskatchewan Co-operative Merit Awards honoured at the 

banquet on Friday night. And my thanks to the organizers of the 

Co-operating to Build a Better West conference for creating a 

forum that brought so many incredible people together to 

discuss the future of Western Canadian co-operatives. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Special Olympics Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

speak about the Special Olympics event in Saskatchewan, the 

world’s largest truck convoy. I had the opportunity to bring 

greetings at this event in the morning kickoff on September 

15th in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, this event consisted of over 40 

semi trucks driving from Saskatoon in an escorted convoy to 

Regina. This was a great opportunity for Special Olympics 

Saskatchewan to raise funds and raise awareness. 

 

My daughter Courtney attended the event with me as well. Mr. 

Speaker, we were both excited to be there because Courtney is a 

Special Olympian. 

 

I would like to recognize all the volunteers for their outstanding 

contributions. The truck drivers gave generously to this event, 

one of them generating over $10,000 in donations. Because of 

the fundraisers like this, Mr. Speaker, Special Olympics athletes 

can compete in national team events on the international stage. 

This event recognizes athletes from the Summer Olympic 2012 

and those competing in the 2013 Special Olympics in Seoul, 

Korea.  

 

I’d like to personally thank all the organizers, volunteers, and 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

athletes who took part in the convoy. It was a great success, 

raising over $30,000 for Special Olympics Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan and all of the athletes for their 

successful fundraiser. It’s not only the funds raised but raised 

spirits as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Increasing the Availability of Entry-Level Housing 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in the House to inform all the members of a key ceremony 

that I was privileged to attend in Moose Jaw this morning. The 

celebration was about making dreams come true and about what 

can be achieved when people work together to achieve a 

common goal. 

 

Plaxton Ridge is a condominium development that will allow 

15 Moose Jaw households to have a home to call their own. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased that the government’s Headstart on a 

Home program has made available $1.9 million in financial 

assistance for this development. The aim of this program is to 

increase the availability of entry-level housing across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan through the 

Saskatchewan Immigrant Investor Fund has responded by 

flowing $200 million in low interest loans over five years to 

developers for the municipality-approved projects. It is 

anticipated that a minimum of 1,000 new entry-level homes will 

be constructed throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend Plaxton Developments Inc. and all the 

other partners involved with this project for stepping forward to 

help Moose Jaw families to find a safe place to call home. 

 

I ask all members to join me in thanking all of those who were 

involved in this outstanding project to thank them for their hard 

work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Saskatchewan Party Convention 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

weekend the Saskatchewan Party held its first convention since 

the November 2011 election, a historic election that saw the 

people of Saskatchewan elect 49 Saskatchewan Party MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, myself and the MLA from Saskatoon Sutherland 

had the honour of co-hosting this event. Over 600 people 

packed TCU Place in Saskatoon to hear Premier Brad Wall’s 

keynote address and to discuss ideas and policies on how our 

party can continue to move Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Convention delegates were treated to an outstanding lineup of 

guest speakers including Brian Lee Crowley, who’s the 

managing director of the MacDonald-Laurier Institute, and 

former chief of defence staff General Rick Hillier. General 

Hillier gave a moving speech on inspiration and leadership. 

 

Premier Wall’s keynote luncheon address focused on our 

government’s plan for growth, our record, and how our party 

can continue to build on the Saskatchewan advantage well into 

the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the youth convention had one of its largest 

turnouts in the history of the party with 77 youth delegates 

focused on policies and practices that will help support and 

develop entrepreneurship throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Sunday morning, caucus members were treated 

to the traditional grilling by convention delegates at the 

government accountability session, and here delegates ask 

pointed questions on water security, education, and 

Saskatchewan’s natural resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2012 Saskatchewan Party convention was a 

resounding success, and I ask all members to join me in 

thanking all of the delegates who came out to support this 

weekend. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

NDP Leadership Campaign 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. So far there is a 

lack of interest in the NDP [New Democratic Party] leadership 

campaign, but that doesn’t mean interesting things are not 

happening in their leadership race. 

 

First we have that Finance critic, the member from Regina 

Rosemont, already posting deficits within the first few weeks of 

his campaign. And then we had three or four NDP candidates, 

including the members from Saskatoon Massey Place and 

Regina Rosemont, who appear to agree with federal NDP leader 

Thomas Mulcair when he called Saskatchewan’s economy a 

“disease.” In fact in a recent StarPhoenix article, NDP 

candidate Erin Weir took the NDP to task for evading questions 

on Mulcair’s spurious smear of the Saskatchewan economy. He 

said, and I quote, “I don’t think it’s feasible for the Sask NDP 

caucus to just keep running away . . . every time the Sask Party 

says ‘boo.’” 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in that same article Weir called out the other 

candidates for running up an expensive bill of promises. Weir 

said, and I quote again, “I have explained very clearly what my 

programs would cost and how I would pay for them. That’s 

something that I have found to be lacking from the other 

candidates. Often they’ve put forward wish lists of things that 

all New Democrats would like to do.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our sincere hope that the rest of the NDP 

candidates do not run away when Mr. Weir says boo. Thank 

you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

The Government’s Performance and the Film Industry 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when people come to this building 

we, as members of the Assembly, always remind them that it is 

their Legislative Building. The people of Saskatchewan own 

this building, and it’s an important part of their government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when business people, working people, 

community groups, and concerned citizens come to their 

legislature, they deserve our respect. And these visits should 

remind us that we work for them, the people of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, government should be transparent and 

accountable to the people of Saskatchewan in its 

decision-making processes and humble in its approach to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

My question is to the Premier: does he share the view that 

government should be transparent and accountable to the people 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said in his acceptance 

speech after last year’s election: 

 

We will be a government that keeps its promises, that 

admits easily our mistakes. We will make them. We will 

take responsibility for them. We will fix them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my, how times have changed. The Premier has not 

led a government that admits its mistakes. This is no more 

apparent than in the glaring mistake this Sask Party government 

has made in eliminating the film employment tax credit. The 

people of Saskatchewan, working people, creative people, and 

now even business people have felt that the Sask Party has 

turned its back on them. 

 

To the Premier: why is admitting his mistake on the film 

industry so hard? Why can he not see the economic and social 

implications of killing an entire industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, part 

of the reason for the results of the last election is that the people 

of this province understood that this party, this side of the 

House, keeps the promises that it makes, Mr. Speaker. You can 

go down the list. The promises that we’ve made in health care, 

kept. In education, kept. The promises we made to invest more 

in highways, kept. The promises we’ve made to keep this 

province moving forward with competitive taxes, kept. 

 

In fact we’ve exceeded promises, Mr. Speaker, dropping 

114,000 low- and middle-income people off of the tax rolls. Mr. 

Speaker, we also promised we wouldn’t use government 

policies to pick winners and losers, that we would create the 

right kind of business environment for all of the economy — an 

economy, by the way, that now is leading the country, Mr. 

Speaker. 

I think the people of the province did vote for a party and a 

government that kept its promises and keeps Saskatchewan 

moving forward, and that is exactly what we’ll continue to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the sign of a true leader is one that 

can understand when a mistake is made and then goes back and 

corrects it. Last week the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

and SaskFilm released a study here at the people’s legislature 

that shows exactly how important the film industry is to the 

province. This was done after the minister and the Premier were 

challenged to allow the report to be made public. My question’s 

to the Premier: did he or his cabinet encourage the new 

restrictions on the CEO [chief executive officer] of the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — That question is out of order as it is 

questioning decisions of the Speaker. Next question. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, were the actions of the 

government as they dealt with the president and CEO of the 

chamber of commerce taken because his report was critical to 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — I already stated once, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition, that that question is out of order. I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Funding for Health Sciences Building 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear that here in 

Saskatchewan we need more physicians. The number of 

physician vacancies listed online is 117. The best plan to 

address this issue, Mr. Speaker, to have a supply of physicians 

here in Saskatchewan is to train and retain our own homegrown 

graduates. That is a long-term plan. But in order for that to 

occur, Mr. Speaker, we need a strong College of Medicine at 

the University of Saskatchewan. My question to the Health 

minister: has he met with the Minister of Advanced Education 

and made clear how important and vital it is to have the College 

of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan on sound 

footing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly the member is correct in that a fulsome plan 

on retaining and recruiting physicians for Saskatchewan must 

first begin with our own medical graduates here at the 

University of Saskatchewan. Certainly the former minister and 

myself and colleagues of this government have certainly had 

discussions about what is contemplated and taking place at the 

University of Saskatchewan. And further to that, Mr. Speaker, 

I’ve met with the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

president as well as the acting dean of the College of Medicine 

earlier this summer, after my appointment as Health minister. In 

fact I spoke with the U of S president on the phone on Friday, 

and we are actually going to be meeting in early December to 

discuss this further. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last spring the 

College of Medicine was given a warning that it would be 

placed on probation without significant changes. Central to 

those changes, Mr. Speaker, are improvements to do with 

teaching space. And this underscores the importance of the 

Health Sciences Building on the campus of the University of 

Saskatchewan. Yet members will recall last spring, Mr. 

Speaker, it was this Sask Party government that broke its 

promise to provide funding for the Health Sciences Building, 

and instead forced nearly $100 million of debt onto the 

campus’s books. As a result of that borrowing, Mr. Speaker, the 

borrowing capacity at the University of Saskatchewan is maxed 

out. In the near future, the board of governors will have to 

decide about the A and B wings of the Health Sciences 

Building, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: we’ve already seen a broken promise with this 

project so far. My question to the minister: what is the plan for 

funding the rest of the Health Sciences Building? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2007 we 

made a platform commitment to complete the Health Sciences 

Building, something that had been sadly neglected under the 

previous administration. We provided $100 million in 2008, 

and a further $50 million in 2011. Mr. Speaker, I can advise that 

the project came in under budget, providing savings of $38 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad travesty that the College of Medicine 

was put under probation by the members opposite. It’s a sign 

that they neglected, did not care about the health of 

Saskatchewan citizens, did not care about post-secondary 

education, and were not dealing with anything to deal with the 

health care in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, it is something 

that cannot and will not be tolerated under our government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can say the right 

words if he wants to, but that’s not reality. Reality is they 

promised to pay upfront for the Health Sciences Building, and 

they walked away from that promise, forcing nearly $100 

million of debt onto the university’s books. The U of S is now 

in a position where it is not able to take on more debt. Because 

of the Sask Party’s decision to cancel funding and push debt 

onto the university’s books, the U of S now has the highest 

per-student debt levels in all of Canada. 

 

If the minister is serious about training physicians in 

Saskatchewan, if he’s serious about living up to his election 

promises, then he should be serious about providing the rest of 

the funding for the Health Sciences Building. The board of 

governors will soon decide on what next steps to take with the 

A and B wings, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: will the Sask 

Party government provide the needed dollars or will they force 

the University of Saskatchewan to stall on this project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

have got a tragic and sad record in this area. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP first announced the project on the C and D wings. They 

announced that in 2003 after and only after they allowed the 

College of Medicine to go on probation. In the dying days of 

their government, they had a sod-turning photo opportunity in 

June of 2007. Mr. Speaker, construction did not start on that 

building until after the 2007 election. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

government will see to it that the C and D wings get completed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, yes, there is additional debt because of this. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s because of the neglect and the ignoring of it 

from that side of the House that went on for 16 long years. Mr. 

Speaker, we will deal with things from this side of the House. 

Mr. Speaker, we will deal it either through debt, through 

additional funding from the . . . [inaudible] . . . but we will 

develop a plan and we will ensure that everything goes as it’s 

supposed to to ensure the health care of the citizens in our 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the last warning of probation 

came under the Sask Party’s watch just last spring. Clearly the 

actions taken by this government, or the lack of actions, Mr. 

Speaker, have not resulted in the desired outcomes that we need 

here in the province with respect to the College of Medicine. If 

this government is serious about training our own physicians, 

then it needs to step up to the plate and provide the funding for 

the completion of the remaining wings. 

 

The U of S’s last annual report says that it is unable to take on 

more debt. It says it has the highest levels of debt per student 

compared to other Canadian institutions in its class. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s necessary that the government provides this 

funding in a cash grant upfront. My question to the minister: 

will the funding for the completion of the Health Sciences 

Building be provided in a cash grant upfront, or are they going 

to once again force more debt onto the University of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to work with 

our partners at the University of Saskatchewan and at the 

College of Medicine to ensure that the issues and the problems 

that that college faced in 2002 are never repeated in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government on this 

side of the House has a track record of increasing the number of 

training seats at the College of Medicine from 60 to 100; the 

number of residencies from 60 to 120, Mr. Speaker. That is why 

we have more than 200 more physicians, both specialists and 

family physicians, working in Saskatchewan today compared to 

when the members opposite were in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the track record of this 

government is walking away from an election promise to pay 

upfront for the Health Sciences Building. The fact of the matter 

is, Mr. Speaker, in order to not be put on probation, we need the 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

College of Medicine on good footing. Mr. Speaker, we need to 

have the completion of the Health Sciences Building. That 

means the completion of the A and B wings. My question to the 

minister, because he did not answer it in the last reply: will the 

funding, the remaining of the funding for the Health Sciences 

Building, will it be provided upfront in a cash grant, or will it be 

more debt that the university has to try to take on? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in my last 

answer, we are certainly going to work with the College of 

Medicine and with the U of S as we move forward on this 

project, Mr. Speaker, and we are going to ensure that we have 

the full complement of physicians that we need in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re doing things like offering 

forgiveness of student loans for those physicians that decide to 

work in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we are 

going to continue to put a focus on recruiting our own medical 

graduates, why we have put in place the physician recruitment 

agency that has a full-time recruiter that is at the U of S, and 

why we’re going to continue to recruit overseas, Mr. Speaker, 

because that is all a part of the answer. But of course moving 

forward with the plan at the college, Mr. Speaker, is a critical 

part of that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Investment and Ownership in the Potash Industry 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, British Columbia and Alberta 

newspapers have recently reported that there has been interest 

expressed from two Chinese state-owned companies, CNOOC 

[Chinese National Offshore Oil Corporation] and Sinopec, in 

owning our potash. The reports indicate that the federal 

Minister of Natural Resources recently met with Chinese 

officials to discuss purchasing potash companies in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve to know what 

conversations have started regarding foreign state ownership of 

the Saskatchewan people’s potash. My question is to the 

Premier: in his recent trip to China, did he also meet with those 

Chinese state officials about investing in our province’s potash 

industry, and who did he meet with? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address 

the member’s question very directly. She’s asking if those 

companies are interested in owning our potash. Mr. Speaker, 

the people of Saskatchewan own the potash in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as far as the investment that we see coming 

into Saskatchewan, into potash, into oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s part of a growing economy. We have recently put forward 

the growth plan 2020 that’s going to take us to 2020 and 

beyond, Mr. Speaker, to reach those aggressive targets for 

employment, for increased population, Mr. Speaker. We 

recognize the need for investment, foreign investment, local 

investment, Mr. Speaker. We think that we’ve got the resources 

to move our province forward. And, Mr. Speaker, we look 

forward to moving our whole province forward. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the net benefit tests that 

takeovers have to meet before being allowed to invest in a 

province’s potash industry has yet to be laid out clearly by the 

federal government. The federal government certainly isn’t 

prepared to consult with citizens when it’s doing the analysis of 

what constitutes a net benefit, and we don’t know whether the 

provincial government even has a say. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan deserve to know where the 

Saskatchewan Party government stands on what is a net benefit 

to the province and whether they are standing up for 

Saskatchewan when the federal government makes up its mind. 

To the minister: has the Sask Party government laid out its 

bottom line net benefit definition when it comes to a potential 

Chinese state potash takeover, and if yes, will they provide that 

definition to this Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the members on this side 

of the House are well aware of the investments in our province 

and when there is a net benefit and when there isn’t. And I 

believe that the record of the members on this side of the House 

of when we feel there is not a net benefit is unparalleled 

certainly by the members on that side of the House. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the record of defending Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite stood in this House in the last 

year and voted against pipelines, Mr. Speaker, that would be a 

net benefit to this province, Mr. Speaker. We have an 

investment climate, Mr. Speaker, in this province which is 

second to none. And those members agree with their leader in 

Ottawa, Mulcair, that it is a disease on our country when we 

grow. It’s a disease on our country when our resource sector is 

leading, when it’s an investment market for the rest of Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. The people on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, want to see 

growth. They want to see investment. They want to see 

Saskatchewan continue to lead in our country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the last time a foreign company 

attempted to take over a potash company, there was much 

confusion about where the Premier stood about the net benefit 

to the province. Saskatchewan ministry officials have recently 

said that since most potash rights are already sold, a Chinese 

state-owned company would need to purchase an existing 

private potash business in order to own Saskatchewan potash. If 

successful, this would have implications for potash companies 

in years like this one when the market is soft. 

 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

To the minister: is the Sask Party government supportive of a 

takeover of a privately held potash company by a Chinese 

state-owned business? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

are very exercised about foreign investment in our potash 

industry and, Mr. Speaker, I think it is something that we 

certainly should be aware of, that we don’t want haphazardly, 

Mr. Speaker. We want to be very clear and deliberate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we today have a potash company, a German 

potash company, investing in Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, 

this is the same foreign investment that was made in our 

province about 40 years ago. It was the last company to build a 

mine in our province, Mr. Speaker. And those members and 

their predecessors, Mr. Speaker, changed the law. They changed 

the rules. They made a nationalized potash Act, Mr. Speaker, 

and I can tell you, I was at the ground breaking, Mr. Speaker. 

Their CEO from Germany, Mr. Speaker, had come to 

Saskatchewan to announce this new potash mine, and he stood 

and said, we were mad; we were upset for a long, long time; but 

we’re now comfortable in this government to invest again in 

Saskatchewan, in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Liquor Store Ownership 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again the 

Saskatchewan Party has rolled out a controversial new idea 

without care nor consideration for the consequences for the 

people in the province. When it comes to the potential for new 

liquor stores in our province, the Sask Party owe people due 

diligence and respect. The Sask Party promised not to privatize 

the Crowns and they are going back on their word. They went 

back on their word already when they said they would admit 

their mistakes, but they didn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once again, why is the Sask Party rolling out the privatization 

of new liquor stores without doing their homework on the costs 

and the benefits to the people of this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unlike when 

the NDP were government, we have a growing province, and 

that is indeed exciting. But it also comes with challenges, Mr. 

Speaker, and those challenges are infrastructure across our 

province. The priority of this government is going to, has been, 

and is going to remain hospitals, nursing homes, schools, and 

highways. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as the population grows, there is a need for 

additional retail stores within our province. We are not going to 

change the existing SLAG [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority] stores. We have a blended, public-private system 

that’s extremely successful. And as we add on to that system, 

right now it’s going to be private stores. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan’s liquor sales provide much needed revenues that 

helps the province, pays for health care and education as the 

minister spoke about. 

 

A study jointly authorized by CCPA [Canadian Centre for 

Policy Alternatives] and the Parkland Institute has shown that 

Alberta’s privatization has cost that province nearly $1.5 billion 

of lost revenues in 10 years, Mr. Speaker, when they privatized 

their stores. This is not just about a fair process, Mr. Speaker. 

The Saskatchewan Party is also restricting SLGA stores from 

improving how they operate to meet the needs of the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party launching private liquor 

stores without studying what this choice will cost the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a lot 

of work done, and the SLGA officials monitor the market quite 

closely. And what we do know is we have 80,000 more people 

living in our province and the existing SLGA stores are serving 

those 80,000 people, but there is capacity issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we have examples, Mr. Speaker. We have a public-private 

system. We have 79 government-owned stores, but we also 

have 185 private rural franchisees in which to look at to see 

how they contribute to the government . . . [inaudible] . . . We 

also have 440 private off-sale outlets, and a private wine store 

right here in the city of Regina. Mr. Speaker, we have a blended 

system that’s extremely successful, and we believe these stores 

will support that system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, a common-sense approach to 

the need for a new store is to look at the model that has worked 

under SLGA. The publicly owned stores provide tax revenues 

that help pay for health and education. We understand that, Mr. 

Speaker. But the Sask Party is so opposed, they are so opposed 

to the public stores that they won’t even consider them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So once again they’d rather choose privatization at any cost 

because that’s their agenda when it comes to the Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. We see evidence of that. The people of Saskatchewan 

see evidence of that. And they’re going to continue doing that. 

And our job is to expose that, Mr. Speaker. So once again, will 

the Saskatchewan Party admit that they have broken their 

promise and they are now starting on their agenda of 

privatization at all costs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the 

member opposite heard earlier but we are not privatizing the 

existing SLGA stores. We are not breaking a promise. What we 

are doing is any new stores within our province will be 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

privately owned, Mr. Speaker, not unlike the 185 private 

businesses that are already retailing alcohol beverages within 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again the NDP are out of touch with the public 

because it was very interesting . . . There was a poll done on 

CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.]; a web poll was done 

on this particular issue. And they had over 1,000 votes and, Mr. 

Speaker, the majority were in favour of additional stores being 

private stores; 76 per cent of the people said that they were in 

favour of this initiative. The NDP yet again are out of touch 

with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we know that SLGA and liquor 

sales account for millions of dollars of revenue for the province, 

Mr. Speaker. And from those revenues of course we have 

education and health care and highways spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s happening now is that there’s been no 

analysis of this announcement whatsoever, and the people of 

Saskatchewan ought to have some analysis and some 

information that they can share amongst themselves, Mr. 

Speaker. And the point is that they are now attacking the 

government-owned liquor stores by simply saying to them that, 

all the revenue that you have made for health care and 

education, we’re not taking that into consideration. These new 

liquor stores we’re bringing in, guess what? They’re going to be 

able to market themselves. They’re going to have longer hours. 

But the government-owned stores cannot, Mr. Speaker. They 

cannot. So once again it’s privatization at all costs, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re allowing their ideology to trump common 

sense. 

 

So once again to the minister: will you at least take the time to 

analyze this choice that you’re making to make sure the people 

of Saskatchewan’s interests are protected? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a growing 

province for the first time in literally decades. And the analysis 

is quite simple — new liquor store or a new school? We know 

what the NDP would do. Quite frankly, in Riversdale they went 

with a new liquor store and they neglected St. Mary School. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/ 

Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51, The 

Public Inquiries Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 

2012 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Do you want me to mention both of 

the members participating in this? 

 

When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that Bill No. 52, The Public 

Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now introduced and 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that Bill No. 53, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 54, The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business 

Practices Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 55, The 

Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 55, The Consumer 

Protection and Business Practices Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/  

Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 56, The 

Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 56, The Court of Appeal 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 57, The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 57, The Condominium 

Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 58, 

The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education that Bill No. 58, The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, 2012 be now introduced and read a first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Deputy Government House 

Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — To bring a motion with respect to the 

Boundary Commission report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — We’ll do written questions first. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I wish to table the 

answers for questions 1 through 50. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled questions 1 

through 50. I now recognize the Deputy Government House 

Leader. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Report of the Constituency Boundaries 

Commission of Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 

the end of my . . . Thank you, and so I’ll be moving the 

following resolution: 

 

That the Constituency Boundaries Commission of 

Saskatchewan final report, being sessional paper no. 284 

of the first session of the twenty-seventh legislature laid 

before this Assembly by the Speaker, be approved and 

adopted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Constituency Boundaries Commission was 

established on April 18th, 2012. Appointments to the 

commission in accordance with the Act are to consist of a 

Chairperson and two residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council is required to adopt, to 

appoint either a judge of the Court of Appeal or a judge of Her 

Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan, 

nominated by the chief judges of Saskatchewan after 

consultation with the Chief Justice of Her Majesty’s Court of 

Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan or, Mr. Speaker, a resident of 

Saskatchewan nominated by the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan. 

 

Once the judge or Saskatchewan resident is appointed in a 

consultation with the leaders of the opposition and any 

recognized members of the legislature of Saskatchewan, the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council then appoints two members to 

the commission who are residents of Saskatchewan and who are 

not a Senator, a member of the House of Commons, or a 

member of the Assembly. 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, a commission may appoint one of its 

members as Deputy Chairperson of the commission who will 

act as Chairperson if the Chairperson is absent or unable to act 

or if the office of Chairperson is vacant. The Hon. Mr. Justice 

Neil Gabrielson is the Chairperson of the commission with Mr. 

Stuart Pollon and Mr. Harry Van Mulligen also serving as 

members. 

 

The commission was appointed and has carried out its work 

under the provisions of The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993. 

The first meeting of the commission was held on May 1st, 

2012, and their deliberations continued until early October. 

 

As described in the commission report, the following factors 

were taken into account as the commission first began its 

deliberations: the inclusion of three more constituencies; the 

change to population of 18 years and older rather than total 

population; the population increase within urban areas, 

especially Saskatoon and Regina; and the change of population 

in some rural constituencies. 

 

As required by the Act, the commission completed an interim 

report and held a series of public hearings across the province in 

September of 2012. The public hearings took place across the 

province, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert, The Battlefords, 

Saskatoon, Regina, Swift Current, Yorkton, and Estevan. These 

hearings were very well-attended, Mr. Speaker, with 45 oral 

presentations being given by individuals and corporations. 

Sixty-one written submissions were also received by the 

commission from individuals and corporations in the province. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, feedback from those individuals and 

corporations who submitted recommendations or made 

presentations to the commission stated that they were very 

satisfied with the work done by the commission and very 

supportive of the boundaries. 

 

The commission advised that prior to preparing their final 

report, they gave careful consideration to the submissions made 

at the hearings, as well as the written submissions that they 

received, and that they were to be commended for the 

tremendous job they did in allowing for public concerns as well 

as recommendations about constituency names and boundaries 

themselves to be included in their work. 

 

The commission states in its report that in undertaking its work, 

the commission has been guided by the requirements of the Act, 

relevant decisions by the courts, and by common sense. 

 

The commission focused on several factors when determining 

the new constituencies, Mr. Speaker, including population 

variations. The commission had the foresight to keep the 

population of certain constituencies slightly lower than the 

quotient, which will ensure that each vote cast in the province 

will remain equal while our population continues to grow. In 

addition to population variances, communities of interest were 

also taken into consideration. Roads and geographical features, 

including rivers and lakes as well as natural barriers between 

communities, were also factored into consideration when 

determining the boundaries. In addition to this, both rural and 

urban municipal boundaries were factored in to help reduce 

fragmentation of boundaries as much as possible. 

 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

Mr. Speaker, the commission did a tremendous job, taking into 

consideration the many factors that are important to this 

process, and again I wish to commend them for their work. 

 

With respect to the requirements of the Act, the rules for fixing 

the boundaries in section 14 provide that: 

 

. . . in determining the area to be included in a proposed 

constituency south of the dividing line and in fixing the 

boundaries of that constituency, a commission shall ensure 

that the population of each proposed constituency is, as 

nearly as possible, equal to the constituency population 

quotient. 

 

The constituency population quotient is the total population less 

the northern population divided by the 59 ridings, with total 

population being the voting eligible population that is 18 years 

of age or older. We are advised in the report that the total 

population quotient for these purposes was determined to be 

13,059. 

 

Having established the central principle, the Act provides that a 

commission may depart from this requirement: 

 

. . . where, in its opinion, it is necessary to do so because 

of: 

 

special geographic considerations, including: 

 

sparsity, density, or relative rates of growth of 

populations in various regions south of the dividing 

line; 

 

accessibility to the regions . . . or 

 

the size and shape of the regions . . . 

 

a special community of interests or diversity of 

interests of persons residing in regions south of the 

dividing line or; 

 

physical features of regions south of the dividing line. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Act provides that, in any event: 

 

A commission shall ensure that the population of each 

constituency south of the dividing line remains within 5%, 

either more or less, of the constituency population 

quotient. 

 

In compliance with these rules, and with what I am sure was a 

liberal dose of common sense previously referred to, the 

commission has completed its final report. And in doing so, it’s 

achieved the creation of 61 constituencies with boundaries that 

will ensure that the value of each vote will be as nearly as 

possible equal whenever that vote is cast in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for good reason, the two northern constituencies 

continue to operate under special rules which recognizes the 

lower population density and vast distances involved in those 

constituencies. The remaining 59 constituencies will now, 

however, all have the same number of actual voters plus or 

minus 5 per cent, in accordance with the recently amended Act. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a fundamental principle of our democracy that 

each vote should be roughly of the same value throughout the 

province. In Saskatchewan we have one of the lowest permitted 

size variances of plus or minus 5 per cent between 

constituencies. However it is our view that in order to ensure 

votes of equal value in Saskatchewan, it is the number of voters 

in a constituency that should be used to establish as roughly 

equal rather than a roughly equal overall population. 

 

The Act was amended to ensure that the commission is using 

the most recent census data to determine who is of voting age in 

a constituency rather than using the voters list as is done in 

some other jurisdictions. 

 

The final report of the commission was produced using the best 

available data, and I am strongly of the view that it deserves the 

support of this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, it is the voters who elect 

the members of the Legislative Assembly, and in our view it is 

the voters who should therefore be the focus of the constituency 

boundaries process. The final report reflects that focus. 

 

The other change reflected in this report is the increase in the 

number of constituencies from 58 to 61. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan has had the benefit of considerable growth over 

the last few years. Since the census upon which our current 

boundaries were drawn, our population has increased over 5 per 

cent. And we are proud to say that this dramatic increase is 

continuing. It has been the view of the government that this 

process must reflect the increase in population since the 

boundaries were last drawn. It should also anticipate the 

population growth that we are confident will occur before the 

next commission is struck based on the 2021 census. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, the Act was amended to 

recognize the population change in the province of 

Saskatchewan and the need for increased representation by 

members of the Legislative Assembly by increasing the number 

of constituencies from 58 to 61. This 5 per cent increase in the 

number of seats was achieved by increasing the number of 

constituencies south of the dividing line, as that term is defined 

in the Act, from 56 to 59 members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Legislative Assembly passes the resolution 

adopting the proposed boundaries in this report, The 

Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993 requires me, as minister 

responsible for that Act, to introduce The Representation Act, 

2012 in the same session of the Legislative Assembly to 

establish the new provincial constituencies as directed by that 

resolution. Accordingly The Representation Act, 2012 would be 

introduced later this session to establish the new constituencies 

and their boundaries. Those new boundaries will come into 

force upon the dissolution of the current Legislative Assembly 

prior to the next provincial general election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the independent Constituencies Boundary 

Commission, led by the Hon. Mr. Justice Neil Gabrielson, has 

served this Assembly and the people of this province 

exceedingly well with its final report. They have listened 

carefully to the people of this province and have worked 

quickly and carefully to execute their duties on our behalf. I 

thank them again for their service to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

So, Mr. Speaker, I hereby move the following resolution: 

 

That the Constituency Boundaries Commission of 

Saskatchewan final report, being sessional paper 284 of 

the first session of the twenty-seventh legislature laid 

before this Assembly by the Speaker, be approved and 

adopted. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General: 

 

That the Constituency Boundaries Commission of 

Saskatchewan final report, being sessional paper 284 of 

the first session of the twenty-seventh legislature laid 

before this Assembly by the Speaker, be approved and 

adopted. 

 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official 

opposition, and I think many people in the province, want to 

thank Mr. Justice Neil Gabrielson and Mr. Stuart Pollon, Mr. 

Harry Van Mulligen for their work in preparing this report to 

the legislature based on the legislation that was introduced in 

this place last spring. They have followed the legislation 

carefully and listened to the people of the province and have 

prepared a report in accordance with that legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have a fundamental problem with the 

legislation that was introduced, and I know that the member 

opposite has gone through to try to explain the legislation again. 

But I think common sense, practical Saskatchewan people are 

very surprised that the Government of Saskatchewan came 

forward and added three more politicians at the same time as 

they’ve been cutting back on services and cutting back on the 

numbers of employees in the government. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this was not something that was mentioned in the election. This 

was not something that the Sask Party had identified as 

something that they were going to do if they were re-elected. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think many people in the province are 

questioning the legislation that’s the basis for this report. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in most democracies when changes are made to 

the actual decision-making body for the people of the province, 

these kinds of decisions are discussed by the population. 

They’re discussed through various forums. We’ve seen that 

kind of thing happen in other provinces in Canada when there 

are suggested changes to be made. Most often there will also be 

a discussion in an election. And there was a very clear 

opportunity for the government to raise the issues that they put 

into their bill, but it’s quite clear that these decisions were made 

in the Premier’s office and maybe with a few other people in 

early December, just after the election was completed last year. 

And I think fundamentally it doesn’t pass the smell test of 

common sense that those changes were made. 

 

Now let’s take a look at what those changes are. The first one is 

adding three more politicians. Saskatchewan now has one MLA 

for each 18,240 people. The next closest province is Manitoba 

where they have one MLA for 21,940 but when you go to 

Alberta it’s more than 43,000. In British Columbia it’s more 

than 53,000 and in Ontario it’s almost 125,000 for each MLA. 

So we know, we heard a little earlier how our university is 

going to have the highest debt per capita. I think that was a 

better number to be working at, is to try to reduce that kind of a 

debt at our university than to increase the number of MLAs. 

 

And so the other aspect of this legislation is that they have 

changed the way we count the people of the province and 

basically said that if you are 18 years of age or under on June 

1st, 2011, well then you’re not going to be counted in any 

calculations related to your constituency until probably 11, 12 

years from now. So many of the new young voters will not even 

have been included in the process that sets up the boundaries for 

our constituency. And that’s another fundamental problem with 

this legislation. 

 

So we have a government that says, we can’t do these things for 

the people. We can’t provide these services. We’re going to cut 

back in jobs in these areas, but we will increase the number of 

MLAs. I think the people of Saskatchewan have understood 

how fundamentally wrong that process is. We don’t need the 

extra MLAs in the province, Mr. Speaker. We will be, I think, 

voting against this concept and this idea of how to change the 

boundaries in the province, because it was not done in an 

appropriately democratic way. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise and speak about Bill No. 45, An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 

The amendments deal with a simple housekeeping matter of 

monetary limits of order in councils and the length of the term 

of borrowing by SaskTel. 

 

Over the past five years, the Canada bond market has expanded 

to include bonds issued for 30 years or more. This financing 

option, which has not been available to the province or SaskTel 

for a very long time, is made possible now due to our recent 

credit upgrades. The provincial Department of Finance has 

started borrowing at these longer terms, and should we fail to 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

amend this restriction, it could potentially impact SaskTel’s 

ability to participate directly in the provincial borrowing 

program. If the provincial Department of Finance determines 

the borrowing for a term longer than 30 years is desirable for 

the province and SaskTel cannot participate, then the interest 

costs that SaskTel will be paying will be higher. 

 

From 2011 to the end of September 2012, SaskTel has spent 

approximately $300 million on its network here in 

Saskatchewan, and SaskTel needs to continue to invest to 

provide services residents and businesses are demanding. This 

includes the 670 million that will be spent on completing the 

six-year fibre to the premises program, and approximately 60 

million for the deployment of the new LTE — which stands for 

long-term evolution — wireless network scheduled to be 

introduced early 2013. 

 

This housekeeping matter is to align SaskTel’s dollar limit for 

the order in council with CIC’s [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] model that was recommended by 

the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. Currently 

SaskTel requires an order in council for all lands purchased in 

excess of $100,000. This can delay the purchase of land for cell 

towers. This of course impacts SaskTel’s ability to provide 

exceptional service to its customers in the highly competitive 

cellular market, as many cellular sites are now exceeding the 

$100,000 mark, especially in our larger cities. This amendment 

is therefore in support of SaskTel’s continued investment in 

cellular and other communication services in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move the second reading of Bill No. 45, An Act 

to amend the Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure that Bill 

No. 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased on behalf of the official opposition to stand up and offer 

our initial comments about Bill No. 45 and the importance of 

SaskTel in terms of allowing the Crown corporation, whom 

we’re very proud of, to be able to borrow excess money if 

needed to really strengthen them as a Crown and that the 

provisions, as the minister has indicated, are minor in nature in 

that some of the smaller rules and regulations surrounding 

borrowing money for SaskTel purposes, as he described, are 

something that the corporation has to do. 

 

And we certainly want to at the outset indicate that SaskTel is a 

Crown corporation that we’re quite proud of. And the minister 

alluded to some of the points about world-class and describing 

SaskTel and the fact that they want to spend $670 million on 

improving their cell service and their cell coverage. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s no question from our perspective as an 

opposition that we look and always make sure that we find the 

ways and means in which we could brag about the Crowns and 

talk about the Crowns, and SaskTel being one of the more 

successful ones that we want to make sure that we take every 

opportunity to make sure that we highlight their achievements 

and their success as a Crown. 

There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that we look to SaskTel for 

leadership on many fronts. As I stand up here every day in the 

Assembly, I present petitions on behalf of a number of northern 

First Nations in the area that I represent as other areas 

throughout the province also reach out to SaskTel to try and get 

them to provide those services. And we look at how we could 

strengthen that to providing the petitions every day from the 

Canoe Lake First Nation, from Dillon, from Patuanak, and of 

course from Turnor Lake and all the neighbouring communities, 

as I mentioned at the outset, that I announced, that I named 

during my petition presentation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand and I think we understand that 

as we move forward that SaskTel’s, obviously their borrowing 

capacity, their borrowing limits, their borrowing requirements 

have to certainly, if I give for lack of a better word, jive with 

what CIC’s doing and certainly coordinate and collaborate with 

what the Ministry of Finance is doing. We understand that and 

we appreciate that. 

 

And it’s important to note that the people out there in 

Saskatchewanland, they want to make sure that SaskTel 

remains competitive, that SaskTel remains strong. And we’ve 

seen evidence of some of the bungling by the minister in terms 

of SaskTel’s future, of how they have not supported nor 

defended SaskTel to the extent that they have, that they profess, 

Mr. Speaker. They have to do more. That’s the bottom line. 

They have to do more. And I’ll give you the most recent 

example as we speak in the Assembly about the Huawei deal 

that the Premier’s signed. What’s all that about? 

 

We talk about the challenge that they had with the wireless 

Internet service for the Internet. That was bungled as well. And 

then as time goes on, you know, we find them bringing forward 

bills of this sort, saying we need to borrow more money for the 

Crowns. And we need to be able to make sure we coordinate, 

collaborate those borrowing responsibilities, those borrowing 

needs to what CIC does and certainly what the Ministry of 

Finance does as well. 

 

And at the outset people would say, well there’s nothing wrong 

with that in terms of being able to position SaskTel to borrow 

for a longer term. But there’s got to be a lot more oversight to 

how much the Crown corporation is borrowing, where they’re 

borrowing it from. And people of Saskatchewan have a right to 

know. And that’s one of the reasons why, when they bring bills 

of this nature forward, as I mentioned on a lot of the other bills, 

is that you have to make sure you take the time to really read it 

through. And always remember that it’s the Sask Party 

government that’s hell-bent on privatization that’s proposing 

some of these things of this nature, that we take the extra time 

and make the extra effort to connect with people that are in the 

know of what challenges the Crown corporation faces to ensure 

it’s longer term health and future. 

 

So at the outset you look at the issue of borrowing more money 

and positioning SaskTel to do that. There’s all kinds of 

questions that we have. Like in terms of the long-term debt, 

how will this affect the bottom line? What are your plans for 

withdrawing from SaskTel any of the retained earnings of the 

corporation? Because obviously the last go around the 

government basically cleaned them out their savings. 

 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

And this is one of the things that really worries a lot of people, 

is how can you on one hand, like this bill, propose to coordinate 

their borrowing process yet at the same time they clean out their 

savings? They don’t defend them when it comes to . . . don’t 

defend the Crown corporations and their customers, like 

SaskTel’s customers, when it comes to protecting frequencies 

on their cell or their Internet service in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of questions we have on the 

miscellaneous statutes that the minister spoke about. There are 

things that we are very, very quick to pick up as an opposition. 

When this government talks about longer term debt for any 

Crown corporation, a longer time frame in which they can 

borrow money, the bigger and greater amounts that they can 

borrow, it’s always a worrisome trend. And that’s what this 

minister’s alluding to in his bill saying that we want to look at a 

longer term process under Bill 45 and to coordinate that with 

CIC’s process as well as the Ministry of Finance. 

 

So it begs the question. They want to borrow more money for a 

longer term. How much more and how much longer? These are 

some of the questions that we have at the outset in relation to 

Bill 45. And it’s always the worry on our part, as I mentioned, 

when we talk about the Sask Party looking after the Crowns. 

It’s really, really worrisome for a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan. And we want to make sure, we want to make 

sure that people out there are aware of what they’re proposing 

in any bill. 

 

And Bill 45 is a classic example of how at the outset the 

minister’s nonchalant in his presentation, saying it’s all about 

coordination. It’s all about borrowing limits and borrowing 

terms. We’re trying to make sure everything’s fine so we can 

strengthen the Crown. The vast majority of people in 

Saskatchewan are rolling their eyes when they talk about that 

sort of thing. And we on this side of the Assembly pay very, 

very close attention to what obviously the minister is trying to 

do. What’s the objective with the premise that we know that he 

doesn’t support and protect the Crowns in any way, shape, or 

form. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we obviously want to encourage and solicit 

people’s help and advice on this front. Like all the other bills 

we’re speaking about today, we’re going to ask them to 

certainly help us to research or to give us information. As I’ve 

said on many other bills, that the purpose of the bills here is to 

explain what the bills are about, to get the opposition 

perspective on the bills. And then of course these bills come 

back in the spring sitting. It gives us an adequate amount of 

time to research them, to find out different groups, what impact 

that they think this might have on the Crown, and all the while, 

Mr. Speaker, being very, very wary of what the Sask Party has 

and what their plans are for the Crown corporations. 

 

So at the outset, from what the minister spoke of very quickly, 

he mentioned the fact that Bill 45 is primarily about the terms 

of limit in terms of the money they want to borrow, plus the 

time frame, and that they’re collaborating and coordinating that 

with CIC, of which SaskTel is part of the process there, as well 

as the Ministry of Finance. 

 

But as I said at the outset, Mr. Speaker, we watch very carefully 

any time the Sask Party has an opportunity to hide long-term 

debt in our Crowns. What does that mean for our overall debt? 

Their PPP [public-private partnership] partnerships that they 

speak about, you know, that’s another example of how they’re 

hiding debt. And we’ve seen evidence of that in the ’90s where 

it took us 16 years to repair some of the incredible financial 

burden that the people of Saskatchewan suffered from on the 

Conservatives of the day, their cousins, when they put this 

province close to $16 billion in debt. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, when you look PPP partnerships, they 

look at longer term debts for our Crown. It begins to worry 

people throughout Saskatchewanland that what’s the objective 

here? Are you going to saddle SaskTel with more debt over a 

longer term? Because if you’re going to saddle all these Crown 

corporations with all that debt, in the process you’re taking all 

the equity out of it to balance off your books for today, Mr. 

Speaker, you’re leaving generations, generations down the road 

with more and more debt. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the 

same MO [modus operandi] of the 1990s Conservatives as 

we’re seeing with the 2011-2012 Saskatchewan Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So through the PPP partnerships and certainly through longer 

term debt as described in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, we 

don’t see . . . we see nothing but trouble. Any time the 

Saskatchewan Party starts talking about protecting our Crowns, 

the people on this side of the Assembly start to laugh. They start 

to roll their eyes because we know, you know, coming from the 

them it’s actually pretty, pretty darn funny, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s what I think is absolutely key to this bill and any other 

bill that they propose. 

 

Really, Mr. Speaker, if they really supported the Crowns, you 

know, would they clean them out of their savings, Mr. Speaker? 

Like you look at SaskTel, they cleaned SaskTel of all the 

retained earnings. They cleaned them right out, and then they 

privatized services like the 411 information services. Now when 

you call up an operator, like where’s this operator based out of? 

You look at all these issues and then you begin to wonder, well 

if these guys aren’t supportive of the Crowns, then why aren’t 

people exposing them to that fact? 

 

And that’s why some of these bills that they bring forward, 

we’ll have to make every effort. And every plan that we have is 

to make sure that people know exactly what the Sask Party’s 

doing with our Crowns. And here’s another example of nothing 

but longer debt, longer term to pay down a debt, and bigger 

debt for the Crowns, and that’s what this bill is basically 

speaking about, Mr. Speaker. And the people of Saskatchewan 

ought to know that, and that’s the purpose of us really trying to 

expose the challenges with Bill 45. 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that my colleagues 

will have a lot more to say about this bill. We’ll have committee 

opportunities to challenge the minister on this bill. And we’ve 

got other things that we want to bring forward as time will 

permit us to do so, and we certainly will take that opportunity. 

So a big welcome to the people out there that may have some of 

the concerns with this bill. And as minor as the minister may 

make the bill and the amendments to the bill, he may want to 

make it appear to be minor, there are some major implications 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

and complications for the Crowns. 

 

So my only point is that I would ask the minister to make sure 

that he has advised people in the area, and advised folks 

throughout his constituency, and advised the people in general 

under his ministerial duties some of the challenges that this bill 

may provide to SaskTel. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move 

that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 45. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading 

of Bill No. 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment 

Act, 2012. Mr. Speaker, the municipal employees’ pension plan, 

also known as MEP, is a defined benefit pension plan 

administered by the Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Commission. The plan provides retirement benefits to the 

employees of school divisions, urban and rural municipalities, 

regional colleges, regional public libraries, and other local 

authorities within the province of Saskatchewan. MEP’s 

membership consists of over 16,000 members and 4,000 

pensioners. As we know, many countries are dealing with issues 

around pensions, and the two key concerns are the solvency of 

the plans and their fairness. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, Canada’s pension plans have been ranked 

as some of the top sustainable pension plans in developing 

countries. This certainly reinforces the need to continually 

review our pension plans to ensure they are operating as 

efficiently and as effectively as possible. Reviewing the 

governing legislation of our pension funds provides the 

opportunity to make changes that are vital for the sustainability 

of the plan and, most importantly, to ensure the security of the 

plan for its members. 

 

It is desirable, Mr. Speaker, to amend The Municipal Employees 

Pension Act to implement the outcomes from a review of the 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission pursuant to 

subsection 7(13) of the Act, and to align certain provisions of 

the Act with The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 

 

The proposed amendments, Mr. Speaker, are, it will allow the 

commission to extend the terms of the Chairperson and 

Vice-Chairperson at times when leadership continuity is vital 

and their original terms are nearing an end. It will, for clarity 

purposes, modify the Act to note that a simple majority of 

commission members is required for all decisions made by the 

commission. It will align the Act with provincial pension 

legislation, provide for a lifetime pension benefit to be paid to 

an eligible surviving spouse where the member dies prior to 

retirement, and it will eliminate ambiguity. The Act will be 

modified to clearly state that a spousal waiver to a pension 

benefit is revocable. 

 

A review of the composition of the commission every five 

years, as required under the Act, helps to ensure that those 

governing the pension plan have the appropriate structure and 

authority to provide high quality leadership to the plan. At my 

direction, this review was last undertaken in late 2010, 

extending into 2011. Plan stakeholders and the commission 

were provided with an opportunity to provide their feedback. 

The feedback received has been valuable in making 

improvements to the governance of the plan. Consultation was 

necessary to ensure the plan for plan holders is as sound and up 

to date as possible. Stakeholders can be assured that if a tragedy 

happens, their loved ones will be protected. These amendments 

will also ensure that the future of the plan is sustainable for 

years to come. 

 

Aligning The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act to comply 

with The Pension Benefits Act, 1992 ensures that members of 

the pension plan are entitled to the same minimum benefits 

afforded to all members of pension plans registered in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Again, Mr. Speaker, our government 

is making appropriate changes to ensure the plan meets the 

needs of participants and to ensure the plan is sound and 

sustainable. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 46, The Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Amendment Act be now read a second 

time. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this afternoon to speak to the Act to amend The Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Act, and it’s Bill No. 46. As the Minister of 

Finance has pointed out, the legislative changes that are made 

for pension legislation need to be about two things: solvency, 

making sure that the plans are financially viable; and also 

fairness to all of the members of the plan. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

will be looking at this legislation in light of comments that we 

will eventually receive from the people who are affected by the 

legislation. But before we get those comments, I think it’s 

important to put a number of questions on the record today so 

that we will have some specific issues to look at. 

 

Now when we look at the legislation, it appears that there are a 

couple of things that are going on. One is that there’s some 

changes made in how the plans themselves actually would 

operate. And when we look at section 3 of Bill No. 46, which is 

headed section 7 amended, we note that they’ve added a 

subsection (9.1) into section 7. And effectively what it says is 

that the commission has the power to extend the term of the 

chairperson and the vice-chairperson to make sure that there’s 

continuity of leadership in the plan. 

 

Now presumably this has arisen because a problem was 

identified or something happened over the last number of years 

where this became an issue. And that wasn’t necessarily laid out 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

in what we’ve heard so far, so we will end up having to find out 

if that’s what happened. But one of the concerns always when 

you step into plans and have the commission make some 

changes in there is, why and in what circumstances would that 

happen? And so practically we’re going to have to take a look 

and find out if the problem that is ostensibly being corrected is 

corrected by this particular provision or if this provision may 

actually create some other problems that haven’t yet been 

identified. But practically this goes right to the heart of the 

Chair and Vice-Chair roles within the running of the municipal 

employees’ pension plan that’s incorporated under this Act. 

 

So when we go to the next section, section 4 of Bill 46, and it’s 

basically saying that there’s going to be a new section 7.01 in 

the existing legislation. And this is a kind of a curious one, and 

I think again it’s drafted in a way that indicates there’s been 

some particular problem and that this will solve that problem. 

And so we will be seeking out the information as to what were 

the facts, what were the circumstances that led to the drafting of 

this particular section. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Because the section talks about how decisions are made and 

clearly what the explanation given is that this now makes it 100 

per cent clear that a simple majority is all that’s required to 

make a decision on a board for one of these pensions 

incorporated under this legislation. But curiously or maybe not 

so curiously, I’m not so sure because we don’t know all of the 

facts that led to the drafting of this of this particular provision. 

 

It then goes on in subsection (2) of 7.01 to say that if you 

happen to be on this commission . . . Say there’s five members 

and the vote is three to two. Well if you’re on this commission 

and you didn’t agree with the decision — so you’re one of the 

two, the minority — you could have your dissent registered. 

And then I think effectively what this does is eliminates any of 

your liability for that particular decision. 

 

It is an interesting question of governance and how decisions 

are made when you state in subsection (1) that the simple 

majority is all that’s required, but if it is a simple majority, then 

the people who lost the vote can take steps to make sure that 

they’re not liable for that decision. 

 

And I think everybody’s curious as to why that particular 

provision is there. Presumably there are a few incidents that 

have arisen in these plans where an issue has come up about the 

ultimate liability of the members as it relates to this. But I think 

it’s interesting to see a clause like this. I don’t think we have 

similar clauses in any other legislation, but that’s something 

we’ll also be looking at to see whether there is a precedent for 

this type of a clause. 

 

Now the next section 5 of Bill 46 amends by adding after 20.1 a 

new subsection (3). And effectively what it says is, “At any 

time before the date of death of a member, the member’s spouse 

may revoke a waiver provided pursuant to subsection (2) by 

providing a written notice of the revocation in a form acceptable 

to the commission.” Now clearly once again this is a response 

to a particular situation that has arisen, and I think it would be 

important to understand the facts around that particular decision 

and as the power of this particular revocation. 

Now if it’s a matter which it appears may be related to 

separation of parties or some other matrimonial dispute, there 

may be some other issues around whether this revocation can be 

granted in a situation where a person has entered into another 

type of contract that says you won’t do this. So it raises some 

questions in the legislation itself as to some very specific points, 

and I think that once again we will be asking for information 

about the particular situation that has arisen that has generated 

this particular amendment. Because it may be that giving this 

power is detrimental to other parties, including the children of a 

member or other people who may be dependent on the member 

who has died. So I think we’re owed a bigger explanation on 

that particular provision that’s here. 

 

Then we go to the next point, and this is section 6 of Bill 46. 

And this amends section 21, and effectively subsection 21(3) is 

repealed, and then they add subsections 21(3), (4), and (5). And 

these particular provisions are said to be, you know, related to 

the payment of the monthly survivorship pension amount, and I 

think practically what they’re trying to do is make sure that the 

provisions in these municipal employees’ pensions plans will be 

similar to The Pension Benefits Act. And one of the reasons that 

I guess all legislation around pensions attempts to become 

similar or the same is that it’s easier to administer for 

everybody because the rules are the same. But once again this 

must have arisen because of a particular problem or a particular 

situation that wasn’t able to be resolved through the discretion 

in the plan. And so they’ve attempted to write in the legislation 

all of the various possibilities that might be covered by, you 

know, by a situation around the monthly allowances. And so it 

is again a situation where we’ll ask about, well what are the 

circumstances that led to this particular change in the 

legislation? 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at pension legislation 

in general, we know that this ends up being effectively deferred 

compensation. And sometimes people forget the fact that what 

happens for an employee is that they have elected or they have 

contracted, if it’s a unionized job which many of the municipal 

jobs are, to receive a certain amount of their pay each biweekly 

or each week or per month, and then they take another portion 

and have agreed that that will go into a pension plan. But 

effectively it is their compensation for the work that they have 

done for that particular two-week period or for that particular 

month. 

 

And so when this money then goes and is managed by a board, 

which is incorporated under this legislation, it’s being held in 

trust for the employee. And one of the challenges that we’ve 

had in a few of the municipal employee pension plans in 

Saskatchewan is that that money held in trust hasn’t been 

sufficient to cover all of the liabilities as identified by actuaries 

whose job it is to assess the amount of money that’s in a plan 

versus the responsibility that the plan has for its members. And 

we know that this was an issue in the recent elections in 

municipalities where there are some municipalities that have 

some particular challenges. 

 

And so when we look at this legislation, we’re also going to 

have to make sure that there isn’t anything here which 

diminishes that responsibility of the trustees to provide for the 

employees or, on the other side, diminishes the responsibility of 

the members in making sure that it’s fair for the employees, 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

which in this case, they’re often the taxpayers in municipalities. 

 

Now we know . . . And it’s quite interesting actually to compare 

what has happened in Saskatchewan, what has happened in 

Canada. And I agree with the Minister of Finance that most of 

our pension plans are in relatively good shape. But we also 

know that when we look at other jurisdictions and California 

comes to mind, one of the biggest issues in the state of 

California is that many municipalities who have plans that are 

probably under legislation pretty similar to this Saskatchewan 

provincial legislation — only there it would be the state of 

California legislation — there’s many of the plans in California 

that have huge liabilities for their retired people to the point 

where they aren’t able to even to hire people to do the regular 

jobs in the local municipalities. And they’ve gotten to a point 

where a number of the communities are really, really stuck. 

And it relates to some of their taxation referenda and also some 

of the decisions they’ve made around the revenues in 

municipalities. 

 

But those kinds of issues also can arise when we look at 

pension plans that are incorporated under The Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Act because the plans are funded by the 

workers out of their salary as they receive it or out of their pay 

as they receive it, but it’s also funded by the municipal 

taxpayers. And there are sometimes challenges to deal with 

related to infrastructure or to many of the other day-to-day 

services that are provided in the municipality, which means 

some choices are made that diminish the assets available for the 

employees under their municipal employees’ pension plan. 

 

And what we will do is ask questions around this particular 

legislation to see whether it is some of the plans . . . it is some 

of the municipalities in Saskatchewan where there is litigation 

about the plan that has generated some of these suggested 

changes or if it’s very specific personal situations that can be 

corrected by this legislation. And this, I think, kind of raises one 

of the points that I’ve often cited when I’ve been responding to 

bills provided by the present government which is, they could 

save all of us a lot of work if they actually were more specific 

in why certain changes were being proposed in the legislation. 

Because a simple story about each of these sections I’ve just 

been going through probably would’ve saved all of us from my 

speculating as to what the situation is. 

 

And I know that that expanded version or perspective as each 

bill is presented is also very valuable on the record if later 

there’s a challenge to the particular Act that has passed or out of 

the bill that’s passed. Because I know, as a lawyer, we would 

often go to Hansard to see what was said about a particular 

piece of legislation when it was introduced. We would look at 

the discussions that take place in the legislature. We’d look at 

what questions were asked in committee, because all of those 

could add an interpretation to one or two words or in the 

legislation that would make a very important difference for 

somebody 10 years from now or 15 years from now or even a 

couple years from now. 

 

So what we look at when we look at all the legislation 

introduced by the government is, what’s the story or what are 

the facts behind why a particular change was made? What’s the 

rationale? What’s sometimes the ideology? Because sometimes 

there’s ideological changes made to the legislation. But more 

importantly, on some of these types of legislation, it really is 

that particular story or factual situation that explains why a 

particular change has been made in the legislation. 

 

So when we’re looking at the legislation as we move forward, 

we will be asking those very specific questions but will also be 

asking some of the bigger questions around some of the 

litigation and discussion that’s been happening related to 

municipal employees’ pension plans throughout the province. 

 

Now I know that a number of my colleagues are going to have 

questions about this particular legislation and that they will 

want to speak to some of the very specific points. I know that 

when you look at legislation like the employees’ pension Act, 

then practically what we’re concerned about is both the 

individuals but also the taxpayers who fund the jobs, and in fact 

then fund the trust monies that will pay for the pensions over 

the long term. So, Mr. Speaker, with those comments I’ll now 

adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 46, The Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Thank you, colleagues. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill 47, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority Act, 2005 and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know that Saskatchewan’s economy is strong. 

Our population is at a record level and is growing. People are 

moving back to our province and building their careers and 

lives here. We need water to support this growing population, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need water to ensure a high quality of 

life. We need water to ensure a healthy environment, and we 

need water for continuing economic growth. 

 

On October 16th, the Premier spoke about The Saskatchewan 

Plan for Growth, and indeed he spoke about the importance of 

water. The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth identifies the 25-year 

Saskatchewan water security plan and the creation of the Water 

Security Agency. It’s an important step to ensure that 

Saskatchewan manages its water supply to support growth 

while protecting and enhancing water quality in its lakes and 

rivers, and responding effectively to floods and droughts. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to mention briefly the concept of 

the Water Security Agency. This concept has been developed 

among the world’s water experts for the last 10 years. Water 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

security refers to ensuring sustainable water supplies to support 

our society’s needs. Those include water for drinking but also 

for irrigation, for industry and energy production, for fisheries, 

and other water services. Mr. Speaker, if I may quote two 

Canadians well-known for their excellent work on water, Mr. 

Thomas Axworthy and Mr. Bob Sandford, and I quote, “Water 

security is the foundation for food and energy security and for 

overall long-term social and economic development.” 

 

The term water security captures exactly what we wish to 

achieve in our province to support a high quality of life and 

continued growth. The Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very 

simple. It continues the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority as 

the Water Security Agency and updates other pieces of 

legislation to ensure consistency in referring to the Water 

Security Agency. It also changes the name of the Act to The 

Water Security Agency Act. 

 

This is however a very important piece of legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in advancing our work to ensure that water 

supports economic growth. It supports our quality of life, and it 

supports our environmental well-being. I am confident, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that everyone in this Chamber agrees on the 

overwhelming importance of protecting and managing our very 

valuable water supply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, creating the Water Security Agency is a major 

step to ensure management of our water and to implement the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth. As the board of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, SARM, 

advised us during our consultations on the 25-year water 

security plan, and I quote, “Water is central to expansion of 

economic development in our province.” 

 

The Water Security Agency is mandated to ensure protection of 

water quality, maintenance of aquatic habitats, and sustainable 

water supplies. The Water Security Agency brings together for 

the first time all of government’s core water management 

responsibilities and technical expertise to ensure a 

comprehensive and integrated approach to water management. 

This has been accomplished by bringing together staff and 

programs from the Ministry of Environment, from the Ministry 

of Agriculture, from the Ministry of Health, along with all of 

the responsibilities and staff from the Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Water Security Agency will provide a stronger 

focus on water issues. This new agency will simplify the 

water-related regulatory processes and establish a one-window 

approach for many water functions. 

 

The Water Security Agency will have regulatory authority over 

water supply including water allocations, water quality, 

municipal drinking water, and waste water systems, and similar 

large private systems, work such as dams and channels, 

drainage, protection of aquatic habitat as well. 

 

The Water Security Agency will provide the strong leadership 

needed to ensure the implementation of the 25-year 

Saskatchewan water security plan. The creation of the Water 

Security Agency strengthens drinking water protection by 

bringing responsibility for source-to-tap protection of drinking 

water into one agency as recommended, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

this is a very important point — as recommended by Justice 

Laing back in 2002. 

 

The Water Security Agency, like the Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority, will be headquartered in Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan, 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, the Water Security 

Agency will lead implementation of the 25-year Saskatchewan 

water security plan. The 25-year water security plan which we 

developed following extensive — and I want to make this point, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — extensive consultations is a major step 

towards addressing the challenges of growth. This plan will 

ensure a sustainable water supply to support our growth, to 

support a healthy environment, and to support our high quality 

of life in our province. 

 

The plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sets out seven principles which 

will guide our actions. A long-term perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

On this side of the House, we don’t shy away from setting goals 

and having a long-term perspective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, number two, water for future generations. We 

want to, we welcome people into our province in record 

numbers, Mr. Speaker. And those future generations will indeed 

be larger and larger if this economic growth continues. 

 

Number three, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an integrated approach to 

management, Mr. Speaker, an integration that’s important 

within a coordinated and well-run government. 

 

Partnerships and participation, Mr. Speaker, that’s an area of 

importance as well. Shared responsibility, the value of water 

and, Mr. Speaker, continuous improvement. 

 

The plan provides guidance to all of government on work 

related to water. That work will be directed to achieving these 

seven goals: sustainable supplies, safe drinking water, 

protection of water resources, safe dams, flood and drought 

damage reduction, adequate data information and knowledge, 

and effective governance and engagement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the pleasure of releasing the 25-year 

Saskatchewan water security plan to a crowd of interested 

people on the banks of the South Saskatchewan River on 

October 15th. Now that was only three weeks ago, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but the weather was quite different than what we see 

out there today. The sun was shining. It was indeed a beautiful 

day. I said that the only thing that could make it more perfect is 

if we saw my opposition critic come to the announcement, and 

lo and behold, a few minutes later the opposition critic showed 

up. So it was indeed, it was indeed a perfect day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to speak to many people 

after the announcement. All of them, Mr. Speaker, all of them 

were very positive about the 25-year water security plan and the 

creation of the Water Security Agency. Many of them had 

participated in the consultations as we developed the plan. Mr. 

Speaker, all agree that water is one of our most important 

resources and requires strength in management and attention. 

Creation of the Water Security Agency is how we are creating 

that stronger focus within the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to repeat the words of former 

Prime Minister Jean Chrétien who, when speaking about water 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

very recently said, “This necessitates the promotion of an ethic 

of water usage and a realization that water is simply too 

valuable not to manage appropriately.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I move second reading of the Bill No. 

47, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Act, 2005 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to point out that I’m very pleased to be able to stand here 

and talk about this particular bill, Bill 47. And at the outset, we 

were sitting there chatting with a few of our colleagues. I just 

want to say to the minister that we’re taking a very, very high 

and certainly an extreme look at what this Act does in terms of 

bringing forward and collaborating and organizing all the 

different departments out there that he spoke about, and having 

them come under one particular roof to look at the importance 

of water quality, the importance of water supply, and the 

importance of water to not just agriculture, but to business and 

to people in general. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I did attend the minister’s statement and 

comment and certainly listened to his presentation on the 

riverbanks of the beautiful city of Saskatoon. And the one thing 

I’ll give the minister, certainly we all do give this particular 

individual an A triple plus because when we do that, we give 

him that because he’s very, very, he’s very gracious, and he’s 

very welcoming to opposition MLAs that attend his functions, 

various functions. And we certainly do give him credit for 

recognizing the opposition MLAs. And that’s something that 

we would encourage him to do. And I thank him for that, as he 

did at this function. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s a big fat F on the future when he talks 

about watershed protection because there’s so many different 

places that he could have went. And he should have spoke 

about it on the riverbanks, and he certainly didn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we see this, what we see this as, primarily this particular 

Act, is we all appreciate the importance of water. Everybody in 

this Assembly and everybody in the opposition, everybody in 

this world appreciates the value of water. No party and no 

person is immune to the fear that we won’t have enough safe 

water. And the quality of water is always a constant, constant 

concern to many people across political parties and across 

countries and throughout the entire world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what happens when we attended the beautiful ceremony — 

and we had a gracious host, no question about that — but I 

really, really wanted to see if there was any kind of 

earth-shattering, just earth-jarring announcements that, you 

know, that the minister would make. And, Mr. Speaker, I sat 

there and I listened to his presentation, and there was nothing of 

significance to note in terms of what the minister has planned 

under this particular bill. 

 

Now let me explain what do I mean by that, Mr. Speaker. They 

amalgamated three different departments, as the minister has 

indicated. And the first insight and the first thing that I thought 

was, I wonder if they’re using this to cut programs, cut staff, 

and cut services, Mr. Speaker. That was the instinct reaction 

that I had. 

 

Now today I’m going to obviously put forward a question about 

the impacts of job losses as a result of amalgamating all three of 

these different departments, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what the 

important lesson that I’ve learned when it comes to the Sask 

Party. They have a lean program. They have a lean program that 

you want to get rid of as many government employees as 

possible. Now is this, is this another exercise in doing so? Is 

this another exercise in reducing the amount of jobs from the 

Moose Jaw area? And, Mr. Speaker, is this another attack on 

the working men and women under the guise of protection of 

water? Now that’s what the important thing, Mr. Speaker, is 

that we have to make sure that this is not the net effect. 

 

[15:30] 

 

But unfortunately the NDP don’t buy that at all. We know that 

some of the amalgamating efforts, amalgamation efforts by the 

Sask Party, all that means is job loss for most of the people that 

served this province for many, many years, people that have 

been involved with the Watershed Authority for many, many 

years, people based in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, and other parts 

of the province. Now I’m pleased to hear that Moose Jaw is 

again going to be the headquarters for the Watershed Authority, 

and that’s really important. 

 

We see that with the Valley View Centre’s a good example of 

how they’ve shut down that centre with no plan in place to 

provide services. You hear very, very . . . no noise from the 

Moose Jaw MLAs. It’s been very quiet on that front. 

 

On the Watershed Authority, if they’ve any job losses, you 

don’t hear a peep from those backbenchers, Mr. Speaker. So 

we’ve got to do the job as opposition to make sure that we 

defend and protect Moose Jaw on not only job losses but to 

work with the people of Moose Jaw to make sure that there is 

no further damage or harm done to the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

And that’s why we looked at the Watershed Authority and 

what’s being proposed in this bill to make sure that it’s not just 

about their eloquent words on water, the importance of water, 

because we all agree the importance of water is there. We’re 

just saying, don’t use your political plans under the guise of 

protecting water to lay off people and forget about the people of 

Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what I’m afraid might be 

happening under the amalgamation that the minister explained 

under this particular bill, Bill 47. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s important is that there is something 

that we always have to look at. Under these bills, 

amalgamation, as the minister spoke about in terms of the water 

quality, the engineering, and so on and so forth . . . We have 

called for a comprehensive and dynamic study of how water is 

needed for the people of Saskatchewan, not just in agriculture 

and the economy, Mr. Speaker, but to ensure safe water quality 

for years to come. 

 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

Now this minister talks about 25 years and they talk about 

amalgamation of some of these units and some of these 

different departments. And we right away instinctively say, oh 

job losses for a lot of people. But when you look at the actual 

content of the bill, what is the plan? What is the structure? What 

is the goals? What are your magnificent plans that you have for 

water, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And we look, Mr. Speaker, at the document, the presentation, 

the minister’s comments today, and basically we see nothing, 

absolutely nothing that would be of significance to the people 

of Saskatchewan. Nothing to address climate change which has 

a direct effect and an impact on our water supply, Mr. Speaker. 

Nothing about protecting the water quality that we enjoy now. 

We see a lot of problems with people flooding in certain areas 

of the province — nothing to address that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have nothing to talk about the infrastructure problem that 

many of the cities have, like Prince Albert as an example. 

Moose Jaw has them as well. You hear silence again from those 

members. So, Mr. Speaker, we sat there, and we really, really 

wanted to hear some significant, solid, forward-thinking, 

aggressive, and dynamic announcements on water quality, Mr. 

Speaker. And not a word. Nothing on water supply. Nothing on 

the three provinces coming forward with a new resolution. 

Nothing on making sure that we’re able to keep some of the 

resources over a longer term so we’re able to have the steady 

supply of water for a variety of needs. Nothing on that front, 

Mr. Speaker, absolutely nothing. 

 

Now we have been calling for a dynamic water strategy on this 

side of the Assembly. We had been asking for that, Mr. 

Speaker. We have three provinces that make a deal here. We 

have Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan. We all share water 

and the supply of water. And we all are concerned about how 

we make sure that the water supply is steady to our province. 

And how do we effect that? How do we make . . . How do we 

build on that partnership, Mr. Speaker? And not a word from 

the minister on that particular partnership. Nothing on the 

changing global challenges that we have when it comes to our 

climate, Mr. Speaker. Nothing on that, Mr. Speaker, at all. 

 

And we talk about things like the effects of, I’ll give you a good 

example, of the oil sands in Alberta. You know, what effect 

does the pollution of the Fort Mac [Fort McMurray] oil sands 

have on northwestern Saskatchewan? That includes Meadow 

Lake. That includes Saskatoon eventually. That all the pollution 

from that activity in northern Alberta is having an effect on our 

northern lakes, rivers, and streams, Mr. Speaker, that’s having 

an effect. Seventy per cent of that pollution is coming to 

northwestern Saskatchewan. And did the minister talk about 

that at the press conference, Mr. Speaker, under this bill? 

Absolutely not. Absolutely not. 

 

And so the point I’m trying to make today, that if you want to 

talk about the importance of water, the importance of water to 

the people of Saskatchewan, at least make the water plan 

dynamic. At least make the water plan exciting. At least make 

the water plan visionary, and at least make the water plan global 

to Saskatchewan. Don’t just talk about one-offs and putting one 

department under another department. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it simply doesn’t fly with the people of 

Saskatchewan where you’re saying, we have a new plan in 

water management, and everybody gets up and listens and says, 

what is it? We’re going to amalgamate three different 

departments together. And these three departments, we’re going 

to maybe save about eight jobs, but we’re going to keep it in 

Moose Jaw. And, Mr. Speaker, my point being that the people 

of Saskatchewan expected better on our water quality and 

protection of our water. 

 

Now had the minister even alluded to the challenge that the Fort 

McMurray oil sands activity has on northwestern lakes and 

streams and rivers and the forest, I would have been pleased 

with that, Mr. Speaker. I would have been pleased with that 

because they would have addressed that. Some people say 

there’s a billion dollar, a $4 billion cleanup fund sitting in 

northern Alberta waiting for the Saskatchewan government to 

force the Alberta government to start doing cleanups on or start 

looking at the problem that they are creating when they’re 

polluting our northwestern lands and lakes. The minister knows 

that. The minister knows that. And no reference to that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

No reference to a new dam site, a dam system where northern 

Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan . . . that we’re able to 

have built a series of dams to make sure that we’re able to retain 

water for future generations. Nothing was mentioned of that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

A process where we’re going to be . . . Again we’re going to 

address the greenhouse gas challenge that Saskatchewan poses 

not just to our own environment but to the rest of the world, that 

we have to address that as well. Nothing on that front, Mr. 

Speaker. And you look at all these issues, the big ticket items 

that should’ve been addressed in this water strategy that the 

minister spoke about were completely ignored, were completed 

ignored. 

 

So my only point is that, why didn’t they take the opportunity, 

that opportunity on that riverbank, to talk about the hard-hitting 

issues that are impacting the quality of our water in northern 

Saskatchewan and the province as a whole? Why doesn’t he 

talk about a comprehensive agreement with our three Prairie 

provinces to make sure that we have a good understanding of 

how much water we’re able to share and when we’re able to 

share it? Why didn’t we talk about a structure, a dam structure, 

a reservoir structure we’re able to keep some of the water for 

years to come? Why couldn’t we talk about a way in which we 

could address flooding in one area and address drought in the 

other area to complement those two problems? None of those 

major, main ticket items were spoken about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, he spoke about amalgamating three 

different departments. And that’s the point that I think is really 

important on some of these bills is that people in Saskatchewan 

ought to know that, when it comes to bills of this sort, that you 

got to really understand the intent of the bill, what the impact of 

the bill is, and really what’s the plan of the Sask Party in the 

background to make sure that the intent that they’re speaking 

about — you know, these nice little words they use — is being 

followed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 47 they never even mention the fact 

that . . . If the minister would have stood up on the banks of the 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

river that day and say, from this day forward, no fresh water 

from Saskatchewan will ever be sold out of our border, Mr. 

Speaker; that we’re not going to have some company come here 

and start piping water out of our communities; we’re not going 

to sell water, start . . . Piping water to the States is ending. He 

didn’t say any of that, Mr. Speaker, when I sat there, and the 

people were expecting some really dynamic announcements on 

never, ever piping fresh water to the States. He could have said 

that easy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He could have spoke about the three provinces, the water 

agreement. He could have spoke about how they’re able to do a 

reservoir system, of how we can change our consumption of 

water, how we’re going to balance all of the needs of the fresh 

water demands for our province, whether it’s agriculture or 

industry or communities. He could have spoke about an 

infrastructure program to really provide safe and potable water 

to the people of Saskatchewan. He could have spoke about 

Prince Albert’s challenges in terms of the infrastructure when 

he talks about the water supply. All these issues, Mr. Speaker, 

as I stood there and listened to the presentation, not one was 

mentioned, not once. 

 

So my point is, if you’re going to have an announcement on the 

beautiful banks of the South Saskatchewan River in the 

beautiful city of Saskatoon, you know, you’ve got a bunch of 

people with you, that was the opportunity, Mr. Speaker. That 

was the prime opportunity. And I went to that function, Mr. 

Speaker, to see if some of those issues were going to be spoken 

about, to see if the minister would get up, and he would get up 

and he would say, I’m glad to be here today to announce this. In 

the intent of this bill, we’re here to put The Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority Act . . . We’re now going to create a Water 

Security Agency. 

 

Now what happens if you started a Water Security Agency? If I 

were him, I’d say it’s a five-fold process. One, we’re going to 

make sure that the Fort McMurray tar sands, oil sands, stop 

polluting northwestern Saskatchewan lakes and rivers because 

that’s a good supply of fresh water and fresh lakes. We’re going 

to stop, Mr. Speaker, stop the fighting between the three 

provinces and come up with a really good deal to ensure the 

continued supply, the continued supply of fresh water from the 

mountains so that all of us can enjoy the continued and safe 

supply of our water. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he could have spoken about the need to change 

how people are using our water to make sure they use the water 

wisely. And he could have spoke about a wide myriad of all this 

great opportunity that he had as a minister. Instead, Mr. 

Speaker, he was resigned and constrained I believe by his 

right-wing friends to simply say, we’re going to amalgamate. 

We’re going to amalgamate three departments, and we’re going 

to rename it the watershed or Water Security Agency, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So while he was a very gracious host, Mr. Speaker — I’ll give 

him that, a very gracious host, always has been the nicest and I 

suspect he always will be — but in terms of visionary, 

hard-hitting, a solid action plan on water, Mr. Speaker, I gave 

him a big, fat F, Mr. Speaker. The member from Kindersley 

used to use that phrase: a big, fat F. But that’s what I’m giving 

this particular minister in terms of vision for a water protection 

agency, Mr. Speaker, because none of the hard issues were ever, 

ever discussed, nor were any of the issues that needed to be 

addressed even mentioned in some of the discussion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m asking the Minister of the Environment 

today, the same minister today, that under his water protection 

Act, is he compelled today to do a baseline study on the effects 

of the Fort Mac oil sands activity on the northwestern lakes, Mr. 

Speaker, to protect the water that he’s described here? Is he 

prepared to do a baseline study? Because every day and every 

month that you don’t do that baseline study to determine the 

effects — the net effects on the lakes and the rivers and the 

streams — then more and more pollution will accumulate. And 

by the time you get to figure out what the pollution is, it’ll be 

too late to force Alberta to remediate the environmental 

destruction that is occurring on our lakes and rivers and streams 

because this minister failed to act. 

 

He has an excellent opportunity, Mr. Speaker, today. An 

excellent opportunity through this particular bill to address that. 

So one after another after another opportunity to address the 

big, major issues under this particular Act, Mr. Speaker, there 

was nothing. There was nothing whatsoever. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the point that I think is really important. 

We look at the Saskatchewan Party. I don’t hear a peep from 

them when they talk about the job loss in Moose Jaw because 

that’s what their net effect is, Mr. Speaker. I don’t hear a peep 

from them that says, no we’ll never have a pipeline of water 

going to the States. We won’t be piping water out of our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t hear a peep from them to protect the integrity of our 

ecosystem, the water in the lakes and the streams from the Fort 

McMurray oil sands activity where 70 per cent of their 

pollution comes in our lakes and rivers. Not a peep from them, 

despite them having money in an environmental front. Not a 

peep from them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Nothing to talk about the incredible drought that happens in 

certain areas of our province versus the flooding that happens in 

other areas. Nothing on that, Mr. Speaker. Nothing on the 

science that has proven time and time again that global 

warming is occurring. We need to address that. We need to 

change our habits. Nothing of that sort ever came forward in 

some of the activity and some of the points that the minister 

raised in relation to this Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So today I’m telling . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And there’s 

the former minister from Martensville. She was pretty quiet on 

these files. She didn’t move any of those files forward 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. Not one inch did she move those 

files, Mr. Speaker. You know, so we listen to her rant from her 

seat. And, Mr. Speaker, she was . . . This minister’s a bit better 

than her. There’s no question in my mind that he’s a bit more 

gracious and that he understand the issues. But she wouldn’t do 

anything, anything to move the environmental file. 

 

And again as far as we’re concerned for her grading, if there 

ever was a grading, she’d get an F minus minus if that’s 

possible, Mr. Speaker, on championing the environmental rights 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

when she was the minister of the Environment, Mr. Speaker, 

because she never once stood up for the things that she was in 

charge of and that she was supposed to defend. She never once 

stood up and done the job that it took to make sure that she 

fulfilled her obligations as minister of the Environment. She 

skirted the issues. She ignored the environment. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we were quite pleased when she got transferred from 

that particular file because we were hoping that the next person 

would at least listen to the people and begin to address these 

issues instead of meeting with this stone cold silence when 

people come forward with some of these pressing and 

concerning issues. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more we want to say on Bill 47. A 

lot more. I know my colleagues will have some issues they 

want to raise as well. Everywhere you go, whether it’s the 

forestry sector, whether it’s the loggers or the fishermen, water 

is a really important resource. The minister had an excellent 

opportunity to address the big global issues. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this Bill 47, all he highlighted was the fact that they’re 

amalgamating three departments, and in those amalgamations 

there will be job loss. And the members from Moose Jaw are 

quiet once again. You don’t hear a peep from them. Don’t even 

mention the Valley View; they’ll break out in a really cold 

sweat. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of leadership that this minister 

is providing on this particular file and the kind of non-action of 

some of the members behind him that simply need to speak up a 

bit more, need to speak up. And instead of hearing quotes from 

the former prime minister, perhaps we need action on this file. 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, actions will speak a lot better than 

quotes, Mr. Speaker, which is really important and a message 

that I want to share with the minister. 

 

So to the people that are out there concerned about water, and 

they look at this particular Act . . . And I go back to the title of 

the Act, Water Security Agency. Water Security Agency, Mr. 

Speaker. Those three words are really, really important to the 

people of Saskatchewan. And when they say, well that sounds 

really interesting, this Water Security Agency. What does that 

mean? Are we going to finally address some of these big-ticket 

items? Well, no. No. What they’re saying with this Water 

Security Agency, they’re going to amalgamate three 

departments, but we’re not sure of the job losses. We’re not 

sure of the effect. That’s the language we’re hearing from the 

minister. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure the people 

of Saskatchewan know that on the NDP side of the Assembly, 

we take water security very, very seriously. We want to make 

sure that there’s no export of raw water or fresh water out of our 

province, that even through NAFTA [North American Free 

Trade Agreement], the free trade agreement, that water is not 

considered a good, Mr. Speaker, that it’s considered a resource 

that Saskatchewan and Canada need to protect. 

 

And there are a lot of people in their camp, Mr. Speaker, that 

would rather have water considered a good under NAFTA so 

they can export water to the States, Mr. Speaker, thereby 

putting all our ecosystems at risk. And yet when we talk about 

these issues, Mr. Speaker, very quiet from the other side, very 

quiet. I think they’re taking their silence lessons from the 

members from Moose Jaw, you know, because they do it so 

well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important, what’s really 

important is that you have to make sure people know water 

security is the main, main problem, is the main issue in the 

minds of people of Saskatchewan. And we have to do much 

more, much more than simply amalgamate three departments if 

we’re serious about protecting our water and if we’re serious 

about making sure that we’re putting a line in the sand, whether 

it’s Alberta tar sands that are destroying our lands or whether 

it’s people from NAFTA that want to take all our fresh water to 

the States. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to say no. Saskatchewan is 

not into that. 

 

And again I go back to my earlier point: not one mention of 

those main big-ticket issues at this announcement. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m sure people there expected a lot more. They 

expected a lot more and they got the, well, we’re amalgamating 

three departments. So we’re sitting there saying, well is there 

more to this? Well we’re going to have it in Moose Jaw, he 

said. We’re going to keep the office there. I said, okay, that’s 

not bad. And then all of a sudden the media pulled him off to 

the side, and we had a lot more questions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today I’m challenging the Minister of the 

Environment, who is proposing this bill, to tell him to get an 

action file going on the impacts of the Fort McMurray oil sand 

activity on northwestern Saskatchewan’s lakes, rivers, and 

streams. Because 70 per cent of that activity, the pollution that 

is associated with that activity is falling on northern 

Saskatchewan lakes, rivers, and streams. And they’ve got 

money to mediate some of those impacts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to see if this minister’s willing to stand up and call his 

Alberta counterpart and tell him to stop polluting our land. And 

if you’re going to pollute our land, we’re going to make sure 

you give money to it so we can fix up and fix up these problems 

that you’re creating. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time that minister 

stands up, and then we can have some . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The former minister’s talking again. But you 

know, she wouldn’t say a word because she’s conservative, Mr. 

Speaker. And they’re conservative over there, and Ottawa 

probably told her, don’t be fighting your conservative friends. 

You know, so she was quite quiet on that front. 

 

So this new minister, I’m hoping, I’m hoping that he has the 

courage. I wish him the courage to stand up and say, we now 

want to see an action plan on the impacts of Fort McMurray tar 

sands on northern Saskatchewan lakes, rivers, and streams 

because 70 per cent of the pollution of that activity is falling on 

northern Saskatchewan lakes. And, Mr. Speaker, that would be 

a good first step, in terms of this bill, when I ask him to give us 

some global answers, to give us some global decisions, to give 

us some global leadership on some of the water stewardship 

efforts that he should be undertaking as a minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the final note I would point out, Mr. Speaker, I had a really 

good friend and this guy used to work for Saskatchewan 

Environment. His name was Henry La Plante. And Henry, God 

rest his soul, he worked in the fire tower for years. And Henry 

would tell me he would get up in the morning. He’d go to work 

and he’d climb up the tower, the fire tower where he stayed a 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

long time. And every morning he would clean out the windows 

in the fire tower. And he’d tell me this. He said, every time I do 

this with my finger, it’d be black, slimy stuff on the windows. 

What is that, he asked me one day. And I said, I don’t have no 

idea what that is. He said, that’s pollution coming from Fort 

Mac. And he said, and nobody’s talking about those things. 

 

Now Henry, rest his soul, was going to be arguing about those 

things. And he talked about these issues time and time again, 

Mr. Speaker. This province owes Henry La Plante a lot of 

thanks because he brought this issue forward. He, I think as a 

result of some of his workplace issues, that he became ill. He 

became ill. And there’s a lot of problems with Fort McMurray’s 

pollution coming our way. Seventy per cent of all the activity 

attached to the oil sands is being dumped on northwestern 

Saskatchewan as we speak. And this minister talks about 

amalgamation as his answer to a water stewardship model, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I’m asking the minister to please take the initiative. And 

don’t tell me you’re going to monitor three or four lakes over a 

period of 10 years because that’s just insulting, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m asking this minister today, if you’re serious about your role 

and you’re serious about your Watershed Authority Act that 

you’re proposing today, then the first step you ought to do is to 

make sure that if Alberta’s polluting Saskatchewan’s lakes, 

rivers, and streams in northwestern Saskatchewan, then they 

ought to stop. And if they don’t stop, they ought to pay to fix up 

the damage and the mess that they’ve created on our northern 

lakes, rivers, and streams. I’m asking the minister today if he 

would do that, Mr. Speaker. He has to do it, because it’s 

impacting what I think is his primary obligation as a minister, 

impacting the quality of water in our lakes, rivers, and streams 

that he’s described in this bill as being really important to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat I want to challenge the 

minister to that point today. I want to thank Henry La Plante for 

his years of service and his years of fighting for the people of 

Saskatchewan and his years of working for Saskatchewan 

Environment. And really I think, quite frankly, the amount of 

time that he reached out to young people to tell them, these are 

some of the issues you have to watch out . . . You have to be 

able to live off the land. You’ve got to be able to respect your 

neighbour. You’ve got to be able to have fun in life. He’d done 

all these wonderful things, Henry did. And he’s the one that 

really told me when I was a lot younger that there’s a lot of 

negative impact, there is, as a result of some of the oil sands 

activity on our lands. And we need to start speaking up about 

that. We need to start speaking up, and we need to start 

speaking out, is what he said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I’ll point out again is that I would ask the minister, I 

would ask the minister to please take it upon himself under the 

new title that he’s created under this Act, to start monitoring 

what Alberta is doing to our northern rivers, lakes, and streams, 

Mr. Speaker. What are they doing? And we need to find out. 

And, Mr. Speaker, nobody’s paying attention to that file. I 

heard the Premier make a small reference about monitoring five 

lakes. Mr. Speaker, it’s a lot bigger than that. 

 

And when that effect starts happening, when that effect starts to 

happen, Mr. Speaker, when it starts impacting Meadow Lake, it 

starts impacting P.A. [Prince Albert], it starts impacting 

Saskatoon, then this plume of pollution is going to start having 

a negative effect on many people’s health, not just northwestern 

Saskatchewan. So it’s a problem in northwestern Saskatchewan 

with the ability and the threat to grow even wider in impacting 

more and more people, more and more lakes and rivers, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s one of the reasons why I was severely 

disappointed, seriously disappointed when I attended a function 

and all I heard was the primary cornerstone of the speech was 

amalgamating three different departments to save on jobs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say about this particular 

bill, and I think we’re going to take the time to ask people out 

there to begin, to begin to pay attention to what this government 

is doing or not doing, of how they like to speak about water 

security and water stewardship when they in fact are providing 

zero leadership on that front. Zero leadership on that particular 

front, Mr. Speaker. So I would ask them, if you’re going to 

make all these announcements on a beautiful bank in a beautiful 

city, at least have the courtesy to bring some global solution to 

the challenges we have when it comes to water security and 

water stewardship. Not just talking about amalgamation of three 

different departments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the points I’m making I’ve made on a number of occasions. 

I’ll continue making those points, and I would ask all my 

member colleagues to take the time to look through the bill and 

see if there’s anything earth-shattering in this bill that really 

blows their minds. And, Mr. Speaker, from what we’ve heard 

and seen of this particular government, of past ministers, and 

certainly the past ministers and the current minister, is that I 

give him a big fat F, as the member from Kindersley used to 

say, a big fat F on dealing with the global issues that threaten 

and challenge Saskatchewan’s water supply and security, Mr. 

Speaker. So on that note I will move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 47. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, after my brief remarks I 

would like to move second reading of the amendment to The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But before I begin talking about Bill 48, I can’t help but 

respond to my learned friend opposite there. He has put forward 

a challenge and, ladies and gentlemen, when you receive a 

challenge on the floor of the legislature from the opposition, 

you want to take that challenge. You want to meet that 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

challenge and you want to go for it. Mr. Speaker, I would like 

nothing more than to accept that challenge, but I can’t. I can’t 

announce tomorrow that we’re going to be doing something, 

Mr. Speaker, that was already announced two years ago by the 

member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker. I can’t 

reannounce, I can’t with good conscience reannounce 

something that was the work that was begun by the member 

from Martensville, the work that was announced by the member 

from Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker. I know members 

opposite reannounce hospitals and things like that, but we can’t, 

we can’t do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with that interesting take from the member 

opposite on the bill, I just, I would like to go on and on, but he 

has given us an opportunity to have things that we can talk 

about later on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now to the next bill, the bill in front of us today, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. The Act 

was passed in May of 2010. The amendment to the Act is 

required to allow the province to negotiate a 

Canada-Saskatchewan equivalency agreement on the federal 

coal-fired electricity regulations which were gazetted in the 

federal House of Commons in September 2012, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The purpose of the equivalency agreement is to avoid 

regulatory duplication by enabling the federal and provincial 

government to work together to achieve priority environmental 

goals and by removing unnecessary regulatory burdens on 

businesses in terms of time, costs, and resources. 

 

The federal and provincial regulations do not need to be 

identical but they need to serve the same purpose with the same 

outcomes. The legislative amendment advances Saskatchewan’s 

growth plan by balancing environmental and economic factors 

and allowing greenhouse gas emission reductions in the 

electricity sector to be managed under provincial legislation 

rather than federal legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The amendment mirrors the key requirement of the Canadian 

Environmental Protection Act, 1999 which gives any citizen the 

right to request the Minister of Environment to undertake an 

investigation of an alleged offence under The Management and 

Reduction of Greenhouses Gases Act and to be kept informed of 

the progress of the investigation. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these provisions for a citizen’s 

inquiry do not currently exist in The Management and 

Reduction of Greenhouses Gases Act. The amendment will 

comply with the requirements to negotiate an equivalency 

agreement and make provincial legislation and regulations 

legally enforceable. 

 

The other key requirement for an equivalency agreement is that 

provincial regulations for coal-fired electricity must achieve 

equal or better environmental outcomes, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

— equal or better. It’s an important term and I hope everyone in 

the House is listening very closely. The environmental 

outcomes of the federal coal-fired electricity regulatory 

framework will indeed undertake, will achieve equal or better 

environmental outcomes. 

 

Under provincial regulations, greenhouse gas emissions in 

Saskatchewan will be reduced by 20 per cent by 2020 from 

2006 levels, which is more stringent than the emission 

reductions required under the federal coal-fired electricity 

regulations. With this legislation, regulated emitters will have to 

report and reduce their emissions to meet provincial targets. 

This will eventually impact other sectors — oil and gas, potash, 

nitrogen fertilizers — where federal standards are being 

established and equivalency agreements will be pursued. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we know, Saskatchewan is leading the 

way when it comes to carbon capture and storage, CCS 

technologies. Having an equivalency agreement in place is vital 

to provide regulatory flexibility and certainly so that SaskPower 

can meet the federal GHG [greenhouse gas] performance 

standard, enabling the corporation to undertake the important 

carbon capture and storage development. 

 

The government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is constructing the 

Boundary Dam capture and sequestration project, the largest 

infrastructure project in SaskPower’s history, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. This project will produce 100 megawatts of clean 

baseload electricity, reduce greenhouse emissions by capturing 

and sequestering 1 million tonnes of carbon dioxide per year 

and help increase oil production through EOR, enhanced oil 

recovery. 

 

Extensive consultation has been undertaken and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when I mean extensive consultation, I mean extensive. 

Some 1,200 submissions from across the province from 

interested groups, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have all contributed, 

and that is something that we are certainly very happy indeed 

that they have. And, Mr. Speaker, stakeholders at various stages 

of the legislation development have given us their thoughts and 

they made this a better piece of legislation. 

 

During this time, we heard that industry strongly prefers 

provincial regulation over federal regulation. We are a 

government that is close to the people. We are close to the 

industry that is helping our province grow. As we say on this 

side, they are leading the way, and the government is moving 

out of the way to ensure that they do that. 

 

We have continued to work closely with the federal government 

as evidenced in the past, in June, when Minister Peter Kent, 

excellent federal minister, a federal Conservative minister, in 

my opinion who’s doing an excellent job . . . I have to say that 

because I quoted a couple of Liberals in the last time. Now I’ve 

got to make sure that I give credit where credit is due, and Mr. 

Peter Kent is indeed an excellent, excellent minister. I 

confirmed our intention to develop an equivalency agreement 

on coal-fired electricity emissions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment demonstrates our 

government’s commitment to sustain economic growth, address 

the challenges that come with that growth and, Mr. Speaker, all 

towards one goal of building a better quality of life for 

Saskatchewan people in an environmentally sustainable way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of the amendment to 

The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 48, The Management and Reduction 

of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure 

. . . I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

also very pleased to stand up today to offer our initial comments 

about the proposed Act, Bill No. 48, The Management and 

Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a great amount of interest of people 

in the province, and of course throughout the world, on trying to 

figure out exactly the challenge we all have with greenhouse 

gas and certainly the emissions and how we’re trying to address 

that to reduce all the greenhouse gas that is generated all 

throughout not just Saskatchewan, of course, but throughout the 

world. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people in the province of 

Saskatchewan know that a lot of our power is generated through 

hydro. It’s generated through natural gas. It’s generated through 

coal-fired plants as well. And I think the people of 

Saskatchewan appreciate the fact that there has to be some 

effort and has to be some notice of the fact that in the coal-fired 

plants that we have to do something to mitigate the enormous 

challenge that we pose to our environment and certainly the rest 

of the Western Canada environment as well. So they look at 

leadership from any government, you know, to do so. And we 

hear some of the efforts around clean coal technology, the fact 

that there is some major effort being undertaken to reduce the 

amount of greenhouse gas that we’re emitting. And that’s 

certainly a positive step forward — nobody’s arguing about that 

— and we applaud it on all fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think at the flip side, we encourage people to look at 

cogeneration. We encourage people to look at conservation. 

These are some of the efforts that people could undertake in the 

wide variety of opportunity to address greenhouse gas 

emissions and to also reduce the problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look at this bill. There is a lot of different 

issues that are at play here. And we’re trying to find out through 

a process of public consultation exactly what the targets are for 

the greenhouse gas emissions that the government is speaking 

about. And there is a lot of interest as to how they’re 

coordinating their efforts with that of the federal government 

because everybody knows that you look at the federal 

government right now, one of their cornerstones is certainly not 

environmental protection, Mr. Speaker. And we look at 

greenhouse gas, and I know that there’s a lot of people within 

the federal circles that know that the Conservatives in Ottawa 

don’t make an extra effort to have the environmental protection 

badge worn on their chest, Mr. Speaker, because they don’t 

provide any leadership and they don’t provide any direction, 

nor do they provide the necessary supports to the provinces that 

may want to undertake that kind of effort. 

 

So obviously the minister is certainly pleased with his federal 

counterpart. And I want to ask the minister later on, as we have 

opportunities for questions or for committee work, exactly how 

his admiration for a federal environmental minister is going to 

translate into real programs to reduce our greenhouse gas 

emissions here in the province of Saskatchewan. What exact 

programs, what exact money is Peter Kent going to give our 

minister to do some of this work? And I can almost guarantee 

you, Mr. Speaker, again you’ll have a big, fat zero dollars 

attached to any kind of commitment from the federal 

government to deal with greenhouse gas emissions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We had an excellent opportunity several years ago to talk about 

how we can integrate renewable energies into providing some 

of the power needs of the people of Saskatchewan to actually 

reduce some of the, you know, the greenhouse gas emissions. 

And that’s my point under this particular bill is that you need to 

have actions attached to these bills. You need to have federal 

coordination. You need to have all these different activities, and 

quite frankly, an array of programs that would really help you 

achieve some of the objectives that you identified in your bill. 

 

But alas, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing of that sort in this 

particular bill. And people, certainly on our side of the 

Assembly, are quite discouraged that once again the minister 

has missed the opportunity, as the previous ministers have 

missed the opportunity, to really bring forward some solid, 

hard-hitting action items to deal with the greenhouse gas 

emission problems that not just Saskatchewan but the world 

faces when we talk about the challenge to our environment and 

climate change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the minister has alluded to and may have agreed that 

climate change is a problem. And many times as people talk 

about the climate change, one of the words I hate to hear is 

when people use the phrase that we’re adapting to climate 

change. And to me when they use the word adapting, does that 

mean that we are consigned or resigned to admit that we’re not 

going to be able to change some of the things that man has 

caused to our natural environment, that we can’t undo the 

damage that we’ve done? It’s got to that point, and people are 

saying that we cannot undo the damage so we have to adapt to 

the climate change. It’s almost admitting defeat, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s something that a lot of people in the environmental 

community don’t want to do, but when they hear that kind of 

terminology they certainly become discouraged. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out again to the minister that I 

will take a great amount of interest in how he proposes to do the 

objectives that he’s outlined in his bill. I want to be able to tell 

people that are out there that may be listening that we would 

encourage you to participate, either through email or certainly 

by telephone or by faxes, to send stuff to us. And we can 

certainly ask them to come to the Assembly and pay a lot of 

interest, pay a lot of interest to exactly what this minister’s 

doing and what kind of coordination and corresponding support 

dollars that he’s getting from his federal counterpart to really 

address the greenhouse gas emissions that the people of 

Saskatchewan grapple with and that we certainly have to 

address as time moves on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, we had a chance to 

tour the province under the green energies commission. And we 

spoke about just a ton of examples of how people can really 

provide solutions to meeting some of our growing energy 

demands and how we could address greenhouse gas emissions. 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

There was all kinds of great information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I just want to point out that it was a very, very worthwhile 

trip that I undertook when I went on a number of these public 

forums. And you sat there and you listened to what people had 

to say, everything from net metering to better and more 

insulation in homes to natural gas opportunities to wind power 

to solar power through cogeneration. Like there’s all kinds of 

these concepts, all these things were being spoken about, Mr. 

Speaker. And I took notes and I listened intently to some of the 

presentations. And man, we’ve got some gifted people out there 

that have some tremendous ideas. And they certainly have a lot 

of intelligence, and basically they know what they’re talking 

about. 

 

So my argument is, are they engaged with this whole 

greenhouse gas point that the minister is trying to raise under 

Bill 48? Are they going to be involved with the reduction of 

greenhouse gas? And if so again the point goes, where are the 

resources to ensure that we exhaust all the avenues to reduce the 

greenhouse emissions through targeted dollars and programs to 

each of these areas that provided information to us during the 

tour and during those hearings? And, Mr. Speaker, I once again 

am disappointed that they don’t see any linkage to dollars or 

programs under this particular bill. And that’s kind of where 

you really want to be able to see whether this minister’s serious 

about the goals that he’s identified. And again he quoted, or 

gave credit to his colleague in Ottawa. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So the question that I have is that if he’s serious about this 

particular target, Mr. Speaker, if he’s serious about addressing 

the climate change challenges, if he’s serious about the water 

quality, if he’s serious about the greenhouse gas emissions 

problem that he’s identified in this bill then, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to see action. We need to see programs because, quite 

frankly, we’re tired of words. We’re tired of rhetoric, and we’re 

tired of spin. We need to see action, Mr. Speaker, because the 

impacts of not addressing these issues is very, very dramatic. 

 

It really goes against the whole notion of what we call smart 

growth as a NDP caucus. Because you’ve got to protect the 

environment. You’ve got to protect the working people, and 

you’ve got to certainly embrace industry and investment into 

building our economy. We understand that, Mr. Speaker. And 

one of the critical points and the vital points of that particular 

smart growth strategy is to make sure you take care of the 

environment and to make sure that people are engaged in that 

duty because we all need to do our part. And so far we haven’t 

seen no evidence nor commitment to the environmental file by 

this minister or the government in general. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this particular 

bill. We want to look at it a bit more. As I said at the outset, we 

invite the public to participate because this is the first go-round 

on the bills. We have a couple of months to research it, and we 

will certainly be back with a lot more information, a lot more 

questions, and a lot more positions to take on Bill 48. And at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 48, The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. After some brief remarks, I will be moving the second 

reading of The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012. The 

amendments before this House will establish a legislated right 

to practice for professional foresters and forest technologists in 

Saskatchewan, elevating the forestry profession to the same 

level as other provinces do in Canada with similar legislation. 

 

The amended legislation will also build on several important 

commitments of this government: our commitment to economic 

growth by ensuring a reconfigured forest sector can rely on its 

forestry professionals, our commitment to provide a 

competitive business environment for the forestry sector, and 

our commitment to the sustainable management and long-term 

health of Saskatchewan’s provincial forests. Through these 

amendments, we will build the public’s confidence that our 

natural heritage of forests is being well managed by 

professionals whose competence is recognized by their peers 

across the country. 

 

Right now, Mr. Speaker, The Forestry Professions Act is right 

to title. This means that only registered members of the 

Association of Saskatchewan Forestry Professionals can call 

themselves registered professional foresters and registered 

professional forest technologists. This right-to-title protection is 

important, but there are remaining concerns for the protection of 

both public safety and for the environment. In the present 

legislation, there is nothing to stop anyone from engaging in the 

professional practice of forestry, whatever they may choose to 

call themselves. 

 

It is important to make sure that this practice is undertaken by 

competent professionals because many of the tasks regularly 

given to forestry professionals can involve significant safety 

and environmental risks, whether they are designing a resource 

road, building a water course crossing, or handling hazardous 

materials such as herbicides and pesticides. Some tasks carry 

financial and legal risks as well. Saskatchewan forest 

companies depend on forestry professionals to make sure that 

their operations are in compliance with all applicable laws, that 

they meet critical standards for certification, and that important 

commitments to share information with First Nations and Métis 

communities are met as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As is noted in The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 

and Beyond, forestry was the hardest hit industry in 

Saskatchewan during the worldwide economic downturn. 

Greater certainty about the forestry professionals who manage 

this in its financial, legal, safety, and environmental risks is 

essential to the recovery of the forest industry in our province. 

The shift to right to practice as proposed in the amended 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

legislation will allow the Association of Saskatchewan Forestry 

Professionals to ensure that all those working as professional 

foresters and technologists in Saskatchewan are qualified and 

competent in their areas of practice. It will also enable the 

association’s members to be recognized as qualified persons in 

the Saskatchewan environmental code expected to come into 

effect this fall. The code will be a cornerstone of our ministry’s 

continuing shift to a results-based regulatory framework that 

will provide client-centred service and foster innovation while 

enhancing the protection we offer our environment. 

 

The amended legislation supports this approach with the 

ministry’s role becoming much less about dictating exactly how 

things are done and much more about monitoring, auditing, and 

enforcing performance. Since we became government, we have 

been working diligently to make changes to the way we 

regulate this industry. We have listened to our clients. We have 

consulted with stakeholders and have incorporated their 

suggestions in the work that has been done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The amended legislation and the right to practice protection it 

includes is fully supported by the Association of Saskatchewan 

Forestry Professionals and its membership, which come from 

industry, consulting academia, and government. Mr. Speaker, 

the proposed amendments will allow forestry to join a host of 

other Saskatchewan professions where right to practice is 

already established in law, including agrologists, engineers, 

geoscientists, and land surveyors. These practice rights are also 

already protected for forestry professionals in the other New 

West Partnership provinces as well as other provinces in 

Canada. 

 

The amendments would bring the profession in Saskatchewan 

up to that same level while ensuring that trade and labour 

mobility agreements are respected, which is vital to our 

province’s thriving economy. Mr. Speaker, the proposed 

amendments are a concrete demonstration of our government’s 

confidence in the Saskatchewan Forestry Professionals and their 

association. They are also an acknowledgement of the 

profession’s key role in the growth of Saskatchewan’s 

reconfigured forestry sector and in the sustainable management 

of the forest on which this sector depends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this I now move second reading of The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Environment has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased once again to stand up and offer our initial comments 

on Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important, there’s a couple 

points that I do want to make. Obviously if we have more and 

more certified and certainly highly qualified people involved 

with forest management, that’s something that the NDP would 

certainly applaud and would certainly want to support, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think what’s really important is that we have to follow the 

process as to where the minister arrived at. And when he spoke 

about how are you going to certainly authenticate the work of 

the forestry professions, he mentioned at the outset that there 

was a number of people that he consulted. And I would ask the 

minister to forward to me if he can, his consulting academia, as 

he described these people that helped him work on the 

qualifications of these foresters and these planners. So if he 

could give me a list of those folks that he dealt with on that 

front, it certainly would give me, give me a lot more 

information than I have in front of me. 

 

I think it’s important that people in Saskatchewan really 

appreciate the fact that when people do go to school, they spend 

a lot of time in school, they spend a lot of money getting their 

certifications and qualifications down pat, that they are 

recognized by their peers, they’re recognized by the public, and 

they’re recognized by government as people that know what 

they’re doing in each of these professions. And I think forestry 

in general needs as many people certified and qualified as 

possible because a lot of people have differing opinions on how 

our forest is managed.  

 

And if you have a consistent kind of process in terms of, in 

terms of qualification, being recognized by your peers as I 

mentioned, then we can certainly to a certain extent have a bit 

of confidence when this particular government talks about 

qualification and certification of people like forestry 

professions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, at the outset, the minister alluded to forestry 

being hard hit by the global downturn in the economy, that 

forestry companies all throughout the world suffered as a result 

of the economic turmoil, that the whole earth suffered, I guess, 

during that time. So it’s nice for the Sask Party to finally 

recognize that it was the global economy, the downturn in the 

forestry sector that created forestry problems in Saskatchewan. 

So two years ago or a couple years before the last election, 

everything was the NDP’s fault. Now today they’re saying, 

well, it was a global economy problem and forestry really 

suffered. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to hear the truth finally 

come out from one of the ministers as to how the forestry was 

impacted. And certainly it was not, as they described, an NDP 

doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would point out that we have a lot of information out there 

and people that give you advice. And one of the other questions 

I have for the minister is I appreciate the fact that you have to 

have some standards, some training, and some certification by 

your peers to be able to call yourself a forester. And if this Act 

is intended to strengthen that description and strengthen that 

effort, then of course the NDP will certainly look at this bill and 

see if there’s any opportunity for us to move it along as quickly 

as we can. 

 

But the point I would raise is that I’d also want to ask the 

minister: where would you describe the role of, say, a local 

trapper would play or an elder that had a lot of good 

information, a lot more practical information than a certified 

forester? Because as we know, a lot of the elders, the trappers, 

and the fishermen, the people that live off the land, they know a 

lot about animal behaviour. They know a lot about forestry 

planning. They know a lot more than some of the people that do 

get certified. Is there a role, an opportunity for the trappers’ 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2012 

association or the fishing industry that could give some good 

advice on forestry fronts? You know, like, there’s all kinds of 

people out there that have tons of advice. And it would be a 

great opportunity for this minister to say, look, not only are we 

recognizing foresters and planners, but we’re also engaging the 

trappers and the fishermen and the people that live off the land 

and giving them the opportunity to participate in how we 

develop our forests. 

 

And we need to rationalize that as well because, Mr. Speaker, if 

we get them involved, then what can we argue from our 

perspective, at the end of the day, that if forestry’s being cut 

right, that are explained by the professionals as the minister 

alluded to in his bill, and that you have the supporting advice 

and support from impacted groups like communities and 

trappers and commercial fishermen and First Nations and Métis 

leaders and people of the North, and they’re endorsing it as 

well, this makes the package all the more comprehensive and 

makes the package all the more, all the more saleable.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we would want to make sure that we 

have those avenues available to the minister and to determine 

our forestry perspective in terms of making sure it’s 

comprehensive. And if this bill is just simply arming one of the 

planners of that industry, basically being the forestry planner, 

and qualifying and certifying them, then at the outset it doesn’t 

seem to be something that we could not support, but we need to 

take the time to reach out to other groups to qualify what they 

may have to say when it comes to forestry practice in general. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say about 

this as I mentioned at the outset. We solicit some of the advice 

and comments outside of the Assembly, and certainly as 

opposition, we’ll do our job and we’ll go through the bill. We 

will research with groups. And we will certainly counterpropose 

ideas that may strengthen this bill because it obviously needs to 

be strengthened, and by that I mean reaching out to the 

traditional resource users such as fishermen and trappers to 

make this process more comprehensive. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I would want to point out that we 

have more issues and more comments on this at a later date, but 

at this stage, I want to adjourn debate on Bill No. 49, The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member that Bill 

No. 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be 

adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health is committed to working 

with self-regulating health professionals to ensure patient 

safety. We have been working with health sector stakeholders 

to update The Medical Profession Act which has been in force 

since 1981. These amendments were requested by the College 

of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan to support safe 

patient care and update its bylaw-making authority. 

 

The Ministry of Health supports the physician and registered 

nurse engagement in the full scope of practice of medicine and 

nursing respectively. This will also permit the college to 

respond more quickly to the anticipated national changes in 

categories of licensure of health professionals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will also help keep patients’ 

personal health information more secure. The college will now 

have a greater ability to maintain current address and contact 

information for physicians. The college will be able to better 

communicate with physicians and keep information up to date 

when physicians join or leave a practice. This, Mr. Speaker, 

will support proper and secure storage, disposal, and transfer of 

patient files and improve disaster planning processes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we consulted extensively with professional health 

provider organizations about the changes. And I’d like to thank 

the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, the Saskatchewan 

Association of Licensed Practical Nurses, the Saskatchewan 

College of Pharmacists, the Registered Psychiatric Nurses 

Association of Saskatchewan, and all of our regional health 

authorities. These organizations provided valuable insight, and 

we appreciate their interest and their contributions to this 

process. 

 

I believe these amendments are a positive step forward for our 

health system. They support our efforts to provide the safest 

possible health care environments for patients and health 

providers. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 

The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 50, The Medical Profession Act, 2012 be read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand up today to offer initial comments on Bill No. 

50. I think it’s important that as we sit here and we speak about 

some of the challenges with the health file over time that it’s 

always important that we collaborate and coordinate with those 

people that are the front line when we deal with people that are 

either sick or injured. And certainly whether you’re a doctor, a 

nurse, or an LPN [licensed practical nurse], that this team of 

health professionals are people that we should consult with first 

and foremost. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see that the 

minister did allude to the fact that there was consultation to a 

number of organizations, and certainly I think that’s a good first 

step. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously if you’re looking at patients’ 



November 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

information being kept confidential, again this government . . . 

When you find health records being found in dumpsters in some 

of the downtown cities, that doesn’t really, that doesn’t really 

bode well for the government that talks about confidentiality. 

And if this effort is meant to improve on that so that there is no 

more health records found in dumpsters, then of course the 

opposition NDP would support that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of having to be able to respond well to emergency 

measures and some planning, obviously if there is instances 

where there is information available to doctors on a priority 

basis, an unencumbered basis that would help deal with some of 

the issues of the emergent nature, then obviously that will make 

the emergency planning system a lot better. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we look at this 

particular file. It’s a huge file. It’s a huge proposal in the sense 

of the impact of the people that it involves. Obviously we don’t 

want to go through the process as quickly as we can because it’s 

something that we should not do as an opposition. So it’s 

important that we tell the associations and groups that the 

minister met with that we may contact them and get their 

perspective in terms of what this bill means for them, whether 

they support it, and whether it complements what the minister is 

alluding to when he talks about trying to make sure, as an 

example, that the emergency measures planning Act is followed 

as efficiently as possible. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say about this particular 

bill. I know my colleagues and the critic for Health will have a 

lot more issues to add to this as we go along. And of course the 

typical invite to people that are out there listening to what the 

minister had to say and certainly what our initial comments 

were, we would invite you to participate in the debate and 

forward to us in any way, shape, or form, whether it’s fax or 

email or a visit here to the Assembly that you can participate in 

this particular debate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a lot more to say on this as we move forward, 

and we will take a lot of time to research this bill and make sure 

that we respond accordingly. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I 

move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 50, The Medical 

Profession Act, 2012. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 50, The Medical Profession Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved that the House do now adjourn. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m., Tuesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:38.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1743 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1743 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1743 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1743 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1743 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Summer Snack Program 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1743 

 Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1744 

 Co-operating to Build a Better West Conference 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1744 

 Special Olympics Fundraiser 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1744 

 Increasing the Availability of Entry-Level Housing 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1745 

 Saskatchewan Party Convention 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1745 

 NDP Leadership Campaign 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1745 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 The Government’s Performance and the Film Industry 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1746 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1746 

 Funding for Health Sciences Building 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1746 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1746 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1747 

 Investment and Ownership in the Potash Industry 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1748 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1748 

 Liquor Store Ownership 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1749 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1749 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 

 Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 

 Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1751 

 Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1751 

 Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/ 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1751 

 Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1751 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1751 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1752 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Report of the Constituency Boundaries Commission of Saskatchewan 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1752 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1754 

 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1754 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1755 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1757 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1757 

 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1759 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1761 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1765 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1767 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1768 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1769 

 Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1770 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1770 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


