




















































Hansard: November 28, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 20A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2257 

 November 28, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly and guests who have joined us, a very special 

guest seated in your gallery. Mr Speaker, for his third visit to 

the province of Saskatchewan, we want to welcome His 

Excellency Ambassador David Jacobson, the ambassador for 

the United States to Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know you had a chance to host a meeting and 

some time together with our US [United States] legislative 

friends that have joined us and the ambassador. Mr. Speaker, I 

know everyone in this House prizes the relationship that we 

have as a province and as a country with the United States of 

America. They’re quite simply our closest friend and ally and 

most important trading partner. And so then it’s therefore very 

important that we not become complacent about the 

relationship, that we never, ever take it for granted, but that 

we’re stewards of the relationship, that we’re always promoting 

the trade and the alliance that is ours and the friendship that is 

ours. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we welcome the ambassador’s visit 

because that’s certainly been his intention since his appointment 

by President Obama. We welcome him again to our capital city 

and the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to stand on behalf of the official opposition and join the 

Premier in welcoming the ambassador of the US to Canada, His 

Excellency David Jacobson. 

 

There’s no question that we concur that the US is one of our 

great friends and allies, and we certainly hope that your visit to 

Canada and to our capital city here in Saskatchewan is both 

pleasurable and certainly productive as well. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce to this Assembly 28 great grade 10 students from the 

Yorkton Regional High School in the west gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Along with them is their teacher Mr. Perry Ostapowich, who I 

talked about a bit yesterday. He’s a great teacher and really 

engages the kids in the legislative process in our province. 

Along with him, another teacher, Mr. Grant Bjornerud, who is 

related to a member on this floor. A lady down the hallway 

asked me if that was any relation to the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. And I said, yes you can tell by looking at 

them. They’re very similar, although Grant is a little bit more 

handsome. With them are interns Ally Rock and Kristine 

Kreklewich, as well as an educational assistant, Ms. Janet 

Varga. 

 

One other student I’d like to point out — I love to embarrass 

him — is my nephew Turner Ottenbreit from Yorkton, an 

accomplished hockey player, much like the member from 

Athabasca. And he’s just a great young man; he’s just about 

like my son. And I’m very proud of the young man he’s grown 

into, and I’m looking forward to his future in hockey and 

whatever he pursues. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members to welcome these fine 

people to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to join with the member for Yorkton in welcoming the 

Yorkton group here today, but I also want to take this 

opportunity to welcome and introduce my son to the legislature. 

We don’t get that opportunity very often. I’m certainly glad the 

member for Yorkton acknowledged the hereditary traits that 

I’ve passed on to my son. Thank goodness hair is not one of 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to welcome him here today, but 

acknowledge Perry Ostapowich. And the member for Yorkton 

has mentioned him a couple of times yesterday and today. Mr. 

Ostapowich taught in Melville and then now has moved on to 

Yorkton, and it’s certainly our loss. But he’s been very faithful 

in bringing school groups into the legislature to see how the 

process works in here. So I would ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming all of them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

sitting in your gallery today are 24 public service employees. 

They are partaking in the parliamentary program for the public 

service. Participants are employees from the following 

ministries. They are representing Agriculture; Economy; 

Energy and Resources; Environment; Government Relations; 

Health; Social Services; Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

And also we have employees from the Legislative Assembly 

Service, Office of the Provincial Auditor, and the Provincial 

Capital Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an in-depth program for employees in the 

public service to understand a little bit more about what we do 

during the day. And I am looking forward to meeting with them 

after question period today, as are you, I understand, as well. So 

I ask all members to welcome them here to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the Minister for the Public Service in welcoming these 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

public servants to their legislature, to commend them for taking 

a greater interest in the functioning of the legislative aspect of 

the public service. On behalf of the official opposition, I’ll have 

the opportunity to meet with them later this day after the 

Minister for Public Service, so that will be extra interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. But I join with the minister in welcoming these public 

servants to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce two people in your gallery from the town of Nipawin: 

the mayor, Dave Trann — Dave, give us a wave — and 

Councillor Mike Botterill. They came down here today to meet 

up with some of the ministries and talk about some of the great 

things that are going on around Nipawin. It’s a pleasure to have 

them down here. Not too often we get people all the way down 

here from up in Carrot River Valley. 

 

The other thing is, is Mike told me that he definitely knows how 

to fish walleye. And he’s better than a lot of some other 

members of this Assembly that have been up there for 

tournaments, and he can actually catch walleye that are big fish. 

So I would like all members to welcome them to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 

gallery today are some very special guests. They are 

representatives of the Ahmadiyya movement in Islam which 

promotes peace and partnership between communities. 

 

Visiting from Toronto, we have Lal Khan Malik, national 

president; Colonel Amjad Khan, national secretary of property; 

from Saskatoon — one of my constituents — Nasser Malik, 

president of the Saskatoon branch; Zahid Abid, a missionary in 

Saskatoon; Dr. Musadaq Hayat and Taqi Khan. From Regina 

we have Dr. Habib ur Rehman, president, Regina branch; 

Muhammad Fiaz, general secretary, Regina branch; and Safeer 

Ahmad, also a member of the Regina branch. Mr. Speaker, it is 

my hope to meet with these members shortly after question 

period, but I suppose that will depend on the good conduct of 

the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ahmadiyya Muslim faith is established in 190 

countries. It promotes a message of peace and tolerance. The 

movement carries a simple message: love for all, hatred for 

none. The Ahmadiyya movement reminds us that the values we 

share are stronger than those that seek to divide us. I would ask 

all members of the legislature to welcome these special guests 

to our legislature today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Minister of Advanced Education in welcoming the members 

from the Ahmadiyya community. It’s a true pleasure to have 

you here today. A special welcome to the guests from Ontario 

and to the guests from Saskatoon — my home city as well. It’s 

wonderful to have you here, and your message of peaceful 

coexistence is a Canadian message and one that is appreciated 

by all people of faith here in the province. So we thank you for 

your presence here in the Assembly. Peace be with you. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce some guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. We have 

with us today the chief of the Saskatoon Tribal Council, Chief 

Felix Thomas. And among officials with Chief Thomas are also 

Vice-chief Geraldine Arcand and executive director of STC 

[Saskatoon Tribal Council] health and family services, Ceal 

Tournier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to visit with them for just a 

few minutes earlier, and I look forward to a lengthier meeting 

this afternoon where we’re going to discuss, I assume, a wide 

variety of issues. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to please give Chief 

Thomas and his guests a warm welcome to our Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thought 

I’d seen the tribal chief up there behind the clock, and now I 

know it to be true. I just want to join with the minister in 

welcoming Tribal Chief Felix Thomas from the Saskatoon 

Tribal Council, Vice-chief Geraldine Arcand, and the officials 

to Treaty 4 territory and File Hills Qu’Appelle territory. But it’s 

really good to see them here. 

 

Saskatoon Tribal Council is certainly a very progressive and 

forward-looking and very active tribal council, and do a lot of 

great work for their members and for the First Nations they 

represent, but certainly setting that example across the province. 

So it’s really good to see the tribal chief, vice-chief, the 

representatives here today from the Saskatoon Tribal Council. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to welcome to the Assembly today a constituent of 

mine, Mrs. Neva Merasty, all the way down from the Flying 

Dust First Nation. It’s great to see you down here. It’s not often 

we have visitors from the Meadow Lake constituency, but 

welcome to your Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on cellphone coverage for northwest 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nation, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations along with the community of 

Turnor Lake; and, [Mr. Speaker], this includes all 

neighbouring communities in each of these areas. 

 

And the people that have signed this petition are primarily from 

Turnor Lake, but many people from all throughout the land 

have signed many of these petitions. And I hereby present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise to present petitions on behalf of residents from across our 

province as it relates to concerns about the finances of our 

province. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

[13:45] 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of the leadership and community of Wollaston Lake. 

In 2008 February they were promised an all-weather road to the 

community of Wollaston Lake to be completed by 2012 

construction year. That has not happened. 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan stop turning their 

backs on the people from northern Saskatchewan and start 

investing in public highways in the North. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that construction on the road 

to Wollaston Lake, which was started under the previous 

NDP government, has shown little to no progress and must 

be completed quickly. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

It is signed by the leadership and community members of 

Wollaston Lake. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture 

 

A Tribute to Neil Jahnke 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, it is with sadness that I rise 

today to pay tribute to a fellow rancher and a leader in our cattle 

industry, Mr. Neil Jahnke, who passed away on Monday, 

November 26th. Neil was a constituent of mine who ranched 

near Gouldtown. He leaves behind his wife Marilyn, daughter 

J.J., and son Shane. 

 

Neil served in numerous organizations throughout his life with 

dedication and passion. Neil served as president of the 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, president of the 

Canadian Cattleman’s Association, chairman of the Canadian 

Beef Export Federation, president of the Saskatchewan 

Livestock Association, chairman of the National Beef 

Information Centre, and director of Canadian Western 

Agribition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Neil was a tireless advocate and a strong voice for 

our cattle producers. That voice was perhaps its strongest when 

we needed it most during the BSE [bovine spongiform 

encephalopathy] crisis. His leadership during that difficult time 

boosted consumer confidence in our beef, and he stood up 

against protectionist policies that threatened the industry. Neil 

received numerous well-deserved honours throughout his life, 

including an honorary life membership in the Agricultural 

Institute of Canada, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and 

induction into the Saskatchewan Agriculture Hall of Fame. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I offer my condolences to Neil’s family, and I ask 

all members of this Assembly to join me in recognizing his 

contributions to our province and agriculture industry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

All Nations Job Fair 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to draw attention and commendation to the All Nations 

Job Fair that is taking place today, getting under way literally as 

I speak at Evraz Place here in Regina. The All Nations Job Fair 

is a first-year event presented by the Ministry of the Economy 

and saskjobs.ca and the Regina & District Chamber of 

Commerce. We commend these entities for their support of this 

valuable initiative. 

 

A special word of thanks goes to the leadership of the Regina 

Chamber of Commerce for this event, especially for the work, 

commitment, and passion on this issue by Regina Chamber 

CEO [chief executive officer] John Hopkins. I also want to 

thank the many businesses and organizations taking this active 

approach to helping address labour force issues throughout 

Regina and region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an important aspect of this job fair is its focus on 

connecting First Nations people with job and career 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

opportunities here in the Regina region. But indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, all nations are welcome. Another important part of the 

proceedings will be the attention paid to career pathing, an 

opportunity for workers, students, employees, and the 

employers and training institutions to come together and 

negotiate strategies that are mutually beneficial for both 

businesses and potential employees. With career planning, 

career counsellors are provided by SaskJobs and meet 

individually with each job seeker to find a position that fits their 

skill level and educational background. However, the fair takes 

it a step further by linking potential students to post-secondary 

institutions to identify programming needs to fit their interests 

and career ambitions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the Regina Chamber of 

Commerce for the All Nations Job Fair and a special word of 

thanks to John Hopkins for his commitment and passion on this 

issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Saskatchewan Citizens Awarded Order of Merit 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to congratulate eight outstanding Saskatchewan citizens 

who recently received the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. The 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit is the province’s highest honour, 

recognizing individuals who have contributed significantly to 

the well-being of Saskatchewan. They are as follows: 

 

Raymond Ahenakew, a friend, a constituent, a tireless leader 

who has cleared the way for First Nations people to strengthen 

their participation in the economy. 

 

Bruce Beatty, who recently received the award posthumously, 

was an accomplished graphic artist and the designer of the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Sandra Louise Birdsell, an award-winning writer, editor, and 

teacher. 

 

Dr. Barbara Keirnes Young has been an innovator in education 

and a mentor for women in leadership. Dr. Young was the 

Ministry of Education’s first female superintendent of 

education. 

 

W. Thomas Molloy, who served as chief federal negotiator for 

the Government of Canada for nearly 30 years. He is one of our 

nation’s most respected negotiators concerning indigenous land 

claims and treaty settlements. 

 

Dr. Brian Rossnagel has devoted his career to increasing 

economic returns and reducing business risk for agricultural 

producers. 

 

Regina painter and sculptor David Thauberger is recognized 

internationally. His paintings of prairie storefronts celebrate 

small towns of Saskatchewan. 

 

And W. Brett Wilson is one of Canada’s best-known 

businessmen and most respected philanthropists. Motivated by 

a deep and enduring affection for his home province, the North 

Battleford native has often focused his entrepreneurial and 

philanthropic efforts on Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

these amazing Saskatchewan citizens on receiving the 2012 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Essay Celebrates a Colleague 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate 

Alex Sokalski, a constituent of Saskatoon Centre, for the 

selection of one of his essays to be included in a 

commemorative collection of dissertations honouring Alex’s 

friend and colleague, François Moureau. 

 

Alex visited Paris, France where he attended a reception on 

November 16th to celebrate the work and life of François. Alex 

is one of the esteemed few whose academic essays were 

selected for a festschrift, a collection of academic papers that 

are prepared in honour of a retiring professor. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a common practice among post-secondary 

institutions in Europe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Alex feels honoured to have been part of this 

tribute. He said, and I quote: 

 

A number of very celebrated scholars have participated. 

I’m fortunate that my work is published alongside a very 

elite group of those who have studied and done research 

in this particular field. I feel I’ve reached my pinnacle 

goal. 

 

Alex is an avid volunteer and the current secretary-treasurer for 

the Saskatchewan branch of Canadian Parents for French. He is 

a lifetime academic scholar whose first language is English. He 

has taught various courses in French culture and history at the 

University of Saskatchewan for over 30 years. Alex explains his 

love of the French language by saying: 

 

My journey began in college, when I had a French 

instructor who led me into what would become a 

fascination with eighteenth century French literature. My 

interest and love for French and for how people live their 

language has always been strong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Alex for the inclusion of his essay in this very important 

publication. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Canada Cup of Curling 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had 

the honour of bringing greetings at the opening ceremonies for 

the 2012 Canada Cup of Curling at Mosaic Place in Moose Jaw. 

This marquee event will feature seven men’s and seven 

women’s elite teams who earned their way into the Cup through 

their participation in previous curling events this winter. 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

The winners of the Canada Cup of Curling will now become 

direct qualifiers for the 2013 Tim Hortons Roar of the Rings 

Canadian Olympic Trials slated for one year from now where 

Canada’s men’s and women’s representatives for the 2014 

Olympic Games will be determined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to mention Becca Garner and Lane 

Greenwood, both of Moose Jaw Wakamow. After writing 

essays on how they give back to their community, they were 

each given the opportunity to participate as two of the 14 

SaskEnergy Junior Stars this week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the speaker of Moose Jaw will be in the national 

spotlight this week as TSN [The Sports Network] has decided 

to televise every draw of this week’s event. And I am confident 

that Moose Jaw will rise up to the occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an event like this is not possible without the help 

of hundreds of volunteers, and I want to thank everyone who 

has helped make this week’s event a success. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Leader-Post Christmas Cheer Fund 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to bring attention to an exceptional seasonal charity, the 

Leader-Post Christmas Cheer Fund. Each year the Leader-Post 

Christmas Cheer Fund raises money for women’s shelters in 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Christmas Cheer Fund supports four women’s 

shelters which provide help to those seeking refuge from 

domestic violence and abuse. Every year hundreds of women 

seek refuge at the four Regina shelters supported by this 

charity: The Regina Transition House, the YWCA [Young 

Women’s Christian Association] Isabel Johnson Shelter, WISH 

[Wichihik Iskwewak] Safe House, and Sofia House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1992 Leader-Post readers donated more 

than $2 million to the Christmas Cheer Fund, and every year 

donations to the fund have continued. Last year, almost 

$224,000 was donated. The donations are used to help enhance 

programs and services for women and children at the four 

shelters that the Cheer Fund supports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, domestic violence and abuse is about domination 

and control. Recognizing abuse is the first step to getting help. 

Domestic violence often escalates from threats and verbal abuse 

to violence, and while physical injury may be the most obvious 

danger, the emotional and psychological consequences of 

domestic abuse are also severe. 

 

Emotionally abusive relationships can destroy your self worth, 

lead to anxiety and depression, and make you feel helpless and 

alone. No one should have to endure this kind of pain. And your 

first step to breaking free is recognizing that your situation is 

abusive. Once you acknowledge the reality of the abusive 

situation, then you can get the help you need. It takes a lot of 

courage to admit to oneself that you have been abused and even 

more courage to reach out and ask for help. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

Leader-Post Christmas Cheer Fund for their outstanding support 

to Regina women’s shelters, and I ask all members to join me in 

thanking Regina women’s shelters for their amazing work in 

helping victims of domestic abuse and violence. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

State of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been manoeuvres from 

the get-go with this Sask Party budget, all to portray a picture 

that’s rosier than reality. In March they made overly optimistic 

resource revenue estimates and punted $100 million of debt 

onto the backs of universities and students to take that off our 

books and pretend to balance. Taking from Peter, Mr. Speaker, 

to pay Paul, if you will. Despite tabling a precarious budget 

from day one, government doubled down on costly spin and ran 

billboards boasting balance with public money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, confirmed in the mid-year report, why is this 

government more interested in budgetary spin than a sound 

fiscal plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we were pleased to table 

the mid-year report yesterday — the only provincially balanced 

budget in all of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been many comments about the budget. 

We’ve heard from the journalists. We’ve heard from people in 

the press from many different areas but, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

key factors is the CIBC World Markets. And Mr. Warren 

Lovely indicated today, and I quote, “Consistent with its 

relative economic out-performance, Saskatchewan maintains a 

healthier budgetary position than other provinces.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a quote that we acknowledge from CIBC 

World Markets. It tells us about the budget that we have, which 

is a balanced budget on both summary and General Revenue 

Fund. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, not only does this budget 

contain cuts, but it also defers the needed building and repair of 

schools and infrastructure projects in our Crowns. Mr. Speaker, 

the mid-term report updates a budget that has been manipulated 

from day one. Now all that props up their boastful claims are a 

one-time accounting adjustment and more budgetary 

manoeuvres such as the deferral of infrastructure projects in our 

Crowns exceeding $200 million, not unlike the late-year, 

unplanned $120 million cash grab from SaskPower of last year, 

something that we’re all paying for now, Mr. Speaker. Taking 

Peter to pay Paul, Mr. Speaker. Does the minister not realize 

that the people of our province see through his budgetary 

games? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, what people who are 

outside of the province of Saskatchewan, what they’re seeing is 

that Saskatchewan is in fact the only province with a balanced 

budget, Mr. Speaker. That’s what people are seeing. That’s why 

we have 80,000 more people in this province in the last five 

years. That’s why we have 10,000 more people working, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When we look at the fact that the credit rating agencies of 

Saskatchewan in this country have given Saskatchewan an 

AAA rating, Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

never even believed that that was ever possible because they 

were planning for decline, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a pleasure to work in a province that is interested in growth, 

that ensures that growth is going to be able to pay for all of the 

things we need, including the infrastructure deficit that the NDP 

left us. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s 

scrambling with short-sighted moves to maintain their spin and 

their PR [public relations]. All of these deferrals only delay a 

financial problem, and now government is liquidating assets to 

have the cash required for next year, a sell-off of 

dividend-paying assets like ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan], not to mention a sell-off of land 

and affordable homes. And now they’re trying to find a way to 

build infrastructure that we need without the upfront cash, with 

their costly new private approach to infrastructure. These are 

nothing more than short-sighted manoeuvres to manipulate our 

books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had enough with the games. Why won’t the 

Sask Party table the real numbers and a budget plan that works 

for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the budget that we planned in the spring was 

planned for a balanced budget. It remains a balanced budget, 

and the people of the province appreciate that. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing. The member 

opposite stands and talks about credibility and balanced 

budgets. Mr. Speaker, it was one year ago today that the NDP 

Finance critic announced that the NDP was reversing its costly 

and unfair policy on First Nations revenue sharing. Just two 

days later, he pulled a double reverse by reversing his reversal. 

And then on the day he launched his leadership campaign, he 

refused to say where he stands on this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $5 billion of unaffordable election promises, three 

different positions on First Nations resource revenue sharing: 

that’s what the member’s record is, and I’m not going to take 

any advice from him. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

Referral Process Resulting From Use of Surgical Mesh 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Legislative 

Assembly is a place for people to bring their concerns. A group 

of women came to the legislature today to tell their stories and 

express their concerns about the use of surgical mesh as it 

relates to women’s health. These people are Marika English, 

Stephanie Brad, and Ruth Olson who joined us in the west 

gallery after the introductions this morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these women are seeking a course of action that 

will best resolve their medical situation. That is why they came 

to the Assembly today. We as legislators owe it to constituents 

to listen to these concerns, so I’m pleased that the minister had 

the opportunity to sit down with them before question period. 

 

My question to the minister: could the minister please outline 

the next steps that the ministry will be taking to resolve the 

situation for the women who came to the Assembly today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to thank the member for his question and the information 

that he’s been able to provide on this serious issue over the last 

week. As well I want to thank our guests that are here, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve had an opportunity to meet with these three 

women, as well as their spouses, just prior to coming in to 

question period. We had a very thorough conversation and one 

that was very informative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a case such as these, it is typically the 

responsibility of the specialist in Saskatchewan to look for 

options, either those that are out of province or indeed, if that is 

not the case and not available, then out of the country, Mr. 

Speaker. The Ministry of Health has taken an additional step as 

well to canvass across Canada, Mr. Speaker, to determine if 

support is available within Canada. We have received word that 

that is the case for those individuals that haven’t had this 

removal, Mr. Speaker, or help from a specialist that is available 

within Canada. And for those that have gone out of the country 

we have, as a government, put a process in place for them to 

seek recourse. And we would invite them to look at those 

options. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The women came to 

the legislature today to have an answer about the process. They 

understand that there is a process, but what I’ve heard from 

them, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s a great deal of urgency for an 

answer. And they’ve gone through the necessary steps, as I 

understand it. We know that they’re suffering, based on the 

stories that they have told, and they have been waiting for an 

answer. 

 

So my question to the minister: I understand that he met and 

received information and that’s a very good step, but what I’ve 

heard from the women is that they want a clear answer about 

when they will actually know, when they will receive an 

answer. So appreciating that there is a process to follow, my 

question on behalf of the women: when will they have a 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

specific answer about their course of treatment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, knowing that these 

are, in this case, three individuals that have three different 

experiences and are at different points in their course of action, 

I wouldn’t want to comment specifically on each of those cases, 

Mr. Speaker, except to say that for those individuals that have 

already sought treatment out of the country, we do have a 

process where they can appeal the decision that has been made 

by the Ministry of Health in terms of out-of-country coverage 

and the recourse that that will take place, Mr. Speaker, if that 

would be available. And that information has, that information 

in those cases is being determined at this point by the review 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for those individuals that have not yet sought 

treatment out of the country, what we are advising, Mr. 

Speaker, and what we are confirming with specialists here in 

the province, is that there is a specialist within Canada that we 

would refer people to. This is work that normally is done by 

their own specialist, but in this case we have as well canvassed 

across the country and are providing that information to 

specialists here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recognize that it’s a 

common issue with three specific cases, each unique because 

it’s unique individuals. But what I’ve heard from the 

individuals is a real desire to have a definite answer about when 

they might know. They want an answer, Mr. Speaker. So the 

minister doesn’t have to state the answer at this exact moment 

on this date on the floor. But will he commit today, Mr. 

Speaker, to provide specific dates to the three women as to 

when they would have a final answer with respect to the course 

of treatment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of a date by which 

we can confirm with these individuals if it is a matter of 

providing a referral to a specialist within Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

that information needs to be communicated by their specialist 

here in the province. And we’ve certainly provided information, 

have checked, done a cross-Canada check to see which 

specialist would be able to provide those services, Mr. Speaker. 

Now of course it is difficult for that specialist out of province to 

be able to completely provide a course of action for that patient 

before they’re being able to see. So I can’t at this date, I cannot 

at this date give a date to these individuals in terms of when 

they will be, when they will be seen by a specialist within 

Canada. 

 

In terms of the date for an answer on reimbursement, Mr. 

Speaker, we will work to get an answer for these individuals, 

but that work has to make its way through the review committee 

if out-of-country treatment has already been sought. And so 

therefore I won’t have a date, specific date for that as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Combatting Impaired Driving 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time of year 

with many people celebrating holidays, safe driving is top of 

mind. The number of highway fatalities this year has the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] very concerned — 146 

people have lost their lives on our highways already this year. 

Sergeant Ron MacRae said recently, “The single greatest 

contributor to fatalities is impaired driving. Drinking and 

driving is the main thing we need to work on.” 

 

The government is tightening the rules to respond to speeding 

in the orange zone. We support these changes because they 

make sense. But when it comes to drinking and driving, this 

government clearly needs to do more. We need to see 

leadership to tackle this issue. Will the Premier take impaired 

driving as seriously as orange zone safety and work to reduce 

highway fatalities in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I agree with the member opposite that this is a very serious 

issue here in Saskatchewan. There’s a number of initiatives 

that’s undertaken by SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] and SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority], both of which I have the responsibility for. 

 

These are programs that our government implemented such as 

report impaired drivers or the RID program, which has now 

resulted in more than 400 impaired drivers being taken off the 

road. In January of 2012, SGI and SLGA partnered with 

MADD [Mothers Against Drunk Driving], which is a great 

agency, and they produced a video which is presented to high 

school students throughout Saskatchewan to raise awareness 

when we have the younger drivers so that they, you know, they 

are aware early of the consequences of drinking and driving. 

 

We have Operation Overdrive, which is a year-round program 

run by enforcement agencies within our province. They do stop 

checks that are targeted for impaired drivers. SGI provides 

money for that program, and that has resulted now in 2011 

alone of 585 total infractions. This month of November, SGI is 

running an extensive ad campaign on the radios, posters in bars, 

restaurants across the province, reminding people that while a 

blood alcohol content of .08 is a Criminal Code offence, it’s 

also administrative suspensions for motorists caught with a 

blood alcohol level of .04. And there’s more, Mr. Speaker, and 

I’m sure the member has another question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly those 

initiatives are good, but they’re simply not enough when we 

hear about increased deaths on our highways and impaired 

driving being one of the main causes. Drinking and driving has 

a devastating effect on families and on our communities. 

 

This government did the right thing by introducing stricter rules 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

for orange zones. It was something the Premier highlighted in 

the Throne Speech. But when highway fatalities are at some of 

the highest levels ever and the RCMP say many of these deaths 

are tied to drinking and driving, this is a crisis that warrants the 

Premier’s attention. Saskatchewan families need to be able to 

travel safely and not worry about meeting an impaired driver on 

the road. Will the Premier tackle the problem of impaired 

driving and work with law enforcement to ensure we have safe 

roads for all Saskatchewan families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I had 

just outlined, I believe it was, five different initiatives that we 

undertake as a government and that is partnering with our law 

enforcement. Ultimately each of us as individuals around our 

province have to take responsibility for not drinking and 

driving. Quite frankly it is a personal decision for each and 

every one of us and we have to recognize that as well. I would 

be more than happy to hear if in the next question the member 

opposite would give us her suggestion of what she thinks 

should be done in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Other provinces 

have shown leadership in their jurisdictions on drinking and 

driving. They have reduced their thresholds for blood alcohol 

limits and they’ve put in place stricter penalties for drinking and 

driving in their respective jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all options need to be on the table. All options 

need to be on the table, and the Premier needs to show 

leadership for our province. He needs to send a strong message 

to Saskatchewan that impaired driving is not an acceptable part 

of our culture. What is the Premier going to do to reduce 

highway fatalities and address drinking and driving in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

going to repeat again that we do partner with our law 

enforcement agencies on this very important and very serious 

issue, of which we have 200 more officers now within our 

province than we did when we had an NDP government. And 

the member opposite perhaps didn’t hear the one answer 

because she mentioned a very strong, aggressive advertising 

campaign, and I had just said that in November, SGI is 

undertaking just that very initiative. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Physician Supply in Kipling 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Rural and Remote Health: does the minister share 

my concern about the impact of reduced hours at the Kipling 

Memorial Health Centre? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you very much. We’re certainly aware of the reduction 

in hours at Kipling, Mr. Speaker. I know that the health region 

is working through that as they look to recruit additional 

doctors and additional providers, Mr. Speaker. And we certainly 

have supported all health regions and all communities by 

increasing the number of training seats in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, increasing the number of residencies, having more 

than 200 more physicians. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as well as the Physician Recruitment Agency 

that is currently recruiting both overseas, Mr. Speaker, with the 

recent trip to India, as well, Mr. Speaker, at our own university 

here in Saskatchewan. And we’ll work with the region and the 

community to address these issues. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what was a 24-hour health care 

facility in Kipling has been reduced to only operating 12 hours 

a day. This follows a month after emergency services in Kipling 

were eliminated due to a shortage of physicians. The member 

from Moosomin told his local paper that “Over the past number 

of years we’ve gradually seen a reduction in physician 

availability and that is certainly impacting our rural 

communities.” He went on to say that the shortage of physicians 

is “becoming a significant issue.” 

 

So to the Minister of Rural and Remote Health: what is he 

doing about the reduced hours at the Kipling Memorial Health 

Centre? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we know there’s challenges in rural Saskatchewan in 

health care. And part of my tour that took place that I took this 

summer, I visited 40 different communities, and I talked to 

different health care providers and community leaders. 

 

Now in Kipling, Mr. Speaker, there was a meeting held on 

Monday, November 19th with the health region, ministry, and 

local foundation, municipal leaders to discuss physician 

recruitment and how to restore emergency services once another 

physician has been recruited. So we have a plan in place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And in a provincial plan, as the Minister of Health just said, we 

are recruiting physicians from India right now. Saskdocs are in 

India. And we have a made-in-Saskatchewan assessment 

process to facilitate the foreign doctors to work in 

Saskatchewan. So we have many things in place, and we will 

continue to work very hard to bring doctors into rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a result of reduced 

services in Kipling, other communities are feeling more 

pressure as well. A letter in the recent issue of the Carlyle 

Observer from Sheila Sim, the secretary treasurer of Moose 

Mountain health care recruitment, says that “In recent weeks the 

Arcola Family Health Clinic has received many calls from 

frustrated area residents regarding the availability of physician 

services.” The letter goes on to say, “. . . patient volumes at the 

Arcola Family Health Clinic have increased significantly with 

the recent closure of the Kipling hospital and the intermittent 

closures of the Redvers Medical Clinic.” Finally, the letter says, 

Mr. Speaker, “We ask that residents consider the current 

physician shortage when determining the urgency of your 

medical requirements.” 

 

So to the Minister of Rural and Remote Health: what does he 

have to say to those frustrated residents who are feeling 

first-hand the effects of reduced health care services in Kipling 

and the added pressure and physician shortage in the Arcola, 

Carlyle region? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, our government has a plan in place that’s been 

incorporated, and we’re working very hard to recruit more 

doctors. But we also have increased the number of training seats 

at our college at the University of Saskatchewan. And as more 

doctors are trained in Saskatchewan and more foreign doctors 

that come into Saskatchewan, we hope to alleviate some of the 

concerns in rural communities and have more rural physicians 

practising in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Information Services Corporation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s repeated some big 

claims about why the Saskatchewan Party has returned to their 

2003 ideology and their privatization agenda. ISC is being 

privatized for no discernible reason. The public doesn’t want 

ISC sold, because it’s profitable. And the privatization of the 

Crowns is certainly not what the people voted for, despite page 

44 of their platform. One has to wonder what is going on with 

the state of the province’s books when the Sask Party touts the 

privatization of ISC as a source of revenue for infrastructure 

needs. 

 

Now that the mid-term finances are out, the people of 

Saskatchewan are finally seeing what the Sask Party is up to, 

Mr. Speaker. And they’re looking for assets that aren’t nailed 

down to liquidate and cash in. Mr. Speaker, is the real reason 

the Sask Party is selling ISC is because they have a big fiscal 

hole they need to plug? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it was a very interesting 

question and I want to touch on a couple of the points. The 

member opposite said that there is no discernible reason why 

we moved ISC into the private sector, Mr. Speaker. Of course 

they would never understand the discernible reason of growth, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s allowing for this company to 

expand, not only across Canada but around the world, Mr. 

Speaker, so that the company grows, Mr. Speaker, we believe 

greatly, as we move forward. 

 

The other point of her question, which is very curious, Mr. 

Speaker, is she was talking about the mid-term report. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, legislation on ISC won’t be passed until the spring 

and then after that, Mr. Speaker, before a share offering, it’s 

well down the road that any resources coming back from the 

sale of ISC would be realized by government. It has nothing to 

do with the mid-term report, Mr. Speaker, that is balanced on 

the fiscal, on the GRF [General Revenue Fund] as well as the 

summary financial statements. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there is little appetite for the 

Sask Party’s ideological plans, and they know it. The 

Professional Surveyors Canada, a national organization of 

surveyors, recently wrote the Premier about his fire sale of ISC. 

They said: 

 

From an economic point of view, the divesting of a 

Crown corporation that makes money and provides 

income to the government raises concerns. How is the 

public good served in the long term by this divestiture? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the surveyors go on to say, “A sale of ISC to a 

private entity would adversely affect the impartiality of services 

to the public and to our members.” 

 

To the minister: how is there any positive impact to the public 

from this ideological sell-off of ISC? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to 

meet with the Saskatchewan land surveyors as well as Guy 

Craig from the national association. We met back on November 

the 8th. I was able to answer many of their concerns, Mr. 

Speaker. I then also was able to meet with the Saskatchewan 

land surveyors’ annual general meeting on Monday and spoke 

to the group, Mr. Speaker, and addressed many of their 

concerns. 

 

A couple of their concerns, Mr. Speaker, were around the 

controller of surveys and the registrar of titles. They’re 

quasi-judicial functions which were previously with ISC, Mr. 

Speaker. We were able to reassure them — as well as the 

Minister of Justice was with me as well — that those services 

will be moving back into the Ministry of Justice. So that, Mr. 

Speaker, answered many of their questions, not to mention the 

fact that the land titles would still be controlled and guaranteed 

by the provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

After raising a number of those points, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard 

back from at least one member saying that they are quite 

satisfied that their points have been answered. 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 80, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 

2012 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Economy has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 80, The Power Corporation Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub 

Authority Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move Bill No. 81, The Global Transportation Hub Authority 

Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 

No. 81, The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act be now 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise today to enter into the second reading debate on 

Bill No. 69, An Act respecting Information Services 

Corporation. And of course this is one that really underlines 

what this government is all about in so many ways, in so many 

ways, in terms of saying one thing and then doing another, and 

having this idea of accountability to the promises that they 

made during the campaign, this last campaign a year ago in the 

fall of 2011, and going back even further. 

 

And so this is one where we see the government 

communications, the high speed when it comes to spin, trying 

to convey a story that this makes some sort of sense when it 

makes absolutely no sense, when you have a profitable Crown 

like this, that when we see just recently, yesterday, an update, a 

mid-year update with a razor-thin amount that every penny 

counts to this government. 

 

And when they’re selling this off, they’re looking for 

everything. And as I think, as our critic has said, it really has 

been a case of robbing Peter to pay Paul. And here they’re 

going to the extreme where they’re going to sell off a 

significant Crown that is doing well, and we can only think it’s 

because of ideological factors. To many folks, they did not see 

this coming. And even in the last question during question 

period, Mr. Speaker, we saw the question about the land 

surveyors who didn’t think this made any sense at all. And then 

the minister is quite happy that one land surveyor has phoned 

back and said, I see your survey says one surveyor says it 

makes sense. 

 

How can he feel that that reassures the public that, you know, 

that it’s the right thing to do, that it makes any sense at all that 

one surveyor phoned back to say, hey, I think you’re on track? 

But I don’t think that really holds a lot of water because clearly 

there’s too many questions and people weren’t looking for this. 

 

Quite often this fits into the pattern of this government who will 

do anything with their work, with the budgets. I won’t use that 

word balanced because I think it’s become a different word on 

that side of the House. Clearly this government is looking after 

any rock for anything it can sell, and promises it made during 

the campaign and the previous campaign are not on. And 

they’re working very hard to whatever they can do to spin that 

into some sort of story that people at home might buy, but I 

don’t think people are buying it. 

 

They’re saying, hey, this has become a significant Crown and 

it’s one that people value. They value the idea of an Information 

Services Corporation that has become to be known as a good 

provider of important pieces of information — whether it’s 

titles or reports, birth certificates, a whole range of maps and 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

surveys — that it’s seen to be the right thing because these folks 

are impartial. They are professional and there’s a sense of 

accountability because it’s a public Crown. And if this all 

becomes back into the private hands, then we’re not sure what 

may happen, what might happen. I mean, clearly we have a way 

of ensuring accountability because it’s a Crown, and people feel 

safe with that. And there’s a public integrity aspect to it, and I 

think that people have come, have really come to support that. 

 

And we have serious, serious questions about this. And we will 

ask more questions as it goes along. And I know in the media, 

the media’s even asking questions about, you know, the way 

that this piece of legislation is laid out. Are we really going to 

get the value that makes it even worthwhile? And why is this? 

And it seems to be more driven by ideology and perhaps testing 

the waters for bigger sales as that may come along. 

 

And so they’re testing the waters, and if they can spin it in a 

way that seems to make people believe it’s less what it is, then 

they will push the envelope. But I don’t think people are buying 

that. They’re not buying that at all. They’re saying we’d like to 

keep our Crowns intact. We are seeing that in the budget, a 

government that relies so heavily on commodities that it’s 

important to diversify. And we’ve seen that yesterday, the role 

of the Crowns being a strong part of making us, making the 

government be able to make ends meet. And so when this kind 

of thing comes up, I think people have a lot of questions. They 

have a lot of questions. 

 

And one of the questions they have is, this is a bit of a surprise. 

They did not campaign on this. They did not campaign on the 

fact that they will be, within a year of being elected, that they 

will be offering up a significant Crown, one of the major 

Crowns, for sale and they would be starting that process. And 

people did not know this, and I’m sure out in the public there 

are many folks may not even know it today. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, this is just one more of those surprises. And we’ve 

known for sure, that we’ve seen over the last few months since 

the last election, some major surprises foisted upon the people 

of Saskatchewan, not the least, not the least is the three more 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Again these folks did not campaign on having increasing the 

number of MLAs in this legislature. That would’ve been a very 

interesting debate on the hustings, but this government instead 

chose to be quiet on that and announce that shortly thereafter. 

And we have some real concerns about what that really, really 

means. They did not campaign on it. And is this the tradition 

that this government will have in the next campaigns? Will they 

not really release the main parts of their platforms because they 

will do it anyways and they’ll wait until after the election? 

 

So you have the three more MLAs, and what the implications of 

that are: costing millions of dollars when we have other things 

that are much more important, you know. And a second bridge 

to Prince Albert comes right to mind because I know the folks 

. . . And so when we talk about the bridge, we know that that’s 

something that’s critically important to the people of Prince 

Albert, and they’re not hearing anything from that government 

over there or the members over there. But what they are hearing 

is three more MLAs, five more dollars on drug costs for seniors, 

the elimination of the film tax credit. 

 

And of course we have yet to see, we have yet to see the labour, 

the new employment code that they did not campaign on. 

Where is it? We’re in the dying days of the winter sitting and 

we’re not seeing it. We’re not sure we’re going to see it. Is the 

minister retracting that or what’s happening with that? We have 

how many, five more sitting days? Five more sitting days, three 

more government days, three more government dates — just 

three days next week — and we have not seen the employment 

code.  

 

And clearly that was something that while a major, major 

surprise to the people of Saskatchewan, major surprise when 

that was announced on May 2nd in the spring because again 

these folks did not campaign on their massive overhaul of 15 

pieces of labour legislation. And they said that it would be 

delivered . . . Now they did say sometime in the fall sitting, in 

the fall sitting. But it’s going to be pretty close to the end. 

 

And you know, ironically, this is what happened last year if I’m 

not mistaken. I believe that the three more MLAs legislation 

came . . . And it would be funny if it came on the same, the last 

Tuesday or the last Wednesday, yes. Now I understand actually 

there’s only two more days this bill can be delivered — next 

Tuesday or Wednesday — and so I don’t know what the odds 

are. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, and when we talk about the labour piece of 

legislation, this clearly, clearly fits the bill, about Bill 69, in that 

it seems to be ideologically driven. Here you have a Bill 69, and 

I don’t know what the number of the employment code will be 

if it is actually delivered, but both are ideologically driven. 

Nobody asked for them, and they did not campaign on them. 

And here we have this, and this could be the beginning of major 

changes about how we do things in Saskatchewan, how we do 

things in Saskatchewan. And I think that it’s alarming for 

people. 

 

You know, when you look at the labour bill, the lesson the 

government should learn was around the consultation process 

that was involved. Now I do have to say it’s somewhat ironic 

that the ministry of workplace relations is claiming that they’ve 

spent something like $525,000 on consultations for the labour 

review. I find that . . . I don’t know how they could have spent 

$500,000 on consultations or the meetings. I mean these folks 

are in the province. And I don’t know how many have, but if 

they’ve had 10, that’s like $50,000 a meeting. I don’t know if 

they’re paying per diems or what would be the costs. 

 

And when we asked about this in the spring, about how much 

would this cost, because we didn’t see it in the budget. There 

was no budget increase for the Ministry of Labour. And we 

asked about that and they said, well it’s going to be able to be 

done all in-house and there would be no extra costs. And now 

we have a situation that the costs are half a million dollars. And 

a half a million dollars for that kind of surprise is quite 

something else. It’s quite a surprise that they hadn’t planned 

for. So here we have a situation with Bill 69, with ISC. Was this 

planned for? Did they know about this several years ago? 

 

And we can look back, and we can look into their past annual 

reports. And in fact, I’ll read one. This is the 2008 ISC annual 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

report. And at that time the Minister of Crown Corporations and 

I believe it was the minister from Silverwood and I would quote 

him directly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Silver Springs, 

Silver Springs. Thank you for the corrections. Not Silver City. 

This is what the minister at the time said and I quote: 

 

My priority for the future remains the same: to ensure that 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations remain publicly 

owned and provide high quality service at a low cost. This 

is a promise our Government made to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and it is a promise we will keep. 

 

So that member from Saskatoon, in 2008, that’s what he had 

said about this. Our word is our bond — maybe — until it’s not. 

 

And here we have the situation . . . just a few short years how 

things change. So was this planned or not planned. And that’s 

what I say about the labour review. Was that planned or not 

planned? You know, you have a minister who will say in the 

spring, we have the resources. We can do this. It’s all 

well-planned out. And then just a few short months later, we get 

the bill — a half a million dollars. And I don’t know how they 

could have planned so badly. How did they plan so badly on 

that? And so here we have a circumstance very parallel to this, 

not campaigning on it. All of a sudden this comes out and they 

have their spinmeisters working full-time, probably overtime. 

But they must have a lot if it’s going to cost a half a million 

dollars for this. And we don’t know what the costs of readying 

the people of Saskatchewan for the sale of ISC, what that’s all 

about. 

 

So clearly a broken promise and clearly a surprise and clearly 

something that the people of Saskatchewan don’t want. And 

clearly something that they should have campaigned on, they 

should have campaigned on. 

 

So the list is growing. The list is growing, Mr. Speaker, of 

things that they did not campaign on but that will change 

Saskatchewan fundamentally. And whether it’s the three more 

MLAs where we now become the most, if not one of the most, 

highest ratio between the number of people . . . or the lowest 

number of people, the lowest number of people per MLAs. We 

were already quite low, and we see that Manitoba was way 

above us, Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario. Ontario’s 

something like 100,000 people per persons, and now we’re 

going to be something like 12,000 people per MLA. 

 

Clearly that was a surprise. Clearly the employment code is a 

surprise. Clearly the film tax credit is a surprise. I haven’t 

talked about the film tax credit, but even again, Mr. Speaker, 

when the numbers come out . . . And we saw what happened 

with the chamber of commerce actually saying this costs us, I 

think the number was just over $1 million a year in terms of net 

costs. That clearly is something that is affordable. And yet we’ll 

see no more films made here in Saskatchewan, no more films of 

the kind of stature that we had seen in the last few years, which 

is really, really sad, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, it was interesting this summer. I was on a Canadian 

Parliamentary Association meeting in Quebec City, and we 

were doing a tour around the historic buildings, which are 

phenomenal. And one of the guides said, oh Saskatchewan, we 

love that Corner Gas. In fact they had a connection with 

Saskatchewan. They loved watching it. It was a sense of 

humour. It was about who we were as a people with our own 

unique, quirky ways. But it really spoke in a humorous way 

about us and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It sure is. It’s all 

about surprises. It’s all about how you guys are a surprise. 

Surprise, surprise. It has everything to do with this bill, 

everything to do with this bill. They should listen, they should 

listen a little bit. Come on. 

 

Let me, let me start from the beginning. Let me start from the 

beginning then. If they don’t see the connection between ISC 

and the long list of surprises this government is laying out, 

laying out, well it’s like you guys are an episode of Corner Gas. 

The government is becoming an episode of Corner Gas, Mr. 

Speaker, for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a long list of initiatives that this government 

did not campaign for, did not campaign on, the film tax credit. 

And maybe that struck a nerve over there, struck a nerve . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And there you go, there you go. 

When you kind of do that kind of stuff, it does kind of come 

back to bite you, you know, when you start surprising the public 

of Saskatchewan. And the list is growing, and ISC is part of it. 

ISC is clearly a part of it, Mr. Speaker. So here we are. We see 

a pattern. We see a pattern of a government that is being driven 

by ideology that won’t campaign on their ideology, that will lay 

low and make sure nobody asks any questions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Corner Gas has got an awful lot to do with 

ISC. And I know the Minister of Finance doesn’t want to draw, 

connect the dots, but it sure, sure does. Because people know it 

and they see it. And they’re asking about these things all 

together: ISC, selling the Crowns, cutting the film tax credit, 

adding three more MLAs, and this new employment code. Four 

things, Mr. Speaker, and we could go on.  

 

We could go on at length, go on at length about the surprises 

these guys have launched on the public of Saskatchewan, the 

things that they’ve launched but under the cover of getting 

re-elected, under the cover of being re-elected, but not mention 

what they really . . . what is the real agenda of the Sask Party. 

What is the real agenda of the Saskatchewan Party? The Sask 

Party is to govern by surprises. And I think sometime next 

week, we’ll get another surprise when the employment code 

comes forward that cost us over half a million dollars in 

consultations in which no one from the public could actually 

come and speak. They had to write it in. They had to write it in 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to remind the member speaking that 

the bill before us is Bill No. 69, the Information Services 

Corporation. And I wonder if he could address the bill, please. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well absolutely, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate 

the opportunity to enter into this debate because it is about 

connecting the dots for the people watching and people in 

Hansard. And I really think it’s important to reflect on Bill 69 

because it really does show what this government is all about. 

 

It’s about broken promises, broken promises, selling a 

profitable Crown and just because of being driven by ideology 

and something that is trumping common sense. Why are we 

selling, why are we selling something that is turning a profit? 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

Now apparently it made $17 million last year. Clearly it’s 

having a return. And the question is, is it worthwhile? So, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m very happy to be part of this debate today and talk 

about the issues at hand. So as you know, Mr. Speaker, and I 

will talk about how this government . . . And this is I don’t 

know if it’s the biggest surprise because I know I’m the critic of 

Labour, and I keep going back there, but I do have to draw the 

parallels.  

 

But I will reflect on this, and as I talked earlier, I’ll read this 

into the record once again because this is a message from the 

minister, the 2008 ISC annual report, about what they really 

believe. And I would assume that their word is their bond when 

they put this out. I mean we didn’t write this. I’m reading 

directly from a quote. It might’ve been . . . I don’t know if the 

minister actually wrote it. I hope he read it before he signed it. 

It actually has his signature at the bottom. But this is what he 

said. This is what he had said, Mr. Speaker: 

 

My priority for the future remains the same: to ensure that 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations remain publicly 

owned and provide high quality services at a low cost. 

This is a promise our Government made to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and it is a promise we will keep. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And now we’re seeing that promise being broken. Now we see 

this promise being broken. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not been 

many years since 2008, and clearly Bill 69 is the breaking point 

of that promise, that sacred vow the Sask Party made to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that’s an important point, that’s a critically 

important point for people here in Saskatchewan because, you 

know, when we do have elections and when we have all the 

things that happen between and we have these annual reports, 

people read them and go, okay, we take them at their word. This 

is what they say. They’re not hedging their bets; they’re not 

saying utility Crowns. They didn’t say anything, they didn’t say 

anything about utility Crowns in that promise. They talked 

about Saskatchewan Crown corporations. They didn’t talk 

about page 44, wait till page 44 in the upcoming election. There 

was no asterisk. It was pretty, pretty straightforward. So what 

changed? What changed between then and now? What changed 

between then and now? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of concerns about this Bill 69 

because we think it really is indicative and it fits the behaviour 

pattern. And you know, it’s often said, what predicts future 

behaviour is past behaviour. And you’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, 

past behaviour of surprises, whether it’s a film employment tax 

credit, three more MLAs, where they don’t campaign on those 

things and all of a sudden they happen. All of a sudden they 

happen. And so we have some real concerns about this. 

 

And it’s not just ourselves. It’s other folks. You know, I 

wouldn’t mind reading parts of Murray Mandryk’s column into 

this. This is what Mr. Mandryk said in November 20th, 2012. 

And you know, I think he offers some points that we should be 

thinking about reflecting on here, Mr. Speaker, because clearly 

. . . And I think the headline, it says it all: “ISC privatization 

case not compelling.” Not compelling. It’s not worth the 

breaking of a promise. It’s not worth the big surprise. 

 

These folks, if they really believe in their ideology of 

privatization, should go out and campaign on it, should 

campaign on it and not be secretive about it and wait until after 

the election and then say, surprise, you know that promise that 

we’ve been making about not selling off Crowns or 

privatization? That’s not true. That’s not true. We actually are 

. . . We do have a plan, and we were just waiting until the right 

moment. So clearly that’s what Bill 69 and . . . You know, it’s 

funny how bill numbers stick in our mind, like Bill 5 and 6, Bill 

80, and now 69 will join that, icons of famous bills that really 

showed what Sask Party was all about.  

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this is what Murray Mandryk had to say, 

and I’ll quote extensively from this because I think this is very 

relevant, salient to the bill at hand. I quote: 

 

The problem with the Saskatchewan Party’s argument for 

privatizing Information Services Corporation (ISC) is that 

it’s . . . [not really] that much stronger than its argument 

to keep it in its present, wholly owned public state. 

 

In fact, it would probably be more to the benefit of the 

average Saskatchewan taxpayer to keep . . . [it] as it is. 

Here’s why: 

 

The obvious benefit of selling 60 per cent of the Crown 

corporation through a stock offering is that we’ll reap $90 

million to $120 million that ISC Minister Don McMorris 

says can be put . . . [forward to the] provincial 

infrastructure work. 

 

Or maybe not. One of the more interesting observations 

about the share offering came from NDP critic Kathy 

Sproule, who asked: “What happens if this (new) 

company turns out to be like Facebook?” 

 

And I’ll continue on, but I think this is a . . . I think that’s really 

important. Now I don’t know if the Minister of Finance hates 

Facebook like he hates Corner Gas. He seems to have a real 

problem with Corner Gas. But I’ve got to say, we’ve seen what 

happened to Facebook. We’ve seen what happened to 

Facebook. 

 

And you know, when you look at corporations like Facebook, 

and it was an amazing show of entrepreneurship when 

somebody had an idea . . . And of course if you’ve seen the 

movie, it’s a fascinating movie about entrepreneurship and how 

ideas come to reality and who really has the idea and the kind of 

work that happens, but at some point some things happen. 

There’s a very interesting life history to most corporations, and 

it was a fascinating film.  

 

And of course the second part, which was after the film was 

made, is their share offering, where everybody thought that 

their shares would go through the roof, would go through the 

roof. I think they were offered $38 a share or something like 

that. They started at $38, and of course the owner of Facebook 

actually was just married. Mark Zuckerman was just married 

before the share offering came forward and was in Europe when 

they did the big launch. And it crashed. And I think the shares 

are now in the 10 or $13 range, something like that. About half 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

price anyways. 

 

And clearly who could have predicted that? I mean there were a 

lot of people in the know, a lot of people who make this their 

business to know what to do in these kind of situations. But 

clearly people were hesitant about it. They were hesitant about 

it because, you know, the question was, does this make a lot of 

common sense? Should I be buying something . . . They 

weren’t seeing the real tangible returns, I suppose. And for 

some reason they decided that they would hang tough, not 

invest in Facebook. 

 

What would happen if that happened in this circumstance here? 

And this is what our critic asked, and I think it’s a 

straightforward question. And the minister’s not been really 

straightforward about this in terms of, are there people out there 

who would snap this up right away? And if they’ve been 

shopping around, then clearly they’ve been working on this for 

a bit. So I think this is an interesting question that we have to 

ask because, you know, when we get to keep 40 per cent of the 

stocks, we want to make sure it’s a viable corporation. We don’t 

want to be sunk or tied into something that’s not going to work 

very well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have to ask, wouldn’t it make 

more sense to keep a corporation that has a return in the 15, $17 

million range per year than selling something that we might get 

90 to $120 million, that we would make in five years, just by 

holding the whole place, keeping it? What kind of sense does 

that make? What kind of sense does that make? I’m not sure. 

 

I mean it makes ideological sense to all those folks over there. 

All those folks understand that because it’s their ideology of 

privatization that’s at work. That’s what makes sense to them. 

It’s not the dollars and cents that makes sense to them. 

 

Well let’s continue. The problem in an ever-changing 

technological world is that investors might be somewhat 

hesitant to plunk down their cash on a company in need of 

upgrades, especially if that company has only one catered 

provincial government client and has never really made a sale 

outside its jurisdiction. And that’s the case, that we’re going 

into some really uncharted waters. We’re not sure what’s out 

there. 

 

We know the business case works well in Saskatchewan and 

does a good job and is meeting the marketplace needs, and the 

people of Saskatchewan feel very good about that. It’s a 

one-stop shop in terms of information services, places where 

you can go to get your birth certificate, titles, you know. You 

know everything is secure. You know that there’s a sense of 

accountability, that in Saskatchewan the tradition of public 

Crowns is a strong one and you can trust it.  

 

But you’re really going into some unchartered waters here, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think that clearly we have questions. We have a 

lot of questions about that and, Mr. Speaker, and if it’s just . . . 

again whether it’s the Minister of Finance looking for some 

ways to get some quick cash and as we see that happening both 

with . . . And from my background, I’ve been listening to the 

Minister Responsible for Sask Housing and selling off acres of 

land around Regina. 

 

Now the answer is that she says all of that money will go into 

housing. And we’re not sure. And we know for sure that it 

won’t go all into housing in Regina that’s for sure. The 

bureaucrats in the Sask Housing answered that question clearly, 

that Regina should not be expecting money from the sale of the 

northwest parcel of over 300 acres. That’s going to benefit all 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we see this liquidation of assets as a pattern for this 

government. They’re looking for things to sell, and as my 

colleague from Athabasca said, if it’s not nailed down or bolted 

down, it’s going to be up for sale. We see that happen. We’re 

starting to see that happen more and more. So it’s the land. It’s 

ISC. Now we’re seeing houses for social housing up for sale. 

It’s really a bit alarming about the kind of directions that we’re 

going. 

 

I’ll continue here: 

 

Moreover, if McMorris is right that other governments 

were frightened off from doing business with ISC because 

it was a 100-per-cent Saskatchewan-taxpayer-owned 

company, wouldn’t a 40-per-cent Saskatchewan- 

taxpayer-owned company still be problematic? 

 

I think that’s a fair question. That’s a fair question. They think 

they’ve struck this balance. But is it really going to solve the 

problem for someone in an ideological driven who really wants 

a privately owned and run company similar to ISC? Why would 

they be looking for a partner with the Government of 

Saskatchewan? You know, I mean that’s an odd thing. Like 

who would be looking for that? 

 

And so we have a lot of questions about that and so do other 

observers, and I think that’s a fair question. There is another . . . 

and I quote: 

 

There is another aspect of this government ownership that 

potential investors might see as even more of an issue. 

Those investors might see this 40-per-cent government 

ownership — and likely four . . . [of] the 10-person ISC 

board — as hampering them if they exercise political 

influence on key corporate decisions like staffing and 

future rate increases. 

 

That’s something to reflect on. So you’ve got four members of 

the 10-member board and a golden share, and you’re not . . . I 

think it would be only reasonable to think that the four board 

members are going to be acting on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And when it comes to determining what the 

future rate increases are, I sure hope that the Government of 

Saskatchewan is saying, keep them low; keep them low. But 

that may not be the case with the other folks on the board, and 

say listen, it’s about making a profit. It’s about turning a profit 

here, and a significant profit. Because clearly in their private 

world, there is that profit motive and that’s what keeps the 

business going. If there’s no profit, then you wonder why are 

you doing this. And so I think that that’s a fair, fair question. 

 

And so some of these things are just not making a lot of sense. 

And I’ll continue: 

 

 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2271 

Government officials speculate that ISC might be more 

attractive for “safe” investors, like pension fund managers 

or insurance companies trying to offset riskier 

investments. 

 

But lest anyone think that a privatized ISC under a 

40-per-cent government ownership structure is a great 

deal for Saskatchewan taxpayers or consumers, think 

again. 

 

To begin with, there is the discussion of additional rate 

hikes for land titles transactions that might be required 

more frequently to meet investor demands, meaning that 

there’s little to indicate Monday’s privatization bill will 

offer users much of a break. 

 

So this is where we see another perspective on this story. Not 

only do we sell off a profitable Crown and we see a reduction in 

the return — that as Saskatchewan citizens, we might see rate 

increases. So here we have this problem, and we have very little 

control over it. We have very little control. So I think there’s a 

lot that we need to be thinking about here, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think that, as I continue through this, it’s important to really 

reflect on what’s at stake here and is this wise for us to be going 

down the road. 

 

Now as we take our Christmas break in the next few days, I 

know we will be talking to a lot of people about this. And 

maybe that lone surveyor will be out there telling us that it’s the 

right thing to do. Maybe he’ll come and visit us. I don’t know. 

But I think that the government needs to hang their hat on more 

opinions than one surveyor. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will continue here from the article: 

 

For taxpayers as a whole, there is the temptation of 

recouping some of the . . . investment the previous NDP 

administration poured into ISC. And there is the notion of 

having money for capital projects, although there is 

reason to doubt it will be the $90-to $120-million the 

government is now speculating. But with a mere 

40-per-cent ownership, there will be likely less dividends 

unless a privatized ISC far exceeds financial expectations. 

 

Then there will be added costs of having to administer 

vital statistics through executive government — a cost 

that will have to be subtracted from the profitability of 

this privatization. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can just remember just a few short years 

ago when vital stats went over, left Health and went over to 

ISC. And we had concerns about that because you know, 

traditionally when you have that kind of change, we ask a lot of 

questions because we want to make sure that there are no 

unintended consequences. But nobody saw, nobody saw that in 

a few short years that vital statistics would be rebounding, 

bouncing back to Health. And now we heard about the land 

titles will be coming back to Justice. 

 

All these things . . . And there will be costs. There will be costs. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s critically important that we 

take that into account. And I don’t know if the minister has 

taken that into account because we’ve not heard a lot about it, 

and particularly when this government has gone through a lean 

initiative and has taken on that mission. I don’t know if there is 

a spot within Health where it can fit into in a neat way already, 

if they can just plug in and everything’s ready to go, or will 

there have to be significant infrastructure developed so that it 

can be part of the provincial government yet again? So there are 

questions we have about this. 

 

So people were getting used to the new changes over there and 

were thinking of it as a valuable addition. And in fact, I was 

even thinking about some of the things that ISC could be doing 

that would be of value, you know. Mr. Speaker, as you may 

remember, I’ve raised often questions around photo ID 

[identification] and how SGI is the only place, I believe, that 

you can get photo ID from the government. And I was thinking, 

wouldn’t it be interesting for ISC to do that? But now I think 

that’ll be out of the range. Because we’ve had people come and 

say, listen, I don’t have any connections with SGI. And for 

whatever reason, they may not like SGI for some reason. 

 

But I think that it would be appropriate to have two or three 

points within the government where you could get ID, 

especially now when we’ve seen the changes in election 

processes where you need ID. And I think it’s only fair that 

people have more than one choice within the government range 

of services. And when you have a monopoly like SGI on that 

little thing, and particularly when ISC has all the data, it would 

have made sense. But clearly now that’s out the window 

because it’s going to be for sale and this government seems to 

be heading down that road. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of questions about this, and I’m 

only just partially through this editorial. And I’m not sure if the 

members opposite have had a time. And I appreciate the 

opportunity to read through this, because I want to make sure 

. . . There’s some very good points that are made and, you 

know, I think that’s important that we cover this. I quote: 

 

So, lower dividends, possibly less money from the sale of 

ISC than the government is suggesting and more costs to 

both users and taxpayers? Why would the government 

even bother? 

 

Well, there is considerable logic in the notion that ISC is 

destined to stagnate under its current format. A decade of 

no out-of-province sales would seem to suggest that. 

 

But there is also a significant statement for Premier Brad 

Wall in this first sale of an entire Crown corporation in a 

considerable amount of time. 

 

A quiet, incremental — and most importantly, successful 

— privatization would do wonders to change the narrative 

about the need for the Crown corporations in this 

province. That, in turn, would be a huge victory for the 

conservative philosophy of smaller, less-intrusive 

government over the NDP/left notion favouring 

government delivery of services. 

 

And that’s why I’m thinking, it’s a testing the waters. It’s a 

sticking the toe in the tub to see, can they do this; can they pull 



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

this off; can they go to the electorate, get elected, and then 

surprise people by doing this kind of thing? Clearly they were 

mum, you know. And as I’ve read several times . . . And that’s 

not the only one, you know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a 75-minute debate and we had 

members from all over that side of the House saying all sorts of 

different interpretations of page 44. We’ve heard them say, no, 

it’s only the utility Crowns; no, it’s the only one in the Act; no, 

it’s every one of them. I think every one of those folks have a 

different interpretation of what it means to protect the Crowns. 

And to them, what it means is just getting re-elected so they can 

actually sell the Crowns. That’s what it really means to them. 

 

So, in closing, this is the last paragraph: “Privatizing ISC hardly 

seems worth the fuss and bother. Or it would seem that way if 

you don’t look at it from the perspective of the bigger fight.” 

 

And clearly, Mr. Speaker, when I raise Corner Gas, that’s the 

bigger fight. Now, Mr. Speaker, clearly some members over 

there don’t see the connection between Corner Gas and they 

must really hate that show. I didn’t realize that they had such a 

dislike for it. I actually think it’s kind of an interesting show. 

But that’s the bigger fight. That’s the bigger fight — the change 

of what Saskatchewan landscape is and what it really means in 

this province to solve our own unique challenges when we have 

a growing population. 

 

But we need to be able to provide services in a way that people 

feel confident, and it’s affordable and it’s modern and it’s up to 

date. There’s been . . . I’ve not heard, I’ve not heard any 

complaints about ISC as a service provider and that it needs to 

be done in. In fact, people think of it as a very top-notch, state 

of the art corporation. 

 

And while there were challenges . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I was a 

member of that committee and I remember some of the 

questions from the Sask Party at the time when they were in 

opposition about the value of it. But clearly, clearly it’s come a 

long way. It’s come a long way. And it has really fulfilled its 

niche in the marketplace in solving so many of the needs that 

people have. And I think there is ways for it to do more. But to 

do this kind of thing, Mr. Speaker, is very, very wrong-headed, 

but not surprising, as I said, with this government in terms of 

the way it operates. 

 

So I know many of my friends will want to get into this debate 

and will want to talk about this because it is one that we feel 

very, very strongly about when we see . . . And I think that in 

the column I read by Murray Mandryk from the 20th of 

November, that we are worried about what this really means. 

And is this a Trojan Horse? Is this much more than just one sell, 

one sale? We see it with the sell-off of the lands, the Sask 

Housing lands, the social housing, and under the guise that it 

will refresh the inventory, refresh the inventory. But really, 

clearly, when you’re asking people to move out of their homes 

they’ve lived in, many of them for several, several years in 

strong, safe, vibrant communities and into apartments, I have 

some real concerns. I have real concerns. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, that the whole idea that this government, 

as I said, to me . . . Now I know others will get up and have a 

longer list but, you know, as I’ve said, we’ve had four major 

surprises from this government that they did not campaign on, 

did not campaign on. And people are wondering what else, 

what else is going to happen. And whether it’s the three more 

MLAs they didn’t campaign on, the film employment tax credit 

they didn’t campaign on, the sell-off of the houses, and the 

employment code . . . And now actually, Mr. Speaker, there are 

five — five — and the fifth one is the ISC. And the fifth one is 

ISC. 

 

It’s a pattern. It’s a pattern, and it’s one that’s indicating that 

what they’ve done in the past, and if they can get away with it, 

they’ll continue to do with it. And these clearly have been 

shown. They’re more ideologically driven, ideologically driven 

than driven by common sense. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, with that, I know other members will 

want to get up and speak a bit about this and other bills that are 

before us today, but I’m glad that I was able to get on record my 

thoughts that I will not be supporting this bill, that there will be 

lots of questions on this in committee. And we will be talking to 

lots of people over the months ahead about Bill 69 that now 

joins the infamous ranks of Bills 5, 6, and 80. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I move adjournment of Bill 69, an Act to request 

Information Services Corporation. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 69, The Information Services Corporation 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 71 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 

boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today to speak to Bill No. 71, which is The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012. And in this Act 

there’s a number of amendments to the 1997 Act, the alcohol 

and gaming Act, and it’s part of a comprehensive package that 

the minister introduced in regards to some changes generally to 

the alcohol and gaming regulations as they currently exist. 

 

At first blush, Mr. Speaker, these appear to be some simple, 

administrative-type changes that will, as the minister tried to 

explain, reduce red tape for Saskatchewan businesses. And I 

think in general that’s something that we see this government 

doing a lot. And I guess in some ways it seems appropriate, but 

I do have some concerns about this because there’s always a 

balance, Mr. Speaker. And when you start removing red tape or 

barriers, I think sometimes it’s important to realize that they 

were there for a reason in the first place, and there was a public 

policy purpose for those regulations to be enacted. 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

And sometimes regulations can seem cumbersome, but when 

you’re talking about alcohol and gaming, I think these are areas 

that are very sensitive in our communities and are the source of 

a great deal of addiction issues, Mr. Speaker. So this is not 

something that should be undertaken lightly. 

 

The minister has indicated that, and she certainly in her press 

release listed a whole number of changes that are going to be 

recommended as part of their work to remove red tape for 

businesses. And I think we just need to take a very careful look 

at that. Certainly the survey that she did with people in the 

industry was, as she listed and described who they were, was 

stakeholders in the industry. So permitted restaurants and 

taverns, manufacturers of brew pubs and wineries, festival 

organizers, people who actually apply for permits. It doesn’t 

identify in this case any consultation with representatives of the 

groups she was talking about today, for example, Mr. Speaker, 

like MADD or other organizations that are working to reduce 

alcohol addictions or help people with those addictions. 

 

So I’m not sure why she wouldn’t have consulted with people 

who have concerns and for whom these laws are intended to 

protect. So it’s a bit of a concern that she’s limited it to people 

in the business of selling alcohol, but she did not consult with 

people who are dealing with the results of alcoholism which is a 

terrible problem here in Saskatchewan. We heard about that 

today in question period. 

 

At any rate, some of the changes she’s identified, they’re trying 

to balance the needs of private businesses, modernize the 

regulations with a need to ensure that the sale continues in a 

socially responsible manner, and certainly some of the changes 

that she’s proposing are indeed along those lines. But I think the 

government needs not to be too hasty in dealing with making 

things easier for businesses, especially when it comes to the sale 

of alcohol. So I hope that there’s been a temperate approach to 

this — and I use that term deliberately, Mr. Speaker — and that 

this is a serious issue and needs to be treated very seriously. 

 

So she outlined the number of changes that she will be looking 

at, and I’ll get into those in a minute. At the very end of her 

comments she talked about two changes in the bill that will 

enhance SLGA’s ability to continue to contribute to public 

safety. Again I’m going to speak specifically to those changes. 

I’m not sure they actually hit the mark, and may actually create 

some problems for businesses indeed in interpreting them and 

also in carrying them out. And again it’s not clear to me what 

the public policy change is here that’s trying to be achieved. So 

those are two things I will speak to when I get to the end of the 

Act itself. 

 

[15:15] 

 

For the first change that they’re proposing is an amendment of 

section 2 of the 1997 Act, and basically what this clause is 

attempting to do is to allow catering businesses to be included 

in the definition of a permitted premise. And I think this is 

something that caterers are looking for. It will allow them to 

provide a more full menu, I guess, of their services, so that they 

can actually serve alcohol at events that they’re serving through 

their catering business. So this is . . . Now what it’s going to do 

is accommodating changes to The Alcohol Control Regulations, 

and even though they don’t have an establishment that’s 

permitted, they will be included in the definition of permitted 

premises. So I think that makes a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker, and 

don’t really have any issues with that. 

 

The next change is to section 49(1) in the existing Act, and 

that’s section 4 of the Bill. And what this does is a couple of 

things, and I’ve been through this process a few times myself 

when applying for permits in an outdoor facility. And what 

happens there, Mr. Speaker, currently if you go to the SLGA to 

apply for a permit, they’re going to say, where’s your municipal 

approval for this permit? And so then if you haven’t already, 

didn’t realize you needed that, you need to give them 60 days 

— or sorry, it was a year earlier — but you have to get 

permission from the municipality before you can apply for the 

permit. And so the changes that are being made now, this is 

going to simplify the application process for a new permit by 

removing the requirement that SLGA publish notice in the 

Gazette . . . Oh, sorry, this is a different provision. This is one 

where the SLGA has to publish notice in the Gazette when there 

isn’t a store or permitted premises in a community for more 

than 60 days. 

 

So publishing in the Gazette is a fairly technical and 

administrative process that likely is not of note for the public in 

terms of notice any more. I think it may have lost some of its 

validity. And certainly having the notice provided in 

newspapers, or what the new section does is just refer to the 

notice provisions in section 62 of the Act. And in there, you 

know, I’ll just read section 62 of the existing Act, and it has to 

be published “once each week for two successive weeks in a 

daily or weekly newspaper published: in the municipality . . . 

[itself or] in Saskatchewan and circulating in the municipality” 

because often municipalities may not have their own newspaper 

or weekly paper. 

 

So that’s probably a sufficient way of giving notice for these 

types of changes and this is where a permit is being applied for, 

for premises located where there haven’t been premises for 

some time. Seems fairly administrative. It’s probably not a big 

issue. So that type of thing makes a lot of sense. 

 

The other thing that the amendment does is it takes down the 

limit from one year to 60 days. This is one of those ones I guess 

where you would question what was the original public policy 

for 100 days, or sorry, one year, and why the ministry is 

thinking now two months or 60 days is sufficient. And it would 

just be curious, I think, to go into the history of the original bill 

and find out why somebody thought one year was good. But 

now the powers that be and the policy people have decided that 

two months is adequate. 

 

So I think this would make it easier for permits to be issued in 

the municipalities. I’m not sure how these apply to areas where 

people are concerned about alcohol and perhaps don’t want 

permitted premises in their community. Again this is a 

juxtaposition of these types of business-friendly changes against 

the issues that communities face when it comes to the evils and 

the illness of alcohol when it presents itself as a serious concern 

and disease for some people. 

 

So again we’re not sure from her comments whether she 

actually consulted with people that deal in addictions and with 

alcohol-related issues, but she certainly did consult with the 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

business community. And we would be concerned to know that 

the balance was there in terms of the consultations. So it’s 

easier to get a licence in a community that hasn’t had a licence. 

Whether that’s a good thing from the point of view of people 

working with people with addictions, we’re not sure. We don’t 

see any evidence of that in her consultations. 

 

The next change is section 5, and it’s repealing in whole section 

55 of the existing Act. I don’t have any issue with this change at 

all. All that section said was that the price lists were to be 

posted. Well, I’ll read you the existing section. It says, “Every 

permittee shall post in a prominent place on the permitted 

premises a price list showing all prices for beverage alcohol 

fixed by the authority.” I’m not sure what purpose that would 

have served. Again it would be interesting to know what the 

public policy thinking was in saying you’ve got to print and 

publish the price list. Maybe to make sure that nobody was 

cheating you or shorting your drinks or perhaps overcharging. 

Who knows. But I think now consumers, if they want to know 

what the price is, all they have to do is ask. 

 

And I guess there’s certain prices fixed by the authority for 

which premises must charge, but the explanation here says that 

“Permittees will continue to be required to provide customers 

with the amount of alcohol in a mixed drink.” So they still have 

to give the customers the amount but they no longer have to list 

the prices. So I guess they can charge whatever they want and if 

you’re willing to pay then it’s all good. 

 

The next change is section 6 of the new bill, and that is relating 

to the suitability of premises. So there’s some changes being 

made to existing section 56. And what it’s doing here is that 

currently permit applicants have to give SLGA copies of 

compliance with applicable fire, health, and safety standards. 

And what the amendment is doing is saying no longer will they 

have to provide SLGA with the demonstration of compliance, 

and all they need now, all SLGA is requiring now is a written 

statement that they complied. 

 

And this is one of the examples, Mr. Speaker, where I think 

there might be some concerns from a public policy perspective, 

because what it’s doing is it’s taking SLG [Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming] out of the picture. SLG is no longer 

responsible for ensuring that those fire, health, and safety 

standards are complied with. That solely rests now upon the 

permittee themselves. And yes, the permittee is responsible and 

should have some, I guess, liability to ensure that they are 

following the rules, however for SLG to walk away from that is 

also of concern and I think needs some further examination. 

And we would certainly be looking to folks in the community 

and those that are listening to tell us whether they think that 

SLGA should remove itself from this obligation. 

 

And I think the explanation here, it states that it “will clarify 

that SLGA is not legally liable where the applicant provides 

false information to SLGA respecting compliance with 

applicable fire, health and safety standards.” And certainly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’m not aware of any situations where 

someone can be held liable when someone else gives false 

information. I don’t think SLGA could ever be held liable if 

information has been provided that’s false. 

 

But this goes further than that. It says not only do they not have 

to provide the information anymore, all they have to provide is 

a written statement saying that they’ve complied, which I think 

takes it way further than it perhaps needs to go. And I know 

whenever you’re filling out a form and you’re required to 

submit documents like your passport, you know, you do those 

things and then you know darn well you’ve complied because 

you’ve gone through the process and you don’t get your permit 

or your passport or whatever you’re applying for unless you 

give all the documentation that’s required. 

 

For SLG to say, oh don’t bother sending us your fire and safety 

standard compliance; we don’t need to see that anymore. All we 

need is for you to sign on a piece of paper saying that you’ve 

done it — that’s a big step, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think 

this is kind of opening the door for businesses to, if they’re in a 

hurry, they’re trying to get their doors open, they’re trying to 

get everything done, and they say, oh well we’ll get the fire 

compliance later. We just want to get the licence. And it’s 

opening a door, I think, that perhaps shouldn’t be opened. And 

it’s also, I think, being done for the wrong reason, because 

SLGA likely would not be liable if someone gives them false 

information. How can you be liable when somebody lies to 

you? So that’s another . . . There’s some questions, I think, 

about that proposed change to the Act. 

 

The next one is section 7, and this is dealing with public notice 

of permit applications. And this is only for businesses that . . . 

This is for catering businesses. So now that they’re being 

included in the definition of permitted premises, they obviously 

wouldn’t need to hang up a public notice of their permit 

because they’re operating out of a more private place, and 

they’re taking the food wherever they’re catering. So it 

wouldn’t be necessary for them to demonstrate a public notice 

of their application. They’re only being allowed to serve 

alcohol at catered events. And so there’s no concerns that this 

section 62, the original section 62, would arise out of that. So I 

think that’s something that I don’t have any further comment 

on. It seems to make sense if you’re going to include catering 

businesses in the definition of a permitted premise. 

 

So now we get into some of the more maybe interesting 

changes. Section 75, I think this will be of interest to people 

who golf at least, because those who golf now, what the 

changes being proposed will allow golf courses to serve 

customers alcohol in closed containers for consumption on site. 

And I think on a hot day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s nothing 

worse than a flat beer. So I can see why this change will make a 

lot sense for people that golf. And certainly you want to be able 

to engage in the beverage when you feel like it. And if it’s 

sitting there open for half an hour, it won’t be all that appealing 

any more. So I think that doesn’t change the . . . rock the world 

a whole lot. 

 

And furthermore the section . . . The amendments that are being 

proposed are going to allow customers to request permittees to 

recork beer similarly where customers can now ask to recork 

unfinished bottles of wine. So that’s just . . . Now that we have 

a larger beer market, I think, that has the corking of beer, then 

again those kinds of changes make total sense and I don’t think 

would raise any public policy issues. However I guess we’ll see 

what happens on the golf course once this change is made, and 

if there’s golfers running amok because they have not opened 

their beer containers, I’m sure the government will take note of 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

that, but it’s highly unlikely. 

 

The next change is section 9 that’s being proposed in the bill. 

And I’m just going to flip over the page here. All they’re doing 

is a wee, small change there, and it allows an option being 

created to let consumers bring their own wine to consume with 

the meal. This is something I’ve enjoyed the opportunity to do 

in Quebec actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s something 

that I think allows consumers more choice. The business is still 

allowed to charge a corkage fee, so they get their profit off of it, 

but the people can choose their own wine if they have a special 

beverage that they like to drink. Again I don’t think on a public 

policy level this is a big change, and so this is not something 

that would require a whole lot of review and comment. So 

that’s section, sorry, that’s section 8 of the new bill, 

consumption on premises. 

 

And of course it clarifies that customers cannot remove alcohol 

from the premises unless it was purchased from an off-sale. So 

that’s another clarification and that’s the changes that are 

proposed to section 8. 

 

Section 9, yes that’s the one where wine is allowed to be 

consumed with a meal. Then section 10 is actually a proposed 

new section which also goes along with section 9. It’s a 

complementary section, and that’s the one where they can bring 

their own bottle of wine. And now section 11 is changing 

section 124, again just to accommodate the new section 116.2 

where customers can bring their own bottle of wine into the 

restaurant. 

 

And then we get into section 12, and I think this is one where 

there’s some actually serious policy considerations that need to 

be looked at closely. And this is where no person . . . The 

amendments clarify that permittees and their employees will be 

able to allow an intoxicated individual to remain in the premises 

until a safe ride can be arranged. And there’s standards now that 

are being developed by SLGA to support this amendment. 

 

So we certainly will need to see what those policies that 

SLGA’s developing will look like, but I think the concern here 

from a business perspective is that what happens if there is no 

safe ride? What happens if it’s two in the morning? And is the 

business owner then expected to remain and supervise this 

intoxicated individual until they’re no longer intoxicated? And 

so is it adding an additional burden and liability on the business 

owner to basically babysit an intoxicated individual? Certainly 

we don’t want them sending them out into the rain and snow 

without a proper ride home or that they choose to drive 

themselves home, but this is rife with I think legal danger, no 

matter how you approach this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So currently they’re required to remove the individual. Now 

they’re allowed to let them stay, but what does allow mean? Is 

there a legal obligation to now let them stay? Or if the 

individual insists on leaving even though they’re clearly 

intoxicated, you know, is there further obligations on the part of 

the business owner? 

 

[15:30] 

 

So this is something I think that will probably hit the courts at 

some point because of the uncertainty in the liability of the 

business owner. And I’m not sure this would clarify that, 

although we’ll wait and see what the policies are that SLGA’s 

developing to see if that indeed accomplishes what they’re 

trying to do. 

 

Now the new section, section 13, deals with a new section. Or 

sorry, section 128 of the existing Act is now being amended. 

And the amendments will increase accountability for permittees 

for illegal activity taking place near establishments. This again 

is something I’m not sure if I was a business owner I’d be too 

happy about because illegal activity is a choice of the patrons, 

and requiring the permittee to supervise the activity of the 

permittees is something that I think is going to be very difficult. 

For example, when an illicit drug deal is taking place in a bar, is 

the permittee or the bar owner required to make sure that none 

of these activities take place? And if they don’t stop those 

activities, you know, then what are they supposed to do? Are 

they supposed to call the police? And are they going to be held 

liable if those activities take place? So it’s not clear to me. 

 

What the section’s suggesting is that the permittee has a duty to 

curtail the activity, for example, calling the police. That could 

be something that may put some permittees in danger, and I 

think requiring business owners to be responsible for people 

doing criminal activity in their business would be something as 

a business owner I think I’d be really uncomfortable with. I’m 

not sure. And I’m trying to think of other situations. But for 

example, it’s like saying shoplifting in a store is the 

responsibility of the business owner to stop shoplifting. Well 

certainly I think they’d be motivated to stop it because they’re 

losing their own merchandise. But there’s probably other 

situations. You’re sitting in a park and you’re a pool supervisor 

in a swimming pool or a park worker and you see illegal 

activity going on in a park. Are you going to be held to the 

same standard? 

 

So this seems a bit strange, and I’m not sure that the 

explanation from the minister is one that’s really complete and 

sufficient. What if it happens in the parking lot, for example, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? Obviously calling the police is something 

that is an easy answer for some of these things. But you know, 

if you have a suspicion that something illegal’s going on, do 

you call the police, or do you have to actually know that 

something’s illegal is going on? So this is something I think that 

the minister may have . . . Maybe this section will raise more 

questions than it answers. And I’m not sure what sort of 

liabilities it’s imposing on the business owner, or the permittee 

in this case, that I’m not sure this will be entirely welcome by 

those business owners. 

 

So I think that’s the basic gist of the changes in the bill. I just 

have a few comments about the timing of this bill and certainly 

some of the things we’re hearing in the news these days about 

alcohol. Certainly last week we heard stories about huge 

problems with drinking, for example, in the city of Prince 

Albert. And there’s all kinds of work being done from the 

people working in health and addictions, dealing with the issue, 

but the problem is growing. And what we see is that, although 

we’ve been told by the Minister of Public Safety that there’s 

always room at the inn in terms of corrections, there certainly is 

not room at the inn when it comes to detox centres. And that’s 

the first level for people who are struggling with an alcohol 

addiction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

So we see a government introducing sweeping changes to 

alcohol and gaming regulations, making it easier and reducing 

red tape. But we don’t see really any effort being made by this 

government to ensure that those who suffer from alcoholism 

and addictions are being assisted at all. We heard that the 

number of public intoxication arrests in Prince Albert are going 

up, and the news stories are saying that the city of Prince 

Albert, for example, is losing battle with the bottle. We also 

know that there are other communities that have similar 

problems. 

 

And you know, it’s just a shame that these laws and these 

changes had to be introduced the same day in this legislature 

that some young people came and made a presentation to 

members about their concerns with alcohol abuse in their age 

category. And really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the timing was quite 

inappropriate. And it was something that I think this 

government was so anxious to defer media attention on their 

changes to ISC that they decided, oh well, let’s just introduce 

some new liquor changes then. And it was very insensitive I 

think, Mr. Speaker, to those young individuals who came and 

made a heartfelt presentation about problems with alcohol in 

their age group. And this is also coming from a party who’s 

decided that maybe the drinking age should be lowered. 

 

So we see all that, and then we juxtapose that with stories in 

today’s news about the number of deaths related, on the 

highways, to drinking and driving. There’s a disconnect here, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that this government is, you know, 

being driven by forces that don’t take into account the true 

social picture of what’s going on with alcohol in this province. 

And it’s unfortunate that that’s had to happen and that we’re 

seeing all these stories come out where, you know, the number 

of deaths on the highways, for example. 

 

Why is that happening in 2012? I mean I remember when I was 

young, and that was a common occurrence. And every year 

around graduation parties in my area of the province, there’d be 

a fatal accident of some young people. And I thought that was 

going down, and now what we hear in the news is that it’s back 

up. Alcohol and youth and alcohol and people with additions, 

there’s still serious, serious problems. 

 

So what really should be done is more of a focus, I think at least 

some focus, on ensuring the people have access to the resources 

they need to get themselves well. And if that is a detox centre as 

a first line of defence, absolutely let’s make sure that’s 

available. If it’s tougher penalties for drinking and driving . . . 

And that’s not just for the people that are, you know, having 

problems with alcohol. That’s for safety of the public and 

families that are driving on the roads. There’s all kinds of areas 

here I think where this government is sort of missing the mark. 

 

And yes, it’s fine to rejuvenate or modernize the way alcohol is 

being consumed in our province, but I think there’s a 

corresponding responsibility for this government to ensure that 

those with need, those with addictions and illness related to 

alcohol, families that are suffering are taken care of and also 

have access to the services that they need so that it reflects the 

balance that’s required. This seems to be quite imbalanced, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And we’ll look to this government for more leadership in that 

area because we certainly don’t see it right now, especially 

when they’re making more money and especially when they’re 

privatizing liquor and gaming outlets as well — in particular, 

liquor stores. We’re losing the profits that would go to help 

people with detox programs. And it’s just another sort of 

sell-off to people rather than ensuring that our government has 

the revenues it needs to ensure that people with illnesses and 

sicknesses related to alcohol and other additions are being 

helped in I think what should be a compassionate society. 

 

At any rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank you for your attention. 

And at this point, I think that’s the extent of my comments on 

this bill. So at this point I would like to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 71 which is An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act, 1997. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 71, The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 72 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 72 — The Traffic 

Safety Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 

the debate on Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 

2012. The minister gave second reading a few days ago here, 

and I’d just like to talk a little bit about what this bill proposes 

to do and what it’s coming out of, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This summer there was a horrible, awful, tragic death. Ashley 

Dawn Richards was a young flag person who lost her life in a 

construction zone due to speeding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this 

government has chosen to implement a suite of changes to 

ensure to try to address speeding in orange zones. 

 

And it’s not just under The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The minister outlined that: 

 

. . . the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure made 

changes that will see rumble strips being used in 

prioritized work zones, and gates that narrow the 

approach to work zones being installed. [And also] These 

measures are intended to ensure motorists are aware they 

are nearing a work zone and to help slow traffic to 60 

kilometres per hour in work zones when highway workers 

are present. 

 

[As well the minister had outlined that] . . . SGI worked 

with the Ministry of Justice to increase the fines for 

speeding when passing a highway worker to triple the 

base fine for speeding. These increases make 

Saskatchewan’s fines for speeding in construction zones 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

among the highest in the country and will be [the minister 

says] a deterrent to motorists speeding in areas where 

highway workers are present. 

 

So that’s been a part of the suite of measures to ensure people 

are not speeding in construction zones and putting people’s 

lives at risk. 

 

But with this particular bill, Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, it has a couple of pieces that I would like to 

talk about. One of the things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister 

outlined is that this bill “. . . will allow for the use of photo 

radar, only in work zones where highway workers are present, 

to charge drivers exceeding 60 kilometres per hour when 

passing a highway worker.” So that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 

good thing. 

 

Again an awful . . . I can’t even imagine for Ashley Dawn 

Richards’s family how very tragic it was lose their daughter, 

their sister, their fiancé. It was not a very good thing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But the one thing actually, interestingly enough in question 

period today, we were talking about highway deaths, not just in 

orange zones. But this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so far, and it’s 

not even the end of November yet, 146 deaths on our highways 

here in Saskatchewan, and that’s still with another month 

remaining in our calendar year. And according to the RCMP, 

that is actually some of the highest numbers we’ve seen in 

recent history, and the RCMP are concerned that still with 

another month left that we are going to be at record highway 

deaths. 

 

And I’d just like to outline what RCMP had said today here. 

Mr. MacRae, or the RCMP officer had said: 

 

“Drinking and driving is the main thing we need to work 

on. Couple that with seat-belt use and intersection 

infractions, those are the big three. Those are the areas 

that we need to focus,” said MacRae. 

 

But he said, “Drinking and driving is the main thing we need to 

work on.” 

 

One hundred and forty-six deaths on our highways so far this 

year, many of them connected to impaired driving, is not 

acceptable. And we in the opposition appreciate the work that 

the government has done in making orange zones safer and 

believe that that’s absolutely imperative. And we’ve been 

supportive of those changes. But when we look at the 

province-wide numbers — 146 people who have families, 

mothers, fathers, sisters, brothers, friends —146 people have 

lost their life this year. This is, I think, worthy of addressing, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I don’t want to be prescriptive and say exactly what we 

need to be doing, but clearly the suasion campaigns — and I’m 

a big believer in suasion as one of the tools in your public 

policy tool kit — but suasion hasn’t been doing what it needs to 

do. I know SGI and Liquor and Gaming do ads. I know the 

minister today talked about RID which has been a very good 

program. Actually my colleague from Massey Place and I, just 

last year when we were on the road, on the highway coming 

back from Melfort to Saskatoon, had to use the RID program 

and believe it’s a very important thing. But clearly when we’ve 

had 146 fatalities on our highways this year, there is more to be 

done. 

 

And you know other, Mr. Deputy Speaker, other provinces have 

looked at issues in their own jurisdictions and how they can step 

up to the plate to try to address impaired driving. And again I 

don’t want to be prescriptive, but I would like the minister and 

the Premier to take this issue seriously, more seriously than they 

have, and work with law enforcement officers and others who 

can maybe come up with a suite of options to address impaired 

driving on our highways. 

 

I know that again they’ve come up with hopefully an effective 

set to deal with speeding in orange zones, but let’s see what we 

can do around impaired driving. I know, I believe in both BC 

[British Columbia] and Alberta, one of the things . . . Again I 

don’t want to be prescriptive, but I’d just like to put on the 

record one of the things that BC and Alberta are doing for their 

new drivers is that you’re not allowed to have any alcohol in 

your blood before you receive . . . You can’t even have had one 

drink. You can have no alcohol in your blood. If you have any 

alcohol in your system, you will receive an automatic 

suspension. 

 

[15:45] 

 

That is different than here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So I think about that 17-year-old who maybe snuck a 

six-pack from mom and dad’s fridge or got the key to the liquor 

cabinet and took it to the party and hit the road. And even if 

they just had one or two drinks, depending on their size, their 

weight, their body’s ability to metabolize alcohol, even one or 

two drinks could put them over that, could put them in the range 

of impairment. And a 17-year-old, first of all, shouldn’t be 

drinking at all, but the reality is that is happening. 

 

So I think that looking at Alberta and BC who have said, zero 

tolerance and no alcohol for new drivers is something that we 

could look at. Again I don’t want to be prescriptive, but let’s 

look at best practices. And we do have some good things here in 

the province. There’s no doubt about it. 

 

But let’s look at what other jurisdictions are doing and thinking 

about how they could enhance the work that we do here in 

Saskatchewan to reduce that number of fatalities. One hundred 

forty-six people have died so far on our highways this year, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Families who are impacted by that, it is 

absolutely devastating. I’m the mother of young kids and one of 

them actually is getting pretty close to being the age of driving. 

She’ll be 15 this spring, and she will be getting her learner’s 

licence. And I’m actually dreading that a little bit, but we all 

have to come into our own at some point in time. And even now 

she drives with her cousin, who is 18 years old and is a very 

responsible, great kid. But I worry about them. Mothers worry 

all the time. 

 

But I worry when my niece picks up my daughter from dancing 

— she likes to help me out — and they’ll go to Tim Hortons at 

11 o’clock at night sometimes just to go have an iced capp and 

visit. That’ll be on a Friday night. This is their social night 

sometimes together. My older niece, who has her driver’s 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

licence, and her sister and then my daughter like to spend time 

together. And they drive at times where people perhaps are 

drinking more than they should, and people sometimes don’t 

use the best judgment and get behind the wheel of their car. 

 

So I worry about my daughter, who’s awesome and has good 

judgment. And I hope she continues to have good judgment. 

And her cousin is wonderful, but unfortunately you can’t 

always count on everybody else having such good judgment. So 

I believe that there should, and we here in the opposition think 

that the government should be looking seriously at how to 

tighten and enhance the prevention, well, tighten some of the 

rules and enhance prevention of impaired driving. 

 

Like I said, I worry about my daughter. And it’s not my 

daughter that I’m worried about and her judgment, but I do 

worry about many other people’s judgment. And they just 

happen to be out at times where people do things that they 

shouldn’t do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So again, this isn’t about being prescriptive and about the 

opposition saying, you should be doing exactly this. But what 

you do when you create good public policy, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you talk to people who are on the front lines. First of 

all, the RCMP or any police service, what do they think would 

work well to prevent, to lower rates of impaired driving and 

change the culture in some respects? And I think it’s changed 

over the years, but I think we still have much work to do in that 

regard. So let’s talk to the people on the front lines, and then 

let’s look across Canada and see where we are. 

 

We are doing better in some regards and with respect to some 

of the policies that we have in place, but we are not leading in 

other areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think we need to 

examine those and think about those. I think 146 deaths on our 

highways — on our highways this year alone, and it’s not even 

the end of December — is absolutely, completely, 

unacceptable. And again, as we’ve commended the government 

on the work that they’ve done around the orange zones, I think 

that I would encourage them to take some leadership in this 

regard when it comes to impaired driving. 

 

The devastation . . . I had a friend actually in high school who I 

lost due to a drunk driving accident actually, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Kids, young people who were driving, doing 

something — speeding, drinking, all the things that you should 

not do when you’re behind the wheel of tons of metal. And I 

believe that there are many more things that we should be 

looking at to strengthen our impaired driving laws and prevent. 

The best things you can do . . . This isn’t just about 

enforcement, although enforcement might be one of the tools, 

but there’s no silver bullet in a policy package, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

There are many things that we need to look at around suasion. 

And the minister talked a lot about suasion, which is all the ads 

that we have on, whether they’re on the Internet or TV. And 

that’s one part of a tool kit, one part of the tool kit. And there is 

the RID, report impaired driving. 

 

And as I said, my colleague from Massey Place and I had the 

opportunity, the unfortunate opportunity to use that program to 

call the RCMP. I mean it was unfortunate that we had to report 

a drunk driver, but not unfortunate that the program exists. And 

it was on the highway. We were coming back from Melfort, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and it was scary. We were trying to keep track 

of this driver going highway speeds in front of us, who clearly 

was impaired in some fashion, not quite sure how or why — 

was it health, was it alcohol, was it other drugs? But we were 

all, there were three of us in the car and we were all very 

nervous about getting too close to the driver, but trying to keep 

the driver in our sight so we could better help the RCMP in 

finding this individual. So we had to stay on this very much 

closer than we would have liked to stay. So the RID is a great 

program and we wouldn’t diminish it all. 

 

But public policy, there is no silver bullet, no matter what the 

issue or the problem is. It is about a suite of options, many 

different ways of addressing a concern. And the government 

has done this around orange zones: the rumble strips, the photo 

radar, increasing the base fines. Those are all good things and 

the government needed to do that. But again I can’t highlight 

this enough —146 deaths, which the RCMP has attributed 

many of them to impaired driving. And it says that’s the 

number one thing that we have to deal with. And they’ve 

highlighted other things as well, but have said if we can address 

impaired driving, that number should come down. 

 

And you know, I know the minister in her scrum talked about, 

oh we’ve got an increased population and increased accidents. 

That is not acceptable. We need to build a culture of absolute 

. . . People should not be driving impaired, and we need to 

ensure that we have the proper mechanisms in place. When 

your population grows, you need to ensure that people maybe 

who come from other places where maybe drinking and driving 

is more tolerated, that when people come to Saskatchewan this 

is a place that we are not willing to have people put others at 

risk. Families and the devastation to communities where you’ve 

lost someone in your life to drinking and driving, you know the 

devastating effect that that has, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with respect to bill no . . . I’ve forgotten which bill no. . . . 

Bill No. 72, Mr. Deputy Speaker — they all kind of blend 

together after a while — but this is An Act to Amend the Traffic 

Safety Act which will . . . One of the pieces is around photo 

radar. But I appreciate and commend the government for doing 

this, but I think we need to apply the strategy around fatalities 

on our highways to also address impaired driving, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So with that I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 73 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to have the opportunity to enter debate on Bill No. 73, 

An Act to amend The Municipalities Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a fairly lengthy amendment to the Act. A 

number of different components are addressed. The Act itself is 

substantial, as one might expect when dealing with something 

as important and far-reaching as the municipalities and how the 

rules are structured for their smooth operation. 

 

So the amendment that’s been put forward today, Mr. Speaker, 

as the minister outlined in his second reading speech, touches 

on a number of areas: some fairly substantial, some a bit more 

minor, and some of an administrative or a housekeeping nature, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

First off, it’s of course when we’re dealing with municipalities, 

it’s important to get the legislation right. We can think of the 

different orders of government: federal, provincial, and 

municipal. And I know from my own experience when out door 

knocking, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure members on both sides of 

the House have had similar experiences, to the average 

constituent on the doorstep, often they don’t differentiate 

between what is a municipal or a provincial or a federal 

responsibility. And sometimes the issues that come forward as a 

provincial politician or to a provincial politician really are more 

about services or concerns at the municipal level, and then 

sometimes also at the federal level. 

 

So we know that, you know, based on my own experience and 

I’m sure the experience of many members, we know that 

municipalities certainly matter because it’s through 

municipalities that people often have their most obvious points 

of contact with an order of government. And it’s often the 

things which may seem minor that actually affect people in a 

major way and can also irritate people in a major way when 

they don’t go quite right. And so when you think of whether it’s 

minor things like garbage collection or recycling programs or 

how often a road is plowed, these are the issues that are often 

top of mind because they’re the things that people think about 

on a daily basis or on a weekly basis as they go about living 

their busy lives. 

 

So we know that when we address anything at the municipal 

level, it’s most certainly important to keep that in mind, that 

we’re not talking about some abstract order of government that 

doesn’t matter — not that any order of government is that way. 

I would say any level of government where there are elected 

people who are chosen by their neighbours is most certainly a 

very, very important order of government. 

 

But it’s important to remember the things that we do, the 

changes that we make affect people in a very real way, in a way 

that is felt in their everyday lives. And we should always strive 

to ensure that the legislative framework that we put in place for 

municipalities to act is one that serves their bests interests and 

serves the interests of that order of government and serves the 

interests of our constituents, because there is only one 

constituent. Whether the perspective is municipal, provincial, or 

federal or the school board level, we know that these are 

Saskatchewan people and their concerns are very important. 

 

So as the minister outlined not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, in his 

second reading speech — it was just on the 27th which does 

happen to be yesterday, Mr. Speaker — he outlined the changes 

that this amendment is proposing to make. And so I’d like to 

walk through some of these different steps in order to ensure 

that we have a decent understanding of what is happening in 

this piece of legislation. 

 

First off, Mr. Speaker, as the minister identified in his speech 

and having had the chance to go through some of the different 

amendments, we know how important it is, Mr. Speaker, to 

have a second reading speech that is clearly articulated . . . Well 

a second reading speech that clearly articulates the proposed 

amendments in order to flesh out some of the ideas that are put 

forward in the legislation. I know for many individuals it is a 

very useful tool to have the second reading speech to help 

decipher or interpret what each of the changes mean in different 

aspects of the proposed piece of amendment legislation. 

 

So first off, Mr. Speaker, as the minister suggested, his proposal 

in this legislation is he believes that it will improve processes 

related to the boundary alterations or annexations for the 

municipalities involved in the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

and to support government’s growth strategy. So a bit of 

politics mixed in there with the stated intention, and that’s fine. 

This is the legislature, so politics I suppose should be here. But, 

Mr. Speaker, that was the first objective identified in these 

amendments. 

 

The second is the minister highlighting that “. . . they respond to 

specific requests from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities and the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association.” So we know, Mr. Speaker, for the rural 

municipalities that are organized through SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and the 

urban ones through SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] as we commonly call them, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s important to highlight the role that these 

organizations play in providing information to the provincial 

government with respect to what are the concerns of an area and 

what processes should be in place in order to ensure the better 

operation, a smoother operation of events at the municipal level. 

So it’s important, Mr. Speaker. I do fully support obviously the 

work of SARM and SUMA in providing that information to 

government, and that’s the kind of discussions that we should 

have. When either through SUMA or SARM ideas are brought 

forward, it’s appropriate for the provincial government to listen 

closely to what those ideas are, and it’s essential that there be a 

productive and a co-operative relationship between the 

organizations and government. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The third component that the minister identifies is “. . . they 

support the intent of agreements such as the New West 

Partnership Agreement and the Agreement on Internal Trade in 

areas such as business licensing and municipal procurement.” 

This is the idea, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of the provincial 

government entering into agreements with other provinces as 

identified through the New West Partnership, which of course 

would encompass the Western provinces, and also the 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

Agreement on Internal Trade, Mr. Speaker, these were steps 

taken — we’ve had discussions on the floor of the Assembly 

about these steps — that in a general sense are aimed at 

providing more consistency in regulations across jurisdictions 

in order to support the actions of governments and to ensure 

that organizations, whether businesses or other types, 

non-profits, whatever the case may be, Mr. Speaker, have a 

more common set of rules across jurisdictions. 

 

As with anything, there are pros and cons to an argument, and 

in discussing any piece of legislation that changes the rules at 

the local level, there is a balanced approach that is required. 

And we know that while co-operation and coordination is most 

certainly important, it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, in certain 

circumstances, to maintain local priorities as local leaders and 

local communities identify them. So that’s the balancing that 

needs to occur in order to ensure that steps take place that do 

improve the actual process and at the same time don’t erode the 

well-being of local communities. 

 

But anyway the amendments that are being proposed in this 

piece of legislation speak to that aspect with respect to . . . 

Because there have been agreements that have been entered into 

by the provincial government, there are implications at the 

municipal level. 

 

And the final area, Mr. Speaker, is that the proposed 

amendments in this piece of legislation address: 

 

. . . they address other requests from across the municipal 

sector to clarify wording and improve consistency among 

the municipal Acts regarding primarily administrative 

matters and make other changes identified by the ministry 

to clarify areas such as education property tax reporting, 

licence fees, and purchasing policies. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the notion that across the different aspects of 

legislation that affect municipalities that there ought to be 

consistency in the types of language used and the expressions 

and the intent with different aspects as it relates to tax reporting, 

licensing fees, and purchasing policies. So increased 

consistency so that elected bodies at the municipal level, 

whether at the RM [rural municipality] level or in different 

parts of the province, Mr. Speaker, have a similar vocabulary 

and understanding of concepts, I would imagine is what the 

suggestion is coming at. 

 

And when there is . . . Earlier on in my remarks, I talked about 

the housekeeping nature of legislation as well. And it is 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker, from time to time as issues come up 

and as the hard-working people within the ministries review 

legislation and identify inconsistencies or as feedback is 

received from the municipal level with respect to legislation, 

that there be an opportunity to look at the different Acts and see 

how well they complement one another and what sort of 

consistency there is with the language and the terms. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, if it is of, as the minister suggests, as I 

would read in his second reading remarks, that it is of an 

administrative nature and mostly about consistency, at face 

value, Mr. Speaker, that would seem reasonable because it is 

appropriate. Any piece of legislation evolves over time and 

there are changes that occur. And over the years and sometimes 

over the decades, Mr. Speaker, there can be inconsistencies 

which need to be corrected. And that is fine in most 

circumstances, the catch being, Mr. Speaker, is if there is a 

circumstance where there is an issue that goes beyond an 

administrative change or a language change. That can be an 

issue if it goes deeper and we’re not properly looking at the 

issue at hand. So we can look at a few of the different 

components. 

 

So to recap, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is outlining changes in 

four broad areas that affect municipalities. One has to do with 

annexations and how that works. The second has to do with 

feedback that’s been received from SARM and SUMA, that’s 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. The third 

area, Mr. Speaker, has to do with changes that are required in 

the legislation because of the New West Partnership and the 

Agreement on Internal Trade, implications at the municipal 

level, and therefore the legislation must be amended in order to 

reflect the changes that the province has signed on to. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the last area is efforts made within 

these amendments to provide a higher level of consistency with 

respect to different Acts that affect municipalities, whether that 

be in the North or the South or in rural or urban settings. 

 

So the first area, Mr. Speaker, that was identified, the issue of 

annexations, we know this is an issue that affects many people 

and affects a number of communities. And as populations shift 

within the province, Mr. Speaker, people moving from one area 

to another and from people wanting to come to Saskatchewan, 

which of course is a positive thing, Mr. Speaker, there are a 

number of jurisdictions that are experiencing growth. And I can 

think of, well Saskatoon is one example, and my home 

constituency is another one, where there are new subdivisions 

on the edge of town. 

 

Now we most certainly need to ensure that when we’re doing 

our urban planning and the strategies that we have as regions, 

we need to ensure that we’re growing in a sensible manner that 

allows for sustainable communities in an economic and in an 

environmental sense. But we know this is occurring, and most 

members would have communities where they see growth, and 

there is the reality that certain communities are expanding. And 

therefore that affects relationships with neighbouring 

jurisdictions, and that raises the issue of occasions when one 

centre needs to annex another area in order to accommodate 

boundaries that are expanding. 

 

So what this piece of legislation is doing, Mr. Speaker, is 

providing some more clarity and a new time limit on how long 

one municipality must wait for a response to a proposed 

annexation application from the other affected municipality 

before the process is considered disputed and can proceed to the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board. So the idea is, while there may 

be an annexation application or notice that is given, if one of the 

parties, the party that has a territory being annexed is not 

supportive of the change, I imagine — it’d be interesting to 

know from the minister if this is coming out of a specific 

situation within the province and a certain jurisdiction — but I 

could imagine a situation where, if one party was not happy 

with what was occurring, that an unwillingness to respond in a 

timely manner could be one way that the process could be 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

drawn out a bit in order to prevent the annexation to occur. So 

what this is doing is allowing a different time limit before it 

goes to another body which would provide a ruling on the 

proposed annexation. 

 

It also, Mr. Speaker, in this change, is providing clear authority 

for the approval of a portion or parts of an application by the 

board, for example, the portions on which agreement has been 

reached among the councils; making the ban on similar 

applications going to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

consistent among the three municipal Acts at one year. So a 

consistency between different pieces of legislation which, as I 

said earlier, in most circumstances would make sense. I think it 

is, Mr. Speaker, if we have a new time limit. 

 

The minister remarked in the different sections that there had 

been consultation with SUMA and SARM. And I recognize that 

this particular issue of annexation could affect both parties, both 

organizations — members of SUMA and SARM. So this 

change is not identified as one coming out of the discussions 

from SUMA and SARM, but I’m sure RMs and urban 

municipalities have had a discussion about this and providing 

information. So it would be useful — and perhaps this is 

something that can be cleared up in committee as well — to 

hear views from the two organizations and any other interested 

parties as to whether or not the new proposed time limit is 

appropriate, whether it clears things up, and whether it will 

serve the needs of both sides in a fair manner as they would 

perceive it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I guess the changes that I’ve talked about and some of the 

adjustments that are occurring here, it really does speak to, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that when we look at how our municipalities 

operate and how they relate to one another, we need to ensure 

that we have the best system possible that allows for positive 

outcomes for citizens because, at the end of the day — whether 

we’re at the federal, provincial, or municipal or school board 

level — the work that we do is about the constituent. So we 

need to ensure that the changes that are being proposed do in 

fact give us the best possible system for interested parties, a 

system that maintains separate interests — recognizing that 

there are separate concerns — but a system that ensures that 

both sides can operate in a manner that is effective and that is 

fair. 

 

So the first area that I just talked about, Mr. Speaker, had to do 

with annexations and the relationship between municipalities 

and how that can be settled through an RM board. So, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a number of concerns here. That was the first 

area. 

 

The second area which I will now speak about, Mr. Speaker, 

has to do with requests, as I identified, coming from SARM and 

SUMA. And it has to . . . Again, it touches on this issue of how 

municipalities can meet the needs of their constituents, with the 

reality that there are changes occurring within municipalities 

that affect the ability of municipalities to deliver services or the 

types of services that are required do in fact change as different 

individuals move into areas. And the one example that’s given 

here, Mr. Speaker, the quote from the minister’s speech says: 

 

Many rural municipalities are seeing the development of 

areas that require more urban-type services which are 

different from the typical agricultural areas. Residential 

developments are more common now throughout RMs, as 

people wish to relocate to an acreage or a pocket of 

developed lots. Presently the ratepayers throughout the 

RM may be paying for services in these residential 

developments that most of the RM ratepayers do not 

access or require. 

 

This is the issue, Mr. Speaker, where . . . For most members and 

people in Saskatchewan as they travel the province will see 

these developments pop up within RMs which provide acreage 

lots, development opportunities for RMs, which does increase 

the tax base, but also provide different challenges for these 

RMs. And it’s the notion of who’s paying for what, who needs 

what, and how that occurs in the most effective manner. I know 

most members, I mean the most common . . . I drive a lot of 

Saskatchewan roads but the most common route that I drive is 

between my home and Regina on Highway 11. And we can see 

a number of instances, especially between Saskatoon going up 

to Blackstrap, where there have been these types of 

developments which puts pressures on the local areas. 

 

And I remember, it was a few years ago, having a meeting with 

the RM of Corman Park talking about how this has affected the 

RM. And I won’t get into a discussion on Corman Park in this 

speech, Mr. Speaker, as that’s perhaps a longer speech. But we 

know that it provides, as we have these types of communities 

popping up, we know that it provides challenges for both sides. 

So it’s important to have the right type of legislation in place so 

that communities can grow in a way that is responsible and that 

meets the interests of all people. That’s important. 

 

So that was a request, Mr. Speaker, this aspect of clearing up 

legislation in that area and providing more detail, came from 

SARM. SUMA also had a requirement, Mr. Speaker, which as 

the minister suggested and which was proposed in the 

amendment, had to do with greater flexibility to address issues 

related to municipal debt limits. Specifically, Mr. Speaker, “. . . 

amendments are proposed to ensure authority to define 

own-source revenues and regulation for municipal debt limit 

purposes and establish alternate procedures for determining a 

municipality’s debt limit.” 

 

[16:15] 

 

So the notion that we know that municipalities are required to 

provide a great deal of services to people — and there are 

varying degrees of ability that municipalities have to provide 

those services, and there are many municipalities that borrow 

resources or finances in order to provide services — and this 

deals with how a municipality would establish a debt limit and 

more autonomy as I understand it, at the local level, to control 

that as opposed to being controlled to a higher degree by the 

province. 

 

It’s important, Mr. Speaker, to be responsive to the local level 

and ensure that municipalities have the ability to make rules as 

they see fit. And it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, from a 

provincial perspective, to ensure that the proper framework is in 

place, that the debt limits with the municipalities are being set 

in an appropriate level that is safe and responsible, yet still 

allowing the flexibility that the municipality may need to 

provide services. 



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

Debt limits are important aspects. We can think to a similar 

situation, though not within the realm of municipalities, another 

situation that affects an autonomous group and that would be 

the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where they have 

established a debt limit as determined by our best practices in 

universities of its class across the country based on its assets, its 

liabilities. And in so doing, finding that level of debt that the 

university can safely assume. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, by recent comments from the 

university administration — I shouldn’t say comments — 

recent words printed in public documents from the University 

of Saskatchewan that the borrowing capacity of the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] is maxed out. And that ties to a 

larger discussion, Mr. Speaker, about funding that was 

promised and no longer provided to the university. 

 

I raise that issue, Mr. Speaker, because we do need to be 

cognizant of the fact that funding municipalities is important, 

and it’s also important to ensure that appropriate funds are in 

place for municipalities to do their work — not that there 

shouldn’t be debt involved in certain projects, but that it’s at a 

level that is safe and responsible and well thought through. 

 

So I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that these changes that are 

proposed here would accomplish that end in order to provide 

the necessary autonomy to municipalities, yet still maintaining 

the proper framework and the proper controls in place in order 

to ensure that wise and responsible decisions are made for the 

interests of constituents, of taxpayers, of ratepayers, of people 

living in our cities, towns, and rural communities. 

 

Another component, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation 

speaks to, and I already addressed this to some degree, had to 

do with implications stemming from provincial adoption of the 

New West Partnership and agreement on internal trade. As the 

minister stated in his remarks, “. . . the next category of 

amendments includes enabling municipalities to establish and 

enter into the voluntary intermunicipal business licensing 

arrangements and the common issuance of weight vehicle 

permits with other municipalities.” 

 

So the key word here, Mr. Speaker, as I see it in the minister’s 

description, is the voluntary intermunicipal business licensing 

arrangements, so again, recognizing the need to coordinate 

when possible but also not to erode local autonomy to a degree 

that local self interests are eroded. I think that is an important 

point. And so it is my desire and I look forward to more 

discussions perhaps in committee about how that balance is in 

fact being achieved, some more detail on that, the nature of the 

voluntary intermunicipal business licensing arrangements. 

 

There’s also on this aspect, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

New West Partnership, the issue of overweight permits. And 

that’s not new health jargon, Mr. Speaker. That has to do with 

issues affecting municipalities and it is, Mr. Speaker, as the 

minister said, “Amendments related to overweight permits 

clarify the ability for municipalities to voluntarily develop a 

system that allows for the common issuance of overweight 

permits.” And this of course, Mr. Speaker, has to do with 

components of transportation and with respect to the 

effectiveness and the rules that are in place in order to ensure 

the responsible use of our roadways, as I understand it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The last component has to do with the administrative matters 

that were discussed and earlier mentioned in my remarks, the 

fact that there needs to be consistency among the pieces of 

legislation that affect different municipalities. The minister 

stated in his speech that: 

 

These were initially requested by the cities as proposed 

amendments to The Cities Act. To ensure consistency 

among the municipal Acts, these amendments are also 

included in this bill and also The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

So it’s the notion, as I said before, that across the pieces of 

legislation that affect municipalities, there ought to be a degree 

of consistency. That’s important because then it allows 

municipalities to compare their situation to another and ensure 

that they’re comparing apples to apples. And then I think it 

allows the public, if they have a question about a policy, it 

allows them to have a greater degree of clarity about what the 

different Acts are talking about and how this might have an 

implication at the local level. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important that we have the 

proper approach to language, the proper approach to 

administrative components. And so if this legislation is in fact 

simply accomplishing that and not doing something more 

extensive, I think that that is, as based on my understanding 

from what the minister has said and my basic understanding of 

the bill, Mr. Speaker, I think that is something that would make 

sense. 

 

So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 

municipalities we know that it touches on a lot of areas. It 

touches on a lot of areas, Mr. Speaker, because it affects 

people’s lives in a significant way. And as government has 

grown and changed over the decades sometimes the complexity 

of the issues that we face also grow and change and evolve. 

And that certainly applies to the many things that we encounter 

here at the provincial level if we look at the growth of budgets 

over the last . . . from the initial budget of the province to the 

budget now. We know that government does many important 

things and affects people’s lives in many important ways. 

Therefore when we’re looking at legislation, it’s necessary to 

ensure that the legislation that we’re putting forward speaks to 

the complexity and the modern realities that municipalities face. 

 

And in this situation, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a number of 

components. We’ve talked about . . . The first component that 

we spoke about at length, that I spoke about at length based on 

changes brought forward by the minister has to do with how 

municipalities interact with one another when there is a desire 

and an intent for annexation to take over an area from one 

municipality to another. And so it is, Mr. Speaker, important 

and necessary to clarify that process in order to ensure that there 

is fairness, but at the same time in order to ensure that there is 

expediency in a timely manner, that things aren’t drawn out 

longer than they need to be. But at the same time we have to 

ensure that things don’t happen so quickly that due process is 

not followed and that in situations, which is often the case 

where there are legitimate concerns and question marks, we 

need to ensure that those issues are addressed in a satisfactory 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

manner. So it’s important to strike the right balance. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, through SARM and SUMA where we’ve 

seen changes and . . . I shouldn’t say changes. When we’ve seen 

recommendations coming from these two organizations. They 

are the umbrella organizations for rural municipalities and 

urban municipalities, and it’s important to have a respectful and 

positive relationship with those groups so that the information 

we receive at a provincial level is in fact consistent with what 

Saskatchewan people want. And so that is an important 

relationship, and when information is received from those 

organizations it’s necessary that there be . . . It’s necessary that 

it is heeded. 

 

That being said, it’s not outside the realm of possibility that 

conflicting information may come from the organizations, and 

of course on any issue there are two sides of the coin. So it’s 

necessary to ensure that we don’t blindly accept requests 

coming from either organization but that we approach those 

requests in a thoughtful and a deliberative manner. 

 

We also know, Mr. Speaker, as provincially we’ve entered into 

different arrangements to do with the New West Partnership 

and the Agreement on Internal Trade, which is a broader 

discussion and perhaps a topic for another speech. But as I said 

earlier on, it’s important to take a balanced approach as well to 

this issue recognizing that efficiency and streamlining is good, 

but also recognizing that there are unique local needs in many 

circumstances. And each order of government is important, and 

so when concerns or views are expressed from one order of 

government, it’s necessary to ensure that we’re responding and 

recognizing the points that they raise. 

 

The last component that I’ll speak about, Mr. Speaker, in 

wrapping up now, is the issue of administrative matters and 

consistency in language across Acts. This is important. This is a 

good step because it provides the public with a better 

understanding of the pieces of legislation if the same 

terminology is used. If there’s consistency in that aspect, then it 

provides greater clarity for members of the public and members 

of the Assembly as well. And I think that is a positive and a 

constructive thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, municipalities are very important. The Act 

itself is lengthy. The amendments are also substantive, so I have 

appreciated the opportunity to talk about the different 

components at some length. And we look forward to more 

discussions that my colleagues will have through adjourned 

debates, as well as the opportunity that we will have at the 

committee process to unpack the items further. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would thank members for their 

attention. And on that issue at this time I would move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 73, An Act to amend The 

Municipalities Act. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 73. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 74 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 74 — The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate and discussion this afternoon as it 

relates to municipalities in our province, specifically this 

afternoon, the cities of our province by way of Bill No. 74, The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2012. And I will get into focusing a little 

bit on some of the minister’s comments, some of the 

justification for this bill, some of the alleged consultation that’s 

been put forward, and some broader areas of questions and 

concern for municipalities right across Saskatchewan. 

 

Municipalities right now in fact are dealing with some very 

critical issues across our province, whether it’s waste water or 

whether it’s transportation issues, whether it’s the hard 

infrastructure and servicing of lots and utilities. Mr. Speaker, 

our municipalities are certainly stepping up to the challenges 

and opportunities that they’re facing. But we need to be doing 

all we can as a province to support our municipalities in making 

sure that we’re growing cities, growing communities across this 

province that are in fact enhancing quality of life for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I notice our infrastructure in this province, particularly for 

cities, is under great strain but as well for our small towns and 

smaller communities across this province. And when we’re 

talking about the access to quality drinking water but also waste 

water and how we’re dealing with our sewer systems in this 

province, this is a big issue. And I know this Act here 

specifically focuses in on the 16 cities in this province by way 

of The Cities Act but, Mr. Speaker, and you would know 

whether you’re in Cupar or whether in Carlyle, whether in 

North Battleford, whether you’re in Strasbourg, whether you’re 

in any part of this province, the infrastructure requirements for 

our small towns, our cities, are significant and we need a 

willing partner in government to be working with our municipal 

partners to be addressing those issues. 

 

And I know today I was using the story of taking from Peter to 

pay Paul, Mr. Speaker, and I feel that this is in many ways 

displayed by our relationship currently with municipalities in 

this province. We have a government that, you know, proclaims 

that their finances and their fiscal circumstance is A-okay but at 

the same time we see a real off-loading or transfer of tough 

circumstances for many of our other partners and that includes 

our municipalities along with other organizations such as our 

universities and our school boards. But focusing specifically on 

municipalities, we need to recognize, I believe, the health and 

welfare of our provincial finances in a broader context, and that 

should too include our municipalities. 

 

And I believe if you go and look at the bottom line of 

municipalities across this province and look at their balance 

sheets and look at their budgets, what we see is municipalities 

across this province that are under great strain. And not only do 

they have higher borrowing requirements than we’ve ever seen 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

before. They also have large liabilities and deficits that they 

need to address from a very limited revenue structure, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly doesn’t have access to the wealth of 

resources and revenues that the provincial government has. And 

so certainly any strategy of development in this province must 

include a strong relationship and important structures and 

mechanisms to support that relationship with our municipalities. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And I know anyone who’s observed their property tax notice 

over the past few years and their property tax bill in this 

province — both businesses and families, homeowners, Mr. 

Speaker — will recognize that municipalities in many ways are 

having to step up to the plate in absence of willing partners at 

the provincial level and at the federal level, and are doing so 

with the dollar of the property tax payer, the owner of 

properties, homeowners and businesses. And this is something 

that we need to address. And certainly we are advocates, and 

I’m an advocate for a structure to be put in place that allows the 

infrastructure dollars to be able to flow in a structured way, in a 

meaningful way, to address these challenges and pressures that 

our municipal partners are experiencing. 

 

I don’t see anything in this bill by way of changes that provides 

meaningful response to those big pressures and big challenges 

that our communities, our cities, our towns are facing right now, 

Mr. Speaker. In fact, I don’t see any mention by the minister, 

recognition that these pressures exist. And I know they’re large, 

whether you’re in Moose Jaw, whether here in my community 

of Regina, or up in Saskatoon or, as I say, even so many of our 

smaller towns and communities that are facing significant 

deficits, significant pressures. 

 

And a lot of this relates around access to drinking water, quality 

water, but also our waste water. And if you go across this 

province, you’ve got lagoons that are at capacity for many 

communities all across this province and big questions about 

what solution they’re going to be able to bring forward for their 

community and at what cost. And certainly any development 

strategy of government needs to support and understand these 

pressures and understand who’s paying for it right now, Mr. 

Speaker, which is a significant burden being placed upon 

property taxes in this province. 

 

I know here in Regina right now, Mr. Speaker, there’s big 

questions around how are we going to be able to address our 

waste water treatment facility, something that’s very important 

to our community and something that’s a responsibility for us to 

take care of. And without taking care of that waste water in a 

responsible fashion, we’re leaving contamination for a 

watershed that flows away from Regina and right through the 

Qu’Appelle chain all the way up through your country, Mr. 

Speaker — in fact through your constituency as well — and 

something that we all need to be very mindful of. 

 

And these are the kinds of discussions and consultations and 

then subsequent solutions that we need to be able to bring 

forward to municipalities across the province. Simply right now 

punting that responsibility on to our cities and our small towns 

is an approach that is unfair not only to the municipalities but 

it’s unfair to homeowners and businesses across the province 

who are seeing the impact in a significant way by way of their 

property taxes, Mr. Speaker. And I find it disappointing when 

I’m looking at The Cities Act — and the minister references that 

he’s had some conversations with some of the partners on this 

front — that he’s failed to address the elephant in the room, is 

that, in our growing Saskatchewan, we need to now be stepping 

up to the plate with meaningful structures to ensure the 

development of our communities, ensures and maintains and 

improves quality of life, and that we’re not off-loading on to 

our municipalities, which I believe is something that we have 

witnessed for some period of time. And we see it at the federal 

level, and we also see it here at the provincial level. 

 

I’ll focus some of my attention directly to some of the 

recommendations or some of the changes that the minister is 

suggesting to be made in this legislation. But what I will say is 

that it is so crucial, so important that when we look at a bill like 

this that it’s reflective of thoughtful consultation with our 

partners, with our cities, with our stakeholders, with SUMA, 

with our city managers, with our clerks, and making sure all 

across this province, whether it’s the voice of that council in 

Swift Current or the city manager in Swift Current or the clerk 

in Swift Current or whether it’s the voice of that member in 

Lloydminster, the council in Lloydminster or there in Prince 

Albert where they’re dealing and grappling with big issues by 

way of infrastructure and a government that’s really dug their 

heels in in providing the proper support that that community 

requires by way of water — which is a major issue for Prince 

Albert — but also by way of bridge infrastructure that really 

this government has taken a piecemeal and dismissive approach 

to providing the meaningful solutions that that community 

requires. But when we have legislation like this before us as it 

relates to our cities and our municipalities, we really do need to 

make sure that we’re reflective of those stakeholders’ interests 

and hearing of their voices. 

 

And I’m not certain or convinced that that has occurred to put 

together, to drive this piece of legislation. We know that that’s 

how you get good legislation though, Mr. Speaker, is listening 

to many voices, listening to those who are impacted, listening to 

those who are on the streets, in our communities dealing and 

grappling with these issues right now, and reflecting that then in 

the legislation that’s been put forward. And I’m not certain that 

I see that in this legislation. 

 

There’s passing reference to consultation that occurred with 

some. I hope that’s been broad-based consultation. I hope that 

that consultation is reflected in the legislation that’s been put 

forward. Sadly we’ve learned from this government that we 

can’t simply take their word for it, Mr. Speaker, when it comes 

to suggesting that they’ve consulted. We need to make sure that 

we go out and engage in that consultation with stakeholders 

across this province. And, Mr. Speaker, you can count on this 

opposition doing just that, engaging with our partners all across 

this province, our municipalities — in this case our urban 

municipalities, in this case those 16 cities — and making sure 

that the legislative changes that are being made here by way of 

this legislation in fact are consistent with the consultation that 

occurred and that in fact they’re not bringing about a host of 

unintended consequences that are not desirable for 

communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s our role. That’s our role, to be there to scrutinize. It’s 

our role to consult. It’s our role to provide that we’re making 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

sure that that oversight is in place and to make sure that we’re 

standing up for the best interests of Saskatchewan people and 

communities. And you can count on us to do that. 

 

But I will say, Mr. Speaker, that we would appreciate a more 

willing partner on the government side of the table to go 

forward in deriving legislation and creating legislation and 

creating programs to embrace that same sort of approach — to 

be listening with partners, whether it’s in the education sector, 

Mr. Speaker, or as it relates here in our municipal sector with a 

host of challenges and pressures that we’re facing. 

 

So I’ll get specifically to the amendments that the minister’s 

speaking to. What he says is that this legislation does four 

things. Now the one thing that it doesn’t do, Mr. Speaker, is it 

certainly doesn’t step up to the plate to put forward mechanisms 

or solutions to address the infrastructure pressures facing our 

communities, and I need to make sure I make ample mention of 

this because this is the big issue facing my city. It’s the big 

issue facing cities across this province. And I won’t say it’s just 

an issue facing cities, although this is The Cities Act so that’s 

why I would focus that way. 

 

It’s an issue facing the towns and small communities in your 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s Strasbourg or Bulyea or 

Cupar or Lemberg or we can go down the line, Mr. Speaker. 

They are issues we need to step up to the plate with solutions, 

and we have a government that certainly hasn’t been a willing 

partner to date to put forward meaningful solutions, to address 

the infrastructure pressures that many are facing. 

 

And I know that these aren’t always the front page items, Mr. 

Speaker, on the front page of our paper, but they matter to all of 

us — our water distribution system, our public transport 

systems, our public transit systems, our waste water solutions, 

Mr. Speaker, or how we’re developing and servicing our lots or 

how we’re ensuring that there’s a balance of affordable housing 

within the mixture of new communities, Mr. Speaker. And 

these are big, big issues. 

 

Or how are we going at, in fact, building our developing 

province? And what I see in many ways is that municipalities 

are having a burden and responsibility punted on to them and 

they’re going out and having to secure financing and borrowing 

that’s coming at a higher cost in a lot of cases than the cost of 

borrowing for government. 

 

And I think that it’s an important time to review tools such as 

the municipal financing board and making sure that it’s as 

helpful as it could and should be right now in addressing some 

of these challenges. Or are we constraining and limiting many 

of our municipalities from addressing some of these pressures? 

And certainly borrowing is just one part of it. We need to make 

sure that we’re not simply encumbering communities, whether 

it’s North Battleford or whether it’s Lloydminster or whether 

it’s Estevan or whether it’s Swift Current or Regina or 

Saskatoon, with more debt, Mr. Speaker. What we need to 

understand is that the province itself has at its disposal and has 

access to a wealth of resources and revenues that cities certainly 

don’t have. 

 

And so there’s a role and a responsibility for a government to 

make sure that it’s working with those partners and making 

those dollars flow to make the improvements required. 

Otherwise it’s this scenario, as I highlighted here today and I’ve 

been talking about, of robbing Peter to pay Paul — propping up 

sort of what, you know, is held as sort of a good news story for 

the province to suggest, but at the same time an indebtedness 

that is growing at an alarming rate with significant costs for 

municipalities and property tax payers across this province. 

 

Getting to the specific agenda of this bill and what the 

minister’s suggesting, the first recommendation is that they will 

improve processes related to boundary alterations or 

annexations to make it better for cities and municipalities 

involved. Pretty simple statement that’s put forward, one that 

maybe nods the head of many, but what we need to make sure 

is that this is in fact reflective of the best interests of our rural 

municipalities, of our urban municipalities, and that they do 

serve us well from a regional planning perspective. 

 

We want to make sure this isn’t just some sort of knee-jerk 

response from government. We want to make sure that it 

provides the types of relationships that are appropriate for our 

municipalities and our RMs to enter into as they’re facing 

annexation, and making sure there’s appropriate respect to the 

valuation of land and to making sure that dollars flow to those 

municipalities that rightfully should receive them, and that it 

allows us to develop and organize ourselves in a way that’s in 

the best interests of all communities, Mr. Speaker. And making 

sure this isn’t just a heavy hand, as I say, of government 

deciding that the power should sit either with them themselves 

as the provincial government or with the cities themself or with 

the RMs themself. 

 

It very much requires a balanced approach and I hope this isn’t 

a knee-jerk response to some of the pressures that we’re facing 

in the province. And I would never dismiss the challenge or 

pressures that communities face when they’re dealing with 

annexation. And I know each community goes at this in 

different ways. Small communities or our thriving cities such as 

Estevan or Yorkton or Regina, they each go at it differently. 

 

You know, what I do know is that it’s interesting coming from 

this government, a government that has gone out — and in fact 

I’m thinking of one of the entities that they were involved with, 

the Global Transportation Hub — where they went out and in 

fact expropriated an awful lot of land, I understand, Mr. 

Speaker, and have built out some relationships, both with 

landowners but also with municipal partners in the RM and the 

city that are a strained environment, Mr. Speaker, and have, 

well, created potential liabilities and possibly lawsuits for the 

province of Saskatchewan. So I find that this is interesting 

coming from this government who, when have been given the 

opportunity, have chosen that approach, Mr. Speaker, and have 

not been able to broker an approach that has been able to 

balance off the pressures and interests that exist. 

 

So I hope what’s being proposed is reflective of a balanced 

approach, one that respects the jurisdictions, that respects our 

responsibilities and needs of our rural municipalities, but also 

respects those of the cities and our municipalities. And that’s 

something that we’re going to be seeking further clarity from, 

Mr. Speaker. Certainly the minister’s statement, just in a simple 

way in his introduction of this bill, doesn’t support any of the 

facts as to what the consultation was on this front, what the 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

various perspectives were or what the impacts are for 

communities. So that’s something we’ll be seeking, certainly 

directly through the minister on the floor of this Assembly, or 

directly through committee structures. And certainly we’ll be 

doing so by working with all of our municipal partners, our 

rural municipalities as well as our cities, to establish a full 

understanding of these consequences for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Moving along, the second item that has been put forward is that 

this has been put forward to respond to requests for 

amendments from city governments for consistent authorities 

and treatment among three municipal Acts regarding matters 

such as unpaid utility charges and trailer home permitting. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, that sounds pretty straightforward. We need to 

understand, I guess, what the impact of that consistent treatment 

is, the consolidation of those Acts, and what the real impact is 

back into communities and on people. And that’ll be something 

we’ll derive through thoughtful consultation. 

 

I would have hoped in fact though, Mr. Speaker, that for the 

public of Saskatchewan that the minister would have been able 

to offer up some more information that reflects what this means 

for all stakeholders: for that homeowner, for that business, for 

that municipality. And we don’t have that right here, Mr. 

Speaker, so we’re left to take a sort of a general statement from 

the minister here that this is something that’s in our best 

interests. We’ll continue to do the consultation on this. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And I’ll move on here to a couple of other items . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I always like when the other side gets a bit of 

energy in them, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that I wish they’d 

apply that same sort of energy to the thoughtful consultation 

with the communities within their own constituencies to make 

sure they understand what these impacts mean for, whether it’s 

Saskatoon or Regina, North Battleford. But also making sure 

we’re stepping up to the plate for the municipal pressures that 

are facing our smaller communities, whether it’s Fort 

Qu’Appelle or Indian Head or Milestone, important 

communities with important pressures as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The third part of this relates directly to the New West 

Partnership agreement on internal trade in areas such as 

business licensing and municipal procurement. Now this is an 

area that I’m interested in getting the perspective of councillors 

in Swift Current, and in Yorkton, in Regina, and Saskatoon 

because this in fact does tie municipalities and how they operate 

to a decision made by this government, made unilaterally by 

this government, made without consultation with Saskatchewan 

people by this government. 

 

And when we’re talking about procurement and tying the hands 

of municipalities and focusing procurement in a specific 

manner, this is something that I think we do need to understand 

what the implications are for a municipality. And I believe 

there’s a diverse set of voices and opinions on what this 

provision means for communities. 

 

And I know as well there’s a lot of debate, and I’ve heard from 

many that in fact this agreement has caused a broad-based 

tendering for projects. And now we have, of course, tendering, 

there’s a threshold amount for which tendering for procurement 

is required. I know there’s many that I’ve spoken to in the 

private sector in those organizations and companies that deliver 

services that say that this sort of a broad-based measure may 

have the unintended consequence, Mr. Speaker — but a direct 

consequence — of driving up costs, because it’s a broad-based 

tender that goes across the board. 

 

And something that as well we should have the reasonable 

discussion about whether or not in fact if there is a benefit. 

When you’re using public money, is there a benefit to be using 

a Saskatchewan company, Mr. Speaker? Or is it fair game that 

it should simply be to the bidder out in British Columbia and 

the company and the employees from Alberta to come in and do 

that work? I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, but I certainly lean 

towards understanding the importance of a local economy, of 

local development, and of being able to support and build out 

strong local economies whether it’s in Moose Jaw, whether it’s 

in Prince Albert, whether it’s in Regina, whether it’s in La 

Ronge, Mr. Speaker. And I’m cautious of accepting this 

government’s word that municipalities should now be forced by 

way of their heavy hand to accept an agreement for which they 

were no part of being a signer to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so this is something that I will be moving forward in a 

consultative fashion with those who were impacted — our 

communities: Saskatoon, Regina, Swift Current — and 

understanding their full perspective on what the impact of the 

northwest partnership, what that impact is on their procurement 

processes and as well as matters such as cost and impacts on 

local community. 

 

But I know it’s been shared with me by many that the 

unintended consequence of the provision that’s been put 

forward by this government, by way of the northwest 

partnership, may be an unintended consequence of in fact 

increased costs on small projects that are now going to be paid 

by Saskatchewan people with public money, but also, Mr. 

Speaker, that the consideration that many of those dollars, 

public dollars, may flow directly to out-of-province businesses 

and corporations that will flow those dollars back to their 

respective jurisdictions. And I think there’s a reasonable 

discussion to be had about local benefit, local economies, and 

making sure that we are in fact building communities, and while 

doing so building out a strong local supply chain, a strong local 

economy that has organizations and professional services that 

are able to be crucial drivers of the development of this 

province. 

 

And like I’ve said before, I think it’s wrong for a community 

such as Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, to have this decision simply 

made for them by another level of government. I believe that 

they should have been consulted from day one on provisions 

and agreements that were made that impact their community, 

that impact their treasury, and that impact the services and 

supplies that they procure, Mr. Speaker. But of course, that 

wasn’t the case. 

 

And I think we need to recognize again that we have a 

circumstance where, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure you can relate 

to this, the circumstance that you’re taking from Peter to pay 

Paul. Paul of course being the provincial government, Mr. 

Speaker, who’s in this position of offloading an awful lot of 

responsibility or abdicating important responsibilities. We could 



November 28, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

also talk about the federal government on this front. Meanwhile 

we see our municipalities being more indebted than ever before, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, we can stick our head in the sand, Mr. Speaker, 

and pretend that it’s just not so and look to boastful billboards 

of the government opposite that are paid for with public money 

and pretend that everything’s A-okay, Mr. Speaker. But I think 

if we did a broader analysis and audit of what’s actually going 

on in Saskatchewan right now, whether it’s in Estevan or 

whether it’s in North Battleford or whether it’s in Saskatoon or 

Moose Jaw, I would suspect we’d see an interesting story being 

played out on the balance sheets of municipalities across this 

province. 

 

And I would suspect, Mr. Speaker, that it’s one of increased 

debt, Mr. Speaker, with a government that boasts, as I say, 

about this growth for the sake of growth alone agenda, Mr. 

Speaker, and then is an unwilling partner to step up to the plate, 

Mr. Speaker, and to build out the relationship required, the 

mechanism required to support the development back into our 

communities so our government can pretend what they like 

about our provincial finances. 

 

But if it’s bearing itself out in the community of Weyburn or in 

Moose Jaw or Regina by way of massive debt increases for 

these communities and pressures that are placed directly back 

onto the businesses and homeowners, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And you know I hear members 

opposite say, massive growth, is what I hear them say, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s right, Mr. Speaker. We do have significant 

growth that’s going on. This is where you then need a 

thoughtful partner in government to take a balanced approach 

and to look beyond the lens of their own provincial finances and 

realize what the ripple effect is out onto everyone else, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So where we have a government, Mr. Speaker, that boasts and 

preaches about growth and boosts their own financial position 

with public dollars, they’re incredibly dismissive of, I believe, 

what’s going on at the university level, at the household level 

where families are under more strain than ever before, quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, and at the municipal level where in fact 

we need to take the growth strategy or the growth agenda of 

that government and make sure that we’re then putting in place 

the supports and the structures and the relationships to make 

sure that we’re able to better the lives, to strengthen 

communities and build healthier, stronger communities for 

tomorrow. 

 

And I know that’s a goal of individuals, whether they live in 

Estevan. I know it’s a goal of individuals that live in Weyburn, 

and I know it’s a goal of those living in Regina. And I know 

that it’s unfair and unrealistic, Mr. Speaker, to simply let the 

debts of those communities skyrocket, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

rather appalling if you take a look at the trajectory and the 

trends and the records of what municipalities are being forced 

to take on by way of debt, Mr. Speaker, and then what the 

subsequent impact is going to be for the businesses in Estevan 

or the businesses in Regina or the businesses in Weyburn. 

 

And of course then, Mr. Speaker, we can look at that hard 

reality going on for so many households, those that can afford it 

least, Mr. Speaker, those that can afford it least that are going to 

be asked by municipalities all across this province to have to 

pay significantly more, not because of direct actions necessarily 

of a municipality but because of a government who is unwilling 

to take a balanced approach to development and to understand 

the important role that our municipalities play in providing the 

services and quality of life that we all desire, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they can boast and pretend whatever financial story they 

want to as a province, but I think if we look at what the ripple 

out is to the rest of the province by way of municipalities, by 

way of households, by way of school boards, by way of our 

universities, Mr. Speaker, I believe that would be taking a more 

fulsome look of the true state of the health and welfare of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ve spoken to three of those specific items that the member 

has put forward. I’ll look at the fourth one here. The minister 

suggests that they need to address requests from “. . . the 

municipal sector to clarify wording and improve consistency 

among the municipal Acts regarding primarily administrative 

matters and make other changes identified by the ministry to 

clarify areas such as education property tax reporting, licence 

fees, and purchasing policies. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty concise statement placed by 

the minister. Sounds reasonable. Sounds like something that 

maybe we might support. Maybe sounds like something from 

sort of a housekeeping in nature, but we need to figure that out, 

Mr. Speaker, because we’ve learned very quickly that we just 

can’t take the word of that government opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

when they’ve made the statement that they’ve gone out and 

consulted with Saskatchewan people. 

 

And we need to make sure we understand the full impact on the 

ground with those that understand it, that are facing the 

consequences in our cities all across this province. And we’ll 

need to seek out and make sure that we understand what this 

means for Prince Albert. We need to make sure we understand 

what it means from a perspective of the council, from the 

administration, from the clerks. We need to do just the same 

down in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. We need to do the same 

down in Estevan and here in Regina. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if government, if members opposite think 

that each community is facing the exact same pressures and 

challenges and that they’re a homogeneous unit that need to be 

treated all the same, Mr. Speaker, I think they may be surprised 

to recognize that each community has its unique pressures. 

 

And I know my good friend, the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, is mentioning we also should talk about the pressures 

that Weyburn’s facing, and certainly we should. A special time 

in many ways down in southeast Saskatchewan with an 

expanding Bakken field, Mr. Speaker, and a strong business 

environment on many fronts, Mr. Speaker. But then by way of 

that growth, by way of that development, we need to make sure 

that we’re supporting those communities. And specifically I 

think of Weyburn as a prime example as a community or 

Estevan, Mr. Speaker, of one that we need to make sure that 

we’re listening to and responding to their pressures. Because 

right now, Mr. Speaker, those communities in many ways have 

been forced to go at it alone, Mr. Speaker. And when they are 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2012 

forced to go at it alone, they’re being forced to utilize the dollar 

of the homeowner and the business, Mr. Speaker, by way of 

property taxes to address what are big challenges and big 

opportunities. 

 

So what we need to do is take the lofty rhetoric about how . . . 

of the message opposite and make sure we’re transferring that 

into a solid relationship with our municipal partners, those in 

Estevan, those in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, and making sure 

we’re stepping up with the sort of infrastructure required. And I 

know that busy artery, when you get down on 39 and 6, Mr. 

Speaker, those two highways, and the strain that’s placed on 

that infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. And the members opposite like 

to boast about what’s going on in the Bakken field and boy, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s something. It’s something special on a lot of 

fronts. But then we see a government that’s unwilling to step up 

to the plate and support the activity in those areas, an area when 

we’re speaking about the Southeast specifically that in fact is 

contributing hugely to the treasury of this province, paying for 

infrastructure all across this province . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There seems to be a lot of energy in 

the Assembly late this afternoon. We only have a few more 

minutes left. I would recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I guess when we — and I 

do get these are important issues — and when I look in the eyes 

of many across this province, when I observe in the lives of 

communities across this province, I recognize that we and I 

could be doing something better. I realize that there’s a better 

way forward by way of partnerships, relationships, working 

together to make sure that we take what we are or certainly 

should be proud of — economic development and growth. And 

we’ll focus again on the southeast corner, Mr. Speaker, and 

make sure that we’re building healthier, stronger, communities 

for generations forward, Mr. Speaker, and that we take the 

growth of today in making sure that we understand how we 

want to become, who we want to become in 5 and 10 and 20 

years from now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And right now I believe the approach of government is to sit on 

their hands and to let municipalities borrow more, Mr. Speaker. 

And I see the debt charts on those municipalities across this 

province. I know who’s going to be asked to pay for that, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s your constituents and mine. It’s going to be the 

homeowners across this province, the families who can least 

afford it, the businesses of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in many ways it reflects this whole scenario of taking from 

Peter to pay Paul, Mr. Speaker, allowing a government to say, 

everything’s A-okay with them, Mr. Speaker, but pushing on 

that ripple effect that’s impacting the lives in communities all 

across this province. And we can do something better than that. 

We should be working with this special opportunity we have 

within our economy, the current resource prosperity, and we 

should be making sure that we’re fully capturing that 

opportunity. Improving the lives of communities all across this 

province is something that we’ll continue to stand and to speak 

towards. 

 

As it relates to The Cities Act that’s been put forward here, Mr. 

Speaker, I guess I’d say there was an opportunity to do more. 

We’ll go out and make sure we fully understand what this 

means on the ground in the lives of communities across 

Saskatchewan so that we can bring forward the type of 

thoughtful analysis and potential amendments to strengthen 

legislation in this Assembly. And we’ll be working with all 

Saskatchewan people do just that, Mr. Speaker. And that’ll be 

our course of action in the days, weeks, and months forward, to 

make sure we’re providing those voices that need to be heard, 

voices that are too quiet from Prince Albert, too quiet from 

Swift Current, too quiet from Estevan, Mr. Speaker, too quiet 

from many parts of this province, too quiet in North Battleford, 

and bringing that voice forward. 

 

But at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank those 

that work to improve our municipalities, those on the ground in 

our communities. And I will adjourn debate of Bill No. 74, The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 74, The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. It being now very close to 5 

o’clock, this House will now stand adjourned until tomorrow 

morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2257 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2257 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2257 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2257 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2257 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2257 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2258 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2258 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2258 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2258 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2258 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2258 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2259 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2259 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 A Tribute to Neil Jahnke 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2259 

 All Nations Job Fair 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2259 

 Saskatchewan Citizens Awarded Order of Merit 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2260 

 Essay Celebrates a Colleague 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2260 

 Canada Cup of Curling 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2260 

 Leader-Post Christmas Cheer Fund 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2261 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 State of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2261 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2261 

 Referral Process Resulting From Use of Surgical Mesh 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2262 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2262 

 Combatting Impaired Driving 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2263 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2263 

 Physician Supply in Kipling 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2264 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2264 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2264 

 Information Services Corporation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2265 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2265 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2266 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2266 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2266 

 Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2272 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2276 



 

 Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 

 Bill No. 74 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2283 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


