




















































Hansard: April 25, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 35A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 25, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1261 

 April 25, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Some 

decades ago the federal government and the provincial 

government put together two Crown corporations: the federal 

Crown Eldorado and the provincial Crown SMDC 

[Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation]. And they 

created a new entity which was privatized and became Cameco, 

now the largest uranium mining company in the world and 

we’re very proud to say — I think everybody in the province is 

proud to say — headquartered in Saskatoon. 

 

Well today, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery we’re joined by the 

CEO [chief executive officer], the president of Cameco, 

someone who’s no stranger to this building or really any part of 

this province, a business leader that we’re also very proud of. 

Tim Gitzel is here and we want to welcome him to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, the Minister of Energy and 

Resources will make a more formal introduction of some of 

those who are joining Tim in the gallery today, but I would like 

to say hello from this vantage point. And we’ll be meeting a 

little bit later with the chairman of Vedanta who’s joined us 

here as well. Anil Agarwal has joined us, and we want to 

welcome him as well to our capital city of Regina and the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would want to 

welcome the special guests here this morning on behalf of the 

opposition. I want to have a special welcome for Mr. Tim 

Gitzel. He worked as a young lawyer with me and our people at 

MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman many, many years ago, and 

over the years I’ve followed his career as a fellow lawyer but 

also as a friend. And I very much want to say thank you, Tim, 

for all of the good work you’ve done here in Saskatchewan but 

around the world for our province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

just want to join with the Premier in introducing the delegation 

that is in your gallery, the president and CEO of Vedanta, Anil 

Agarwal. We’ve had a very good meeting last evening with 

him, a few of the ministers and myself. They are conducting 

meetings in the building today with a number of companies. 

They’re looking at making potentially a pretty significant 

investment in Saskatchewan. So we would certainly want to 

welcome you to our Legislative Assembly. Joined with them 

are part of the delegation and Steve Elbaum, the chairman and 

CEO of Alpine Group and Chair of Synenergy Cables. 

I would also want to introduce someone that’s quite a special 

friend and you’ll see, and relative, that’s important to me as 

well, Josh Soloway. Josh is the chairman and CEO of Soloway 

Group and is my son-in-law along with the Soloway Group that 

he operates. Bill Reinert is accompanying them here as well. I 

would ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to welcome 

them here. They are looking at making some pretty significant 

investments. They’ve come a long ways from upstate New 

York and from Connecticut and Delaware, as well as the United 

Kingdom to visit with us today and we’ve had some, as I said, 

some very good meetings. We look forward to their 

involvement in the Saskatchewan business scene. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to, on 

behalf of the opposition, welcome the member’s relative and his 

business associates. So you’re very welcome here in the 

legislature, and we know that you’ll provide very good advice 

to the member on a number of issues. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to rise to introduce a group 

of students who are here in your gallery. We have 30 grade 10 

social studies class students from Sheldon-Williams Collegiate 

here in Regina Lakeview and they’re accompanied by their 

teachers, Jennie Davies and Karen Thull, and Corry Oatway 

who is an educational assistant. So I ask all members to 

welcome them here to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, again today I have the opportunity to introduce to you 

and through you to the members a group from Melville again. 

The Melville Comprehensive School, 30 grade 10 students, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ll have the opportunity to meet with them a little bit 

later. But I’d ask all members to help me welcome them to their 

legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like . . . and to the rest of the Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce a couple of people sitting in your gallery, and 

probably pretty familiar to most of the Assembly. First off, 

Kalee Kent who is my constituency assistant and has done an 

awful lot of work, involved in politics, and in doing an awful lot 

of work for this side of the House. And she’s done fantastic 

work in getting my office organized and I think everybody can 

feel the pain that she’s had to go through for that exercise. 

 

And besides that, I’d also like to introduce Alyna. And Alyna 

has said many times that her favourite person is the Premier and 

she’s very excited to be here. And Alyna, she’s five years old. 

She’s taking kindergarten at Holy Rosary. She likes soccer, 

gymnastics; she’s learning to skate so that she can play hockey. 

And she also is great at decorating offices with artwork for 

anybody that would like that. So I would like to offer 

congratulations at that and thank you for coming, and welcome 

to your Assembly. Thank you. 

 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to request 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has 

requested leave for an extended introduction. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to agree? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

number of individuals here in the Assembly today that I would 

like to introduce to the members, through you and to you. And 

first of all I would like to introduce Joe Schemenauer from Lake 

Lenore, Saskatchewan. Joe is here to meet with the Minister of 

the Environment later, on some issues related to drainage, 

serious drainage issues in the Lake Lenore area. These issues 

have been going on for many, many, many years, and they’re 

here to seek some solutions to that issue. 

 

The other people that I’d like to introduce is Peter and Barbara 

Onofreychuk and their children Emily, Mark, and William. So 

you guys give a wave. They’re in the front row there, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re from MacNutt, Saskatchewan. And again this 

is a group of individuals, farmers in eastern Saskatchewan that 

have been experiencing some very severe and difficult 

situations relating to illegal drainage that’s affecting their farm. 

 

I’d also like to introduce Lenard Schrenk and his wife, Leona, 

from Assiniboia. Lenard’s been engaged in a long-term dispute 

with drainage and issues relating to approvals of drainage works 

since actually about 1986. And so they’re here to speak also 

with the Minister of the Environment to express their concerns 

and look for some resolution. 

 

And finally I have Mr. Frank Paul from Moosomin, 

Saskatchewan. And Frank is now retired from farming, and one 

of the reasons he’s retired is that he has had, he had various 

difficulties again with illegal drainage and decided that he 

would just sell his farm because he wasn’t getting any 

resolution. So they’re all here today to meet with the minister 

and present some of their concerns. So welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery, I 

see two individuals who are currently serving in the University 

of Regina Students’ Union with the term coming to a close 

towards or at the end of April, I believe. Mr. Kent Peterson and 

Ms. Paige Kezima are here today, two individuals that pay a lot 

of attention to what goes on in the Assembly, care a lot about 

issues here in the province, especially as they relate to students. 

So I’d like to thank these two individuals for the service they 

have provided and wish them all the best with whatever their 

next steps may be. 

 

Thank you for coming today to the Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to join with the member opposite in offering our sincere 

thanks to both of these student leaders from the University of 

Regina. We know they’ve served very ably, not only the 

students but the broader campus community, and so on behalf 

of the government I join the member opposite in extending our 

appreciation for their service. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for greater protection for late-night retail 

workers by passing Jimmy’s law. We know that in the early 

morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot 

two times and died from his injuries. He was working at a gas 

station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from intruders. 

 

We know that positive statistics show that convenience store 

and gas station robberies are down by one-third since 1999 

largely due to increased safety practices including two people 

working together on late-night shifts. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 

of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m presenting a petition that is 

basically setting out the point that we should stop increasing the 

number of politicians in Saskatchewan and, more importantly, 

we should count all of the people under age 18 when new 

provincial election boundaries are drafted. And the prayer is as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to not increase the number of politicians in 

the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly and to continue 

including those individuals under the age of 18 in the 

determination of constituency boundaries. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; that 

is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of Cut 

Knife, Yorkton, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition signed by Saskatchewan residents calling on 

the Sask Party government to support and pass a Saskatchewan 

seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which will 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern for our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulation and firearm 

use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

University of Regina Runner Wins Vancouver Race 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 

in the House today to commemorate the outstanding 

accomplishments of a local long-distance runner. Last Sunday, 

Kelly Wiebe, who hails from Swift Current and is now a 

22-year-old University of Regina environmental engineer 

student, was running his second road race. He outsprinted the 

rest of the field over the final 100 metres to win the prestigious 

Vancouver Sun Run 10 K [kilometre] race. Kelly finished the 

race in an amazing 29 minutes, 12.3 seconds on a cool, breezy 

morning, the second consecutive Canadian to win the race after 

foreign runners, 10 of them Kenyan, had won 12 straight times 

beginning in 1999. 

 

Kelly was a member of Canada’s team at the cross-country 

worlds last year and led for a good portion of the race. Over the 

last couple of kilometres, there were a couple of lead changes as 

he battled with other top competitors from across the globe. 

Wiebe’s only other road race competition was a local 10 K in 

Regina last May. Kelly said he’s pointing to the 10 000 metres 

at track nationals this summer and wants to put together a good 

cross-country season in the fall for the U of R [University of 

Regina] Cougars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I had the fortunate 

circumstance of being Kelly’s teammate on the U of R track 

team for his first two years, and you could tell early on that 

Kelly had a great work ethic. And it was easy to see it in his 

training that he was going to go far. And I for one just wanted 

to look . . . I look forward to seeing him being in the Olympics 

for Canada some time soon. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Month 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, April is the Canadian Cancer 

Society’s Daffodil Month, a month in which Canadians reflect 

upon the thousands of people who are living with cancer and 

remember those who have died. Daffodil Month is also a time 

in which the Cancer Society encourages Canadians to do 

something special for someone currently living with cancer and 

to contribute in some way to the fight against this disease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that cancer is the leading cause of death 

in Canada. About 487 Canadians are diagnosed with cancer 

every day, and an astounding one out of every four Canadians 

will die from this horrible disease. But there’s much reason for 

hope and optimism. Incidence rates for most cancers are 

stabilizing or declining, and there are breakthroughs and new 

treatment approaches. This progress, Mr. Speaker, is a direct 

result of the dedication of volunteers and researchers. 

 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

I want to thank all those involved with the Canadian Cancer 

Society for the important work they do to help prevent cancer, 

to fund research, to empower, inform, and support Canadians 

living with cancer, and to advocate for better public policies to 

improve the health of Canadians. I want to wish all the best to 

every Canadian currently fighting cancer. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Saskatchewan Student Wins Scholarship 

to Lester B. Pearson College 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

the House today to congratulate the impressive 

accomplishments of a young constituent of Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, Cassandra Switzer. Cassandra was recently 

awarded the opportunity of a lifetime, receiving an International 

Baccalaureate scholarship to the Lester B. Pearson College in 

Victoria, British Columbia. In a normal year, this very 

prestigious scholarship-only school accepts approximately 100 

students for their two-year program. This year, however, the 

college will only be accepting 80 students, Cassandra being the 

only applicant from Saskatchewan chosen for this upcoming 

year. 

 

The Lester B. Pearson College is one of 13 United World 

Colleges located across the globe, with students coming from 

across Canada and around the world for its unique two-year, 

pre-university schooling. The schools look to attract students 

with different and exceptional traits in order to have a diverse 

student body, focusing on students who have demonstrated 

leadership in activities and community service as well as an 

interest in internationalism and promoting global understanding. 

 

Cassandra was the hands-down pick from the short list of six 

applicants, looking to focus her studies in the medical field with 

hopes of one day working in medical research. Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask all members to join me in congratulating Cassandra 

on receiving this prestigious honour and to wish her best luck in 

her future studies. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Film Festival Recognizes Environmentalists 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

delighted to rise in the House today to highlight the 

Saskatchewan Eco Network’s Environmental Film Festival 

which took place on Earth Day weekend at the Roxy Theatre in 

Saskatoon. At this event, Mr. Speaker, creative thinkers and 

activists were celebrated for keeping the spirit of environmental 

protection and education alive through the Seed the Change, 

Feed the Change themed festival. Over 20 documentary, 

narrative, animated, short, and experimental films, with an 

emphasis on Saskatchewan and Canadian content, were 

screened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the film festival highlights was the 10th 

annual Environmental Activist Awards presented by Rick 

Morrell, the new executive director of the Saskatchewan Eco 

Network. Every year recognition is given to one organization 

and three individuals who have shown exceptional dedication 

and courage in their support of environmental issues. I am 

pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that this year’s recipients are: the 

Brightwater Science and Environmental Centre of the 

Saskatoon Public School Board, Stephanie Sydiaha of the 

Coalition for a Clean Green Saskatchewan and Deanna 

Trowsdale-Mutafov of Nature Saskatchewan and Jan Shadick 

of Saskatoon Nature Society. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in extending our 

congratulations to the award recipients, the Saskatchewan Eco 

Network, and the film festival committee for all their hard work 

and effort in organizing this outstanding festival. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Administrative Professionals Day 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 

today and give much-deserved recognition to our great admin 

colleagues on Administrative Professionals Day. Our 

Saskatchewan businesses are lucky to have a strong core of 

excellent administrative professionals to provide the foundation 

work structures for our growing businesses and economy. 

 

This year’s theme for the 2012 Administrative Professionals 

Day is: Admins, the pulse of the office. This statement could 

not be truer. In my office we rely heavily on our admin staff for 

their organizational, IT [information technology], and 

management skills. 

 

These professionals ensure that jobs get done on time and under 

budget while improving efficiencies along the way. Admin 

professionals are often the innovators of our business processes 

and the organizational engines of business in this complex 

economy. 

 

Administrative Assistants Day has been celebrated since 1952 

and is one of the largest workplace observances after employee 

birthdays and major holidays. It is a worldwide observance that 

includes community events, social gatherings, and individual 

corporate activities recognizing staff with gifts and thanks. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank my constituency 

staff in Saskatchewan Rivers and also the many colleagues that 

I work with here in Regina. Your work is excellent and your 

help is always appreciated. I would ask all members to join me 

in applauding our fantastic professionals. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Summit Plans for Housing Needs 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to rise today in the House to talk about an important 

housing and development summit that is taking place right now 

in Regina on April 24th and 25th. 

 

Presented by the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in 

partnership with the Canadian Home Builders’ Association, this 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

summit is focusing on the need to plan and to take action to 

meet the increased demand for the various types of housing in 

communities province-wide. 

 

Collaboration across the housing sector is key if we are to solve 

our housing challenges and maintain our economic and 

population growth. The release of the housing strategy for 

Saskatchewan and the provincial action plan of 2011-2012 last 

August served as a road map as we work together to achieve a 

healthy housing environment. 

 

Our actions in the first of the eight-year housing strategy 

validate the fact that we have a strong focus on partnerships, 

increasing the housing supply, and improving the way we do 

business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the private sector has responded 

enthusiastically to our new initiatives. With their investments 

and our government’s support for housing which has grown to 

$344 million, we will provide more than 12,600 new homes 

being developed in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people. 

Our momentum is growing, and we will continue to build the 

Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Ontario Budget  

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 

passing another deficit budget, the Ontario government saw fit 

to congratulate themselves for reducing their deficit from a 

projected $15.3 billion to $15 billion. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate them as well. I 

congratulate the Ontario Liberal government on accomplishing 

such a feat, not with any reductions in spending, but with funds 

provided by federal transfers and raising taxes. Being the 

eternal optimist that he is, Mr. Speaker, the Ontario Finance 

minister expects budget surpluses to return in 2017. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ontario seems to have a spending problem, with 

their government attempting to be everything to everyone, all of 

this being supported by the NDP [New Democratic Party]. But 

none of this is surprising, Mr. Speaker, since budget deficits are 

essential to any form of NDP support. In fact that NDP 

promised, through their campaign platform, annual budget 

deficits of over $5 billion here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Fortunately our government has made fiscal responsibility a 

pillar. And the benefits of that fiscal discipline is paying off. 

Our government has had five consecutive balanced budgets; a 

AAA credit rating, a first in Saskatchewan history; increased 

spending in health care, education, social services, and 

highways for the Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ontario government is mortgaging their 

children’s future with the support of the NDP. This is not the 

case in Saskatchewan where balanced budgets and a growing 

economy are the new norm, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Wetlands Policy and Drainage Management 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 

government reported that last year’s flooding cost the taxpayers 

over $360 million. Further to that, over 75 per cent of farm land 

water bodies have now been drained for production, much of it 

illegally. The Minister for the Environment has promised a new 

policy to address wetland conservation and drainage issues. 

 

My question to the minister is this: what has he actually done to 

stop illegal drainage, reverse the over-drainage, and abate the 

resulting flooding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a significant issue over the last . . . particularly 

in the last couple of years, although I know it didn’t just begin 

over the last couple of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, especially in light of the last year that we had, we 

had a considerable backlog at the Watershed Authority in 

looking at drainage complaints. We are currently at about 50 

per cent of the way complete looking at those complaints that 

came in last year. That’s as a result of reallocating some 

Watershed Authority staff from different regions to the areas 

that were particularly hard hit as well as using the work of some 

outside consultants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can share with the members and the public that I 

have, in conjunction with some, not only complaints from 

individual landowners but organizations like SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], I’ve 

indicated to the Watershed Authority that I’m not satisfied with 

the current process that we inherited from the former 

government. And I look forward to options not just on drainage 

and drainage complaints, but on wetlands policy going forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the minister 

indicated, last fall SARM did pass a resolution calling on him to 

take action to enforce the Watershed Authority legislation when 

it comes to illegal drainage. The minister met with SARM and 

promised action. On December 13th, 2011, the minister 

promised here in the House a comprehensive wetland policy, 

saying, “We look forward to moving forward on the 

development of that . . . policy.” Well, Mr. Speaker, the people 

in the gallery want to know where that policy is. But they also 

want more than that. 

 

They want the Watershed Authority to grow up and be 

responsible for the law it’s supposed to enforce. They want the 

Watershed Authority to stop making them be the victims and 

that the victims of flooding have to then be the enforcers. That’s 

like asking a victim of crime to find and prosecute the criminal. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, policy development is fine and dandy, but 

what action has been taken on the SARM resolution to enforce 

the existing Sask Watershed Authority legislation? 

 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all to the 

specific question. Mr. Speaker, you can only enforce action 

when a complaint has been made and a complaint has been 

investigated and a determination has been made whether or not 

the project is legal or not, Mr. Speaker. So on that account, 

because of the high number of complaints that we did receive 

last year, we know we have a backlog. We have moved staff 

from different regions to address those backlogs, to do the 

investigation work, much of which, Mr. Speaker, can’t occur in 

the winter months. You can’t investigate whether or not a 

drainage project is legal or illegal when it’s covered with snow. 

So, Mr. Speaker, that work continues into this spring. As I said, 

we’re at about 50 per cent of the way. 

 

As well as was indicated at the most recent SARM meeting, 

board meeting, by the president of the Watershed Authority, 

Mr. Speaker, I have asked the Watershed Authority to look at 

all tools including legislative changes, regulatory changes, 

issues around education, and issues around incentives including 

a wetland policy, which wasn’t in place, that would market . . . 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is more than 

following up on complaints filed by individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

This is about the authority itself. 

 

The Watershed Authority has challenged in court a 2010 

compliance order from the Department of Fisheries and Oceans 

against them in the Lake Lenore area. The Watershed Authority 

has pitted neighbours against neighbours in the MacNutt area. 

The Watershed Authority caused a Moosomin farmer to sell his 

farm in 2002 by refusing to take action against illegal drainage. 

The Watershed Authority has not followed a 2005 court order 

by the Court of Queen’s Bench in the Assiniboia area. The 

Watershed Authority is not a fiefdom, Mr. Speaker. It is not 

above the law. 

 

To the minister: when will he take action and make changes to 

the Watershed Authority bureaucracy to ensure the law of this 

land is not only being followed but being enforced by the 

agency that is responsible for it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, well I certainly agree that 

the Watershed Authority is not a fiefdom, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

responsible to this legislative body. It’s responsible to me as the 

minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the complaints that the member raises, without 

getting into the specifics of the individuals, in the case of Lake 

Lenore, a closed basin in this province, Mr. Speaker, we take 

the position that it is the responsibility of the Watershed 

Authority and not DFO [Department of Fisheries and Oceans] 

to regulate a closed basin that doesn’t impact any other 

province, Mr. Speaker. And yes, we are challenging the federal 

order in court, and we look forward to, I would hope, be 

successful in that case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of pitting neighbours against neighbours, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re dealing with legislation that was put in place by the NDP 

when they formed the Watershed Authority that has a formal 

and informal complaint process that does, yes, Mr. Speaker, 

force a neighbour to complain against a neighbour, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t think that that is working, and that is why I 

have asked the Watershed Authority to bring back some options 

to change that legislation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and we 

look forward to those changes. 

 

The inaction by this government results in significant cost to the 

taxpayers and the environment. And for many of the individuals 

in the gallery and the others they are representing, it has cost 

them tens of thousands of dollars to fight the Watershed 

Authority to do its job, all to no avail. The individuals here 

today had to take time from their spring seeding to come to 

meet with the minister after having been turned down by other 

cabinet ministers in that government. They are here today 

because the actions of the Watershed Authority have had very 

serious negative repercussions for them and their families, and 

they are fed up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister ensure that the Watershed 

Authority be transformed into an agency that not only enforces 

the law it is responsible for but that it follows its own law? Will 

he give them cause to hope that their pleas will not fall on deaf 

ears? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, within the Government of 

Saskatchewan right now we are developing a new water 

management strategy for the province, Mr. Speaker, that will 

deal with issues of water quality, water quantity, allocation, and 

issues around drainage, Mr. Speaker. Very optimistic about that 

work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in the meantime, we are working with the legislation that 

we inherited, the regulations that we inherited. Mr. Speaker, I 

would expect the Watershed Authority to deal with these issues 

as expeditiously as they can, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we have 

assigned, moved staff from other areas of the province to deal 

with these complaints, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in the interim, until changes can be made, until we identify 

which options will be made, Mr. Speaker, the Watershed 

Authority will be sending out to every single landowner in this 

province an information package that deals with drainage: what 

is required of people in order to be permitted for that, and what 

are the consequences under the existing legislation if they don’t 

follow that. And people can expect that, all landowners can 

expect that in their mail in the coming weeks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

Quality of Health Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month, 

the Canadian Institute of Health Information released a 

comprehensive data set comparing the performances of 

hospitals across the country. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, many 

Saskatchewan hospitals did not provide data to CIHI [Canadian 

Institute of Health Information]. But of those that did, there are 

some concerning statistics. 

 

The minister has had a fair amount of time to review this 

information, Mr. Speaker, and to be properly briefed by his 

officials. My question to the minister: what has he learnt about 

the reasons for the shortcomings identified in this set of data? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am very aware of the CIHI report and some of the 

discrepancies that we’re seeing in our facilities across the 

province, some that have done very well, some that are certainly 

more work to do. 

 

But what we are doing and what we’re doing through the Health 

Quality Council as well — if you wanted to visit the Health 

Quality Council where we have kind of status reports of all 

facilities — is being more transparent than we ever had been 

before. I can remember in the days, Mr. Speaker, former 

governments and former ministers would certainly hate to have 

any negative information out regarding the facilities. What we 

want to do is the ones that aren’t operating as up to par . . . I 

shouldn’t even say up to par, but up to the standard that we 

would like to see, Mr. Speaker, we make that public. We 

challenge them to improve their services, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s what they’re doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look at heart 

attacks here in the province. Compared to the national risk-

adjusted average, the number of heart attack victims who are 

readmitted to hospital within 28 days is 116 per cent higher at 

the Cypress Regional Hospital, 136 per cent higher in Yorkton, 

138 per cent higher in The Battlefords, 192 per cent higher in 

Humboldt, and 230 per cent higher in Wynyard. The number of 

heart attack victims who die in hospital within 30 days is 31 per 

cent higher in Prince Albert, 36 per cent higher in Weyburn, 

113 per cent higher in Nipawin, and 353 per cent higher in 

Humboldt. 

 

My question to the minister: since the release of this data, what 

has he learned about the reasons for the significant differences 

in the readmission and mortality rates for heart attack victims 

here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a 

vast number of reasons why those numbers will vary from area 

to area, depending on the services that are provided in a smaller 

community, Mr. Speaker, the distance that individual is from 

that community. There are a number of variations and variables 

that would cause those numbers to fluctuate. 

 

But what I would say, Mr. Speaker, when you look at cardiac 

care in this province, we are a leader, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan, in Regina, and in Saskatoon. Some of the best 

cardiologists are employed right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, delivering excellent service. 

 

There is still more work to do. We have a very vast province, 

Mr. Speaker, with the population spread out. Having said that 

though, we’re continuing to work with the health regions to 

ensure that proper health care is delivered throughout the 

province, Mr. Speaker, mainly in our tertiary care centres. 

When it’s a severe heart attack, they come to those centres, Mr. 

Speaker. But there is more work to do across the whole 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the fact that the information, the 

data is risk adjusted takes into account differences in 

populations according to different parts of the province. There’s 

also troubling statistics, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the issue 

of strokes. 

 

Compared to the national risk-adjusted average, the number of 

stroke victims who are readmitted to hospital within 28 days is 

72 per cent higher in Nipawin, 81 per cent higher in Melfort, 

214 per cent higher in Lloydminster, and 410 per cent higher in 

Melville. The number of stroke victims who will die in hospital 

within 30 days is 63 per cent higher in Humboldt, 87 per cent 

higher in Kelvington, 92 per cent higher in Melville, 149 per 

cent higher in Estevan, and 194 per cent higher in Meadow 

Lake. 

 

My question to the minister: does he have any insight to offer 

on the reasons behind the significant differences in readmission 

and mortality rates for stroke victims here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would say again that 

there is work to be done, Mr. Speaker. But I can tell you that 

this year’s budget at 4.68 billion is a higher number, greatest 

number of spending on health care than this province has ever 

seen before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can tell you that for individuals that may suffer of a heart 

attack or a stroke in this province, they will be cared for far 

better in 2012 than they ever would have in the previous years, 

Mr. Speaker, because we worked hard to ensure that we have 

the proper complement of health care professionals, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s 200 more physicians working in the 

province today than in 2007 when they were government or 

even, Mr. Speaker, over 900 more nurses working in the 

province today than compared to 2007 when they were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having said that, there is still more work to do. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the health care system in 

Saskatchewan is being looked at by individuals from across 

Canada as one of the leaders in the country today. 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when we look specifically 

at the issues of heart attacks, we look at the issue of strokes, 

especially for people living in rural and regional centres, it 

would show, Mr. Speaker, that there is a significant amount of 

work to do. And the minister’s answer’s simply looking back 16 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the patients of Saskatchewan deserve more than 

that. They deserve answers to know what is going on. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister could have asked many questions to his 

officials about this. He could have asked why certain hospitals 

in Saskatchewan do not provide data to CIHI. That is one 

question he could have asked. He could have asked why we’re 

falling behind, Mr. Speaker, for the care of stroke and heart 

attack victims. He could have asked why the overall 

readmission rate is so much higher and why, Mr. Speaker, there 

are most deaths for those the first five days after surgery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many . . . I realize the answers to these 

questions are complex, Mr. Speaker, but the minister ought to 

be able to give the Assembly, give this House a better 

understanding of some of the causes for the shortcomings, Mr. 

Speaker, and some of the options for improvement beyond 

simply saying we’re leaders. There needs to be more detail than 

that. 

 

My question to the minister: when can we expect a more 

detailed explanation of the path forward with respect to options 

for improvement, Mr. Speaker, and an explanation for the 

shortcomings of this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

talked about going back 16 years. We don’t have to go back 16 

years. I went back five years and showed a huge difference 

between our government and the former NDP government. If he 

would like me to go back 16 years, I could go back to when 

they closed 52 hospitals including the Plains, Mr. Speaker. And 

then he stands in his place and wonders why the care isn’t in 

rural Saskatchewan like it used to be, Mr. Speaker. It was a 

simple fact that they closed 52 hospitals plus the Plains hospital 

here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working with all the health care 

professionals to ensure that we deliver proper care. The Health 

Quality Council through its website does an analysis of our 

facilities, Mr. Speaker. We’re making that public so that people 

can see, compare facility to facility, and so that facilities can 

compare themselves to their peers around the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Great work has been done. There is more work to do certainly, 

Mr. Speaker. But I can tell you, we have come a long ways 

from the dark days of the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Literacy Programming 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, ensuring everyone in our 

province has the literacy skills to get an education and a career 

should be an obvious goal of government. It should be a top 

priority. However, this government has failed to support a key 

provider of literacy in our province. The Saskatchewan 

Aboriginal Literacy Network relies on various programs to 

work to improve community and Aboriginal literacy. Due to 

cuts by this government, the network doesn’t have the funding 

to help Aboriginal communities with literacy programs to do 

this meaningful work. 

 

To the Minister of Education: why is Aboriginal literacy 

slipping through the cracks? Saskatchewan people deserve 

better than this. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

very, very glad to get up on this particular topic. What we have 

introduced under our government is very strong support for 

literacy camps. Most of those camps are held in northern 

Saskatchewan. We have been measuring the results of those 

camps through the northern libraries and the results are 

absolutely, amazingly positive. So we’re putting core funding 

into that in this year’s budget. 

 

We are seeing that not only are the children don’t lose their 

reading ability throughout the summer months, but that they’re 

also getting families engaged. So we’re looking forward to the 

announcement of when those students can travel to Saskatoon 

to pick out their books for this year’s literacy camps. It’s 

exciting. It’s showing very, very positive results, and it again 

displays how this government is committed to literacy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was about the 

Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Network, who’s received 

funds for many years from the SaskSmart Innovation Fund. 

This program is being terminated. Described in an alarming 

email on April 23rd from the organization’s executive director, 

programs are facing cuts due to this government’s, I quote, 

“budget cutbacks.” Supporting Aboriginal literacy is essential 

to engage our potential workforce in the province, to make 

strides in Aboriginal employment, to make improvements and 

lives and communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister cutting instead of providing 

certainty and commitment to the Aboriginal Literacy Network, 

its programs, and the important goals they work towards? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The one 

thing that we are discontinuing under the SaskSmart was RFPs 

[request for proposal] that went to communities for proposals. 

We found that the proposals were not necessarily giving results. 

We felt that something like the literacy camps that we were 

measuring, those results were by far stronger and definitely 

were showing that we were improving literacy skills, especially 

in our most vulnerable communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past some of the RFPs that went out . . . 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

Maybe the NDP loved the program because they definitely had 

it under their government. And we’re reviewing what is 

showing results and what’s effective. And some of the 

proposals that came in that was accepted was that they were 

giving babysitting courses. There was some preliminary courses 

for seniors in computers. We felt that we could more effectively 

spend that money on indeed First Nations and First Nations 

young people and First Nations literacy. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister’s language disguises a cut 

that has caused uncertainty for an important organization and 

for the lives and communities for which they do work in, Mr. 

Speaker. They have millions of dollars more for more 

politicians, but when it comes to improving Aboriginal literacy 

in Saskatchewan, it’s uncertainty and cutbacks. Apparently this 

government has indicated some funds will roll out at some point 

this year to replace the cut program, but no timeline has been 

made. Consultation has been non-existent and no assurances 

have been provided for the budget dollar this year or certainly 

next year. And as the organization states in its email, cuts are 

the result, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the minister commit today to work with the Aboriginal 

Literacy Network to show some leadership, to provide some 

certainty, and to get these programs back on track? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we will be working. 

We have in the past. We will continue to work with the 

Aboriginal Literacy Network. That is not what’s been cut, quite 

frankly. What has been cut is these contracts that is not core 

program. The contracts were one-year programs. There was no 

expectancy that the programs would be repeated year over year. 

That’s not the purpose of that particular grant. 

 

So we are looking at that grant to see if it was effective. The 

RFPs that were coming forward, they were not be any means 

isolated to First Nations or First Nations literacy programs. 

They were not necessarily showing great results. So we’re 

putting our money where we are seeing great results, where we 

are targeting vulnerable communities, and that’s in the literacy 

camps. And the positive feedback that we’re getting from those 

communities is exceptional. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Relationship with Co-operatives Association 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 

federal budget we heard of the unfortunate cutting of funding to 

the Co-operative Development Initiative. This is despite the fact 

that 2012 is the UN’s [United Nations] International Year of 

Cooperatives. And now more than ever, the world over is 

recognizing the vital social and economic benefits co-operatives 

bring to our communities. 

 

However, it’s not just the federal government that’s cutting 

support to the co-ops. The Sask Party government has millions 

more, millions for more politicians, Mr. Speaker. And we saw 

that side of the House vote for more politicians multiple times. 

They also have $35,000 of Enterprise Saskatchewan money to 

sponsor a conference in Quebec. But now they’re cutting 

funding with the Saskatchewan Co-operative Association to 

help develop new, innovative co-ops in our province. To the 

minister: why is he cutting this funding with the co-operatives 

association? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. My staff recently met with the Saskatchewan 

Co-operative Association, had a very good discussion. What the 

member’s referencing was not cut. There was a two-year 

contract in place, Mr. Speaker, with the SCA [Saskatchewan 

Co-operative Association]. That contract has run its course. 

SCA has applied for a renewal of funding under a new contract. 

Enterprise officials are currently reviewing that application and 

a decision will be forthcoming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this funding with the SCA paid 

for a co-operative development officer to grow the province’s 

innovative co-ops. We’ve seen throughout our province’s 

history the vital and important role co-ops have played to bring 

services to all our communities. Co-ops and credit unions are 

completely synonymous with Saskatchewan. These cuts to 

co-ops sadly seem to be unique to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Despite the federal Conservative cuts, Manitoba and Ontario 

have committed funding to their co-operatives. 

 

This government has thousands of dollars for a Quebec 

conference and millions for more politicians. To the minister: 

will he commit today to honour this funding and reinstate it 

with the Co-operative Association and keep this vital sector 

growing in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Perhaps the member didn’t listen to the first answer. 

There’s a two-year contract in place, Mr. Speaker, with the 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Association. That contract expired. 

We’re working . . . We met recently with the SCA. They’ve 

made application for a new contract, Mr. Speaker. Enterprise is 

currently reviewing that application. 

 

What I can say, Mr. Speaker, as well and report to the House, 

Saskatchewan has the only balanced budget in the entire 

country, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has the highest population 

in the entire history of our province, Mr. Speaker, over 1.067 

million people. We’re projected by many private sector 

forecasters to continue leading Canada in economic growth this 

year and into the future. Mr. Speaker, the lowest unemployment 

rate in the entire country of 4.8 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the 

economy in this province is moving forward in great fashion 

with our balanced budget under the leadership of our Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an odd way to 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

celebrate the international year of the co-ops when he’s totally 

not answering the question, will he support the co-ops here in 

the province? We know one third of the province’s top 100 

businesses are co-ops, and most of us can find a credit union or 

a co-op membership card in our wallet. That’s an important part 

of who we are in this province. Growing our co-ops and 

developing new ones just make sense. 

 

So is this minister telling us that the money that he’s saving 

from the 65,000 he is now diverting to the 35,000 who paid for 

conferences in Quebec? Mr. Speaker, what I want to know: will 

the minister himself meet with the Co-operative Association, 

and will he reinstate that funding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a 

prime example of the danger of having your questions written 

out before you walk into the House and being unable to adjust 

when you actually get an answer. Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very 

clear that there was a two-year contract which expired, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re reviewing a request for the new application. 

 

As I can report to the House, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that 

information is the great situation that our province finds itself in 

economically: leading Canada in economic growth, the lowest 

unemployment rate in the entire country, which is good for the 

co-ops as well, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have a booming 

economy. Merchandise exports up 31 per cent in January, Mr. 

Speaker; 2011, the highest growth in retail sales and wholesale 

trade in the entire country. Our economy is moving forward in 

great fashion, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to continue 

moving forward because we have a government that 

understands the importance of low taxes and balanced budgets, 

unlike the members opposite. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 42 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 42 — The 

Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 42, An Act to amend 

The Graduate Retention Program Act. Right now I’ll give a 

little bit of history of what this Bill actually is about, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so in 2008, the government had implemented a graduate 

retention program, which was actually replacing a previous 

program that the former administration, the NDP administration 

had in place, a grad tax exemption program as well. So in 2008, 

the Sask Party decided to put their own brand on a graduate 

retention program. 

 

And so what this program that they implemented does, Mr. 

Speaker, is it provides graduates with a refund of up to $20,000 

in tuition fees over seven years. And right now under this 

current system, the entire graduate retention program benefit is 

a refundable income tax credit. So this means the tuition rebate 

is refundable to the individual irrespective of any taxes payable. 

 

So what this amendment before us here, Mr. Speaker, just four 

years later here, this amendment will, for graduates with 

sufficient income and Saskatchewan provincial tax payable, 

they will receive the graduate retention program benefit as a 

reduction in Saskatchewan provincial income tax owing. And 

so for those graduates who may not be earning sufficient 

income or claiming any other deductions in tax credits, the 

government will provide a new refundable tax credit equal to 

the unused portion of the non-refundable graduate retention 

program tax credit. So this refundable tax credit will be paid to 

graduates as an income tax refund. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to keep those who 

are attending our universities and post-secondary institutions 

here in Saskatchewan. I think that that’s one of the goals of any 

government is those who are studying, who live here or who are 

studying here, our goal should be to try to keep them here. 

 

I think one of the flaws with this program, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that it doesn’t include master’s and Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] students. So this is a government who often talks 

about innovation and we hear about the knowledge economy. 

And I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, and the opposition does 

not understand why you would not want to include some of the 

best and the brightest, those doing master’s, and Ph.D. students, 

those who are doing the research that can be applied across the 

board in all kinds of areas, Mr. Speaker, in public policy. This 

amendment, this Act would’ve been a perfect opportunity to 

include master’s and Ph.D. students in this particular program, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the one thing that we also need to talk about is the reality 

is that tuition is on the rise here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

which is a huge problem. Affordability of university is 

becoming increasingly difficult for students here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I know I have a 14-year-old who will be in university hopefully 

here in the next, well in the next four years. And I know as a 

parent I’m very concerned about the cost of her education. Her 

dad and I have put money away and continue to put money 

away for her education, but are very worried about our ability to 

pay for her education and also the possibility of her being 

strapped with huge amounts of student loans, which it’s not 

unusual to hear of young people who have 30, 40, 50, 60, 

$70,000 in student debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I can’t imagine being a young person graduating with their 

first degree, already accumulating that much debt. How do you 

ever get ahead, Mr. Speaker, when you have so much debt that 

you’ve accumulated in large part due to high tuition rates and 

the other reality of affordability here in Saskatchewan around 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

housing and some of the supports like child care? 

 

So how do you as a young person go forward, ever dream about 

owning a home or putting roots down in a community when you 

are paying huge amounts in student debt, Mr. Speaker? So I 

think . . . And again for those who want to pursue further 

education so they can continue to contribute to the economy, 

and I’d argue doing a master’s and a Ph.D. can be hugely 

beneficial to us as a society here, Mr. Speaker. As I said, the 

research that individuals do can be applied to all kinds of 

different areas here in Saskatchewan and elsewhere. So this 

again would have been a perfect opportunity. There’s 

legislation before us, Mr. Speaker, and the government should 

have seen fit to include some of our best and brightest in this 

program as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the point around student affordability, we’ve seen this 

government actually off-load some financial responsibilities to 

universities, which causes tuition to go up which we have some 

fear that that off-loading will continue to happen and tuition 

will continue to rise at rates that students can’t meet those 

tuition rates. And what ends up happening, Mr. Speaker, is 

actually high tuition rates keep students out of university 

because they don’t want to take on that huge student debt load. 

So you have people who are working in sometimes lower wage 

jobs, working as servers in restaurants. Great to work in the 

service sector, but for most people it doesn’t often put enough 

on the table to raise a family down the road. So the reality is we 

should be making sure that people who want and desire to go to 

post-secondary school have that opportunity. And rising tuition 

keeps people out of university, Mr. Speaker, because they can’t 

imagine working full-time — because that’s often what people 

have to do — working at least part-time and studying and doing 

well at their studies. So we’re putting increasing pressure on our 

students to manage their lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When it comes to some of the things that students need for 

support, housing is huge. We’ve seen rents rapidly increasing 

here in Saskatchewan in the last several years, and students 

have a very difficult time finding affordable accommodation, 

Mr. Speaker, and so that goes into the whole affordability piece. 

The government has committed to building some spots, but 

there’s no guarantee that those will be in fact affordable spaces, 

Mr. Speaker. Or the government actually hasn’t committed to 

doing them. They’ve put in place incentives that they say 

developers will create spaces, but the reality is those 

developers, there’s no commitment that those spaces will be in 

fact affordable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

On the child care side of things, often students do have children 

and family responsibilities, especially if you are more advanced 

or mature in age and you might already have a bachelor’s 

degree and you are doing a master’s or a Ph.D. 

 

So child care actually is a really huge piece of the supports 

necessary to help keep people in school, Mr. Speaker. And we 

have, for example, this government has committed to 500 

spaces this year, which is just a drop in the bucket for the 

numbers of spaces that we need here in Saskatchewan. Well I 

would argue we need a comprehensive child care policy. But 

when it comes to spaces, 500 spaces, I can think of one child 

care centre alone in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker — one centre, one 

child care centre — that has 173 children on the waiting list, 

173 children, Mr. Speaker, which is two-fifths, just about 

two-fifths of the number of spaces that this government has 

committed to this year. 

 

So when it comes to getting an education, the graduate retention 

program, of course every little bit helps. But you have to look at 

the big picture and look at what are those things that help 

students stay in school, but what are those things that actually 

get people into school in the first place. And one of them is 

affordable tuition. And the reality is tuition is becoming less 

and less affordable for students here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, which is a huge, huge problem. 

 

I think one of the other issues we see is retention, or the rates at 

which Aboriginal students stay in university, for example. I 

can’t recall the number offhand, Mr. Speaker, but I know we 

have a very high rate of dropout after the first year. Aboriginal 

students come to Saskatoon, I’m thinking the University of 

Saskatchewan in particular, and there’s all kinds of things that 

are going on, Mr. Speaker. There’s some cultural adjustments 

that need to happen. 

 

But again it’s about the supports that people need to be 

successful. And I would argue that housing and child care and 

tuition that you can afford are all things that help people stay in 

school. There are also cultural pieces and other supportive 

community pieces that need to be put in place. But those other 

supports need to be in place as well. 

 

So again I’d like to just point out that the government had a 

perfect chance, a perfect opportunity while presenting Bill No. 

42, The Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012. 

This was a perfect opportunity to include master’s and Ph.D. 

students in it as well. So I am not quite sure why this 

government wouldn’t want to put an emphasis on retaining all 

students, especially those who are going on to further research 

that can better help our province grow, and grow in a 

sustainable manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I know that I will have colleagues who will be 

interested in speaking to Bill No. 42, The Graduate Retention 

Program Amendment Act, so with that I will leave that up to my 

colleagues to add further to the debate, and I would like to 

move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 42. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 42, The Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 43 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 



1272 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise today to participate in the debate on Bill No. 43, The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012. Again these are 

consequential changes necessary in The Income Tax Act 

corresponding to a number of initiatives that were brought 

forward in the budget and that were campaigned on in the 

election in certain regards by the members opposite and as such 

are fair enough. 

 

Certainly there are two initiatives on the housing front that we 

think are reasonable, plausible, beneficial initiatives. But again 

in terms of what the situation is with housing and how these 

initiatives will or will not hit the mark in terms of meeting the 

broader concerns around the housing crisis, that remains to be 

seen. 

 

But that being said, Mr. Speaker, the first one is the first-time 

homebuyers tax credit, effective January 1st, 2012. It’s a 

non-refundable income tax credit based on the first $10,000 of a 

qualifying home purchase. And the tax expenditures associated 

with this, Mr. Speaker, is about $6.6 million for new 

homeowners and also lines up alongside a federal tax credit; 

you know, a fine initiative, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I know new 

homebuyers will appreciate any sort of assistance or help that 

can be on offer, but in the teeth of a housing crisis and a 

situation where rental accommodation is at point six per cent in 

terms of the vacancy rate, in terms of a situation where we have 

emergency housing shelters full to overflowing, again, Mr. 

Speaker, this in and of itself being a fine initiative, but in terms 

of what the broader situation is and how this impacts that or 

brings about progress, we have our doubts about that. 

 

The second initiative in this particular package as it relates to 

housing concerns multi-unit residential rental projects. And 

again we think this is, on the face of it, a fine initiative. But it’s 

interesting, Mr. Speaker. Certain of these concerns around 

multi-unit residential rental were brought forward as part of the 

Pringle-Merriman task force on housing, and certainly there 

was an expectation of action at that time. 

 

Of course, the members opposite took power in 2007, took a 

very different approach to housing issues. When the previous 

government had had record surpluses at mid-term in 2007, Mr. 

Speaker, February of 2007, I well recall the $60 million that 

was put into the building of social and affordable housing. And 

when members opposite took power in November of 2007, that 

first budget 2008, again in the teeth of a less than positive 

housing situation for a lot of people, one of the first actions was 

to cut the budget for Sask Housing. 

 

And again, when they finally woke up to the public outcry 

around the housing situation, to walk some of that anger 

backwards, Mr. Speaker, they appointed then Ted Merriman 

and Mr. Pringle to head up the Merriman-Pringle task force. 

 

They went across the province, conducted their work, and the 

incentives around multi-unit residential rental projects, I 

believe, was touched on in their report. And that again, Mr. 

Speaker, was back in 2008. That measure largely sat on the 

shelf and was not acted upon. And then we saw consecutive 

budgets and consecutive terms of inaction by members 

opposite. And then of course, Mr. Speaker, to try and get back 

into the PR [public relations] game as related to housing, the 

task force, having proved to be a bit of a dead letter, well it was 

seen fit that they should have a summit on housing, Mr. 

Speaker. And of course, they had the summit and, you know, 

that was its own round of hoopla. 

 

And apparently it’s now something of an annual affair, Mr. 

Speaker, because alongside the actions that they’re finally 

taking as relates to increasing the housing, the availability of 

affordable housing stock, particularly as it relates to incenting 

new, multi-unit residential rental projects, today of course we 

hear news of the next round of summits on the part of this 

government when it comes to throwing summits into the fight 

against the housing crisis. So it’s not a great record on the part 

of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to action 

on housing. And it’s one that is sad the way that it plays out in 

terms of again overflowing emergency housing shelters, and 

that the kind of desperate choices that people are forced to make 

when it comes to keeping a roof over their heads in this 

exceedingly tight rental market. 

 

So this particular measure, Mr. Speaker, is a good thing in and 

of itself, as is the case with the previous income tax measure as 

relates to new homebuyers. But again taken together and 

weighed alongside what is a pretty stark contrast with the 

inaction and the busywork that has gone on in terms of the task 

forcing and the summiting and the committeeing that members 

have thrown into the fray instead of real action and real 

programs, we’re not sure that that addresses the imbalance on 

that particular ledger, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re interested to see how this works out. We’re interested 

to see how the details play out. On the face of it this would 

seem to be a positive measure as regards incenting new, 

multi-unit residential rental projects. But again we await how it 

plays out on the ground and how it’s administered by this 

government. 

 

I guess moving on from the housing initiatives, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a change necessitated by pledges around the research 

and development tax credit wherein effective April 1st, 2012, 

the R & D [research and development] tax credit’s being altered 

to provide a refundable tax credit only for the first $3 million in 

eligible expenditures incurred by small business corporations. 

All other eligible expenditure is now being provided a 

non-refundable tax credit to be deducted against taxes otherwise 

payable and the tax credit rate remaining at 15 per cent. Again, 

Mr. Speaker, we think that’s a fair measure in and of itself. 

 

The idea of incenting economic activity through tax credits is 

one that is a measure that’s deployed throughout the economy, 

Mr. Speaker. And again while we see this going forward as a 

positive thing on the one hand, we see the unrelenting campaign 

on the part of members opposite when it comes to the way that 

the film employment tax credit helped to support and enable the 

thriving of a film industry in this province. And the way that 

they’re trying to now explain that it’s no, not, it’s not a tax 

credit; it’s a grant. Well, Mr. Speaker, the arguments that are 

made for this kind of economic activity, this kind of fiscal lever 

being utilized certainly hold true. And we think that they hold 

true for the film employment tax credit and that’s been the 

history of that particular measure. I guess what we are 

disappointed to see, Mr. Speaker, is the inconsistency. 

 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

I’m glad that you’re finding my remarks soothing, Mr. Speaker, 

to the point of perhaps sending you into an altered state of 

consciousness. But again, Mr. Speaker, if only we could pull 

the sheets over our eyes when it comes to the inconsistencies 

being presented by this government as it relates to tax credits 

being deployed on the one hand for certain economic activity 

and then somehow those rules being suspended and we’re asked 

to believe something entirely different when it comes to the 

film employment tax credit. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hey, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think he 

should involve the Speaker in the debate. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I’m interested to note the Finance minister, the 

member from Canora-Pelly apparently auditioning for a 

Speaker gig. I didn’t realize the Speaker was planning on going 

anywhere but . . . Or perhaps it’s the House Leader gig that he’s 

looking for, Mr. Speaker. But I thought he’d be busy enough 

with the Finance ministry and certainly he was busy answering 

questions last night in the committee. Apparently we’ve 

touched a number of chords over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s a lot of interest in the speech and we’re glad for that 

because perhaps what they could do is listen closely and then 

explain how it is that with the tax credits being on offer for 

innovation, Mr. Speaker, and research and development, how 

it’s been put forward in that regard but then when it comes to 

the film employment tax credit — something that members 

opposite have been on record in supporting for many years, Mr. 

Speaker, and something that certainly was nowhere to be seen 

when it came to the words and the platforms of the members 

opposite in the last campaign — how it is that we came to this 

budget only to see the film employment tax credit be axed by 

members opposite without consulting the industry, without 

consulting partners, without talking to the people whose 

livelihoods are affected by this. 

 

And people whose livelihoods have seen visits from members 

opposite when it came to, you know, hobnobbing around on the 

set of Corner Gas or declaring Corner Gas Day or many of the 

measures that the members opposite were quite happy to jump 

on the bandwagon for, Mr. Speaker. But when it came to talk 

to, when it came time to talk to the actual people that are out 

there in the industry and making a go of it in the film and 

television industry, well we didn’t see them talk about this, Mr. 

Speaker. And in fact we saw a fairly significant amount of 

consultation that pointed in exactly the opposite direction. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, there’s an inconsistency here between 

the research and development tax credit that’s being proposed 

and the rationale that is being embraced in a bear hug by 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and when it comes to the 

situation around the refundable tax or the R & D tax credit on 

the other, we don’t see the consistency in that, Mr. Speaker. 

And I guess we wish we did see the consistency where if it’s 

good enough to put forward in R & D tax credit on the one hand 

and use that as a valuable tool in the economy, Mr. Speaker, 

we’d like them to live up to their past rhetoric when it came to 

the value of the film industry in this province. We’d love to see 

them live up to their rhetoric in past as to the worthiness of the 

film employment tax credit. We’d love to see them have a 

commitment to the film industry, Mr. Speaker, that extends 

beyond showing up to hobnob around the set of various film 

and television productions. We’d love to see them actually 

work in partnership and respect with the people that actually 

have made a success in this industry, who’ve provided 

opportunities for young, creative people in this province. We’d 

love to see them do something more than just drop a bomb on 

them on budget day, Mr. Speaker, and then engage in a stopgap 

measure where they extend the deadline for this, the application 

of this, which again in and of itself, Mr. Speaker, is signal to 

just sort of the thoughtlessness and the recklessness with which 

these members opposite have treated the lives of the people 

involved in the film and television industry. 

 

So they need to pull their socks up there, Mr. Speaker. They 

need to get consistent when it comes to, if there’s a rationale 

around tax credits for R & D, if there’s a rationale for tax 

credits in any number of other sectors in the economy, Mr. 

Speaker, if there’s a rationale that they’ve supported in past and 

supported up until this election, Mr. Speaker, and through this 

election only to do a one-eighty and whiplash the industry, Mr. 

Speaker, with this budget, we would like to see that. We should 

see that. The people of Saskatchewan should see that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I guess the next thing that is on offer in this particular bundle of 

income tax amendments concerns the changes to the graduate 

retention program. Again this is effective January 1st, 2012: the 

tuition rebate being replaced by a non-refundable tax credit 

deductible against taxes otherwise payable, the non-refundable 

tax credit being supplemented by a new refundable tax credit 

for individuals not having sufficient taxes payable to fully 

utilize the non-refundable tax credit. This enables the GRP 

[graduate retention program] to more closely reflect the fact that 

the majority of tax credits claimed are used to reduce income 

taxes otherwise payable. When taken together, these new tax 

credits will purportedly ensure that graduates continue to 

receive their whole GRP entitlement. Again, Mr. Speaker, we 

think, fair enough. We’re glad to see that a response of changes 

are being made under The Income Tax Act to ensure that the 

stated intent of the program is being lived up to in action. So 

we’re glad to see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as was referenced by my colleague from Saskatoon 

Riversdale as regards the situation for the affordability of 

post-secondary education generally, there are any number of 

issues that regards the impact, the ability of students to get into 

post-secondary education and then to stay in post-secondary 

education, and affordability is certainly one of them. And what 

we’ve seen in this action, what we’ve seen in the actions of this 

government opposite, Mr. Speaker, is again a relatively positive 

step on the one hand with this particular tax measure, but on the 

other hand we see tuition going up yet again. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP was in power, in 

terms of the record investments, the nation-leading investments 

that were made in post-secondary education, there was a 

commitment on the part of that government that didn’t translate 

into the kind of tuition gains that we would have liked to have 

seen, Mr. Speaker. But I do know that in terms of the expansion 

of infrastructure at my alma mater, the University of Regina, 

from 1993 to 2003, the physical footprint doubled of that 

institution, Mr. Speaker. And we saw the kind of translation 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

from investment to actual offerings for university students at the 

U of R being improved. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, alongside that we saw moves on tuition 

that we had cause for concern about and that necessitated a 

tuition freeze and it necessitated other proposals being made. 

But it’s unfortunate to see, Mr. Speaker, that the graduate 

retention program again itself for this government, having its 

genesis in adapting and changing a graduate retention program 

that was on offer in 2007, brought in in the budget of 2007, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s certainly one thing that’s worth pointing out in 

this debate. 

 

It’s also interesting to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this does 

nothing to address the importance of extending this program to 

graduate students, Mr. Speaker, the kind of knowledge and 

innovation and impact on a knowledge economy that is 

represented by graduate students, Mr. Speaker. That’s an 

important consideration that we know that students have been 

calling for but that the post-secondary education sector is very 

much interested in as well, Mr. Speaker. And it would be again 

if we’re going to incent research and development activity on 

the one hand and then not do our part to remain competitive in 

attracting and retaining graduate students in any number of 

sectors, Mr. Speaker, to the province, well it again doesn’t seem 

consistent to us, Mr. Speaker. And we think that there’s a better 

job to be done for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The remaining income tax amendment in the package, Mr. 

Speaker, concerns the technical clarification requested by 

Canada Revenue Agency allowing Saskatchewan low-income 

tax credit be claimed by both parents for children in a shared 

custody arrangement matching the federal change made last 

year to the federal GST, the federal goods and services tax 

credit. Again, Mr. Speaker, that would seem to be fair enough 

and would seem to be a fine measure in its own right but more a 

matter of followership on the part of this government as 

opposed to leadership. 

 

So to recap, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, Bill No. 43, a number of fine measures 

contained therein, Mr. Speaker: two regarding housing, one 

regarding research and development, one regarding the graduate 

retention program, another regarding changes required for 

shared custody arrangements for low-income tax folks. Again 

fine measures, Mr. Speaker, but in terms of how they’re put 

forward and how they address the respective concerns that 

they’re put forward to impact, we think that on a number of 

fronts these measures, while fine, don’t quite get the whole job 

done. 

 

I know that other of my colleagues are very interested in 

participating in this debate, Mr. Speaker, so as such I would 

move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 43, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 37 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 37 — The 

Tourism Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to stand in my place today to offer my initial comments 

on Bill 37, An Act respecting Tourism Saskatchewan. And as 

most of the people that follow politics and certainly may watch 

the channel from time to time might know, that Bill 37 really is 

to take away Tourism Saskatchewan from the industry players 

and from being an arm’s-length organization from government. 

 

And what the proposal here today, Mr. Speaker, is to fire all 

those people and fire all those prominent players in the tourism 

industry and simply say, thanks, see you later; we’re now going 

to set-up a Treasury Board Crown that’ll now take care of 

tourism, and we’ll coordinate everything out of government 

because government knows best when it comes to tourism 

strategy, not the players and certainly not the staff and not some 

of the important players within Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this Bill No. 37 is. It’s all about 

the plan by the Sask Party to simply get rid of Tourism 

Saskatchewan as a separate entity and as an independent agency 

that is able to do some of the work to coordinate and to help 

develop tourism strategies and opportunities for our province 

and thus create . . . What we think is important is to make sure 

that the rest of the country and the world know how great 

Saskatchewan is as a province, and a place that you might want 

to visit as tourists and the place you might want to call home as 

potential workers and so on and so forth. 

 

So tourism plays an incredible role, Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing 

the numbers of $1.7 billion in terms of the impact on the 

economy. And we’re certainly pleased to see that that kind of 

effort by the private sector players, by those involved with the 

tourism industry, has paid great dividends for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the things that’s 

really important. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we obviously know that when this Bill was 

introduced, the minister made some comments indicating 

they’ve done a review of the Act. They’ve done an analysis of 

how Tourism Saskatchewan worked, and basically this was 

after all that work was done. The Saskatchewan Party, the Sask 

Party decided to put this Tourism Saskatchewan as a tourism 

Crown or a Treasury Board Crown. And clearly they wanted to 

get rid of this arm’s-length organization and they’ve done so in 

one fell swoop, Mr. Speaker. They indicated that was their plan 

and that’s exactly what they’ve done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what is going on here is the minister got up 

and alluded to the review of The Tourism Saskatchewan Act, 

and this was some of the comments he made. And I want to 

quote, Mr. Speaker. The minister at that time said, quote: 

 

At this time, I’d like to read the eight guiding principles 

for the review developed by the steering committee and 

recorded in volume 1 of the review: 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

(1) The review needs to be visionary. 

(2) The growth of the tourism industry in terms of gross 

revenue should be the focus. 

(3) The relationships in the industry should emphasize 

collaboration. 

(4) Recommendations should emphasize a 

simplification of processes. 

(5) Recommendations should be informed by best 

practices. 

(6) Recommendations should be action-oriented and as 

specific as possible indicating responsibility for the 

action and timeframe. 

(7) There are no sacred cows. 

 

And finally: 

 

(8) The review will be transparent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was what the minister indicated as a result of 

the review that he was talking about as they look and work 

through the process of how we can develop a good, sound 

tourism strategy for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, two of the points that I would like to raise 

out of that particular statement that the minister made when he 

was introducing this Bill, Bill 37, is the fact that . . . The two 

points I would raise is that the item no. 7, that there are no 

sacred cows, and of course no. 8 that the review will be 

transparent — those two guiding principles, Mr. Speaker, it is 

clear as day now. When they said there’ll be no sacred cows, 

the Tourism Saskatchewan board — and they’re independent 

players; they’re private sector players — certainly got that 

message. 

 

They now know that they weren’t sacred cows in any way, 

shape, or form, and they were cast under the bus and certainly 

thrown out of the door when it comes to their planning and their 

expertise and their opportunity to participate in this very vital 

industry. They were told, no thanks for all the work that you’ve 

done. And they were also told that, absolutely not, you’re not 

going to have any role in the future. And you were considered 

— that’s what the Saskatchewan Party is saying to the Tourism 

Saskatchewan players — that you were considered a sacred cow 

and we don’t have sacred cows, so you are now dust. You are 

now gone. We don’t need you any more. And that’s one of the 

things that the minister alluded to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other point that’s also important is the transparency that the 

minister spoke about, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely amazing that 

he was talking about transparency when he introduced this Bill, 

when there was no transparency in their plans to develop this 

Treasury Board Crown at the expense of the private sector 

Crown, Mr. Speaker, or the private sector organization. And 

what happened, Mr. Speaker, was that this group of committed 

men and women, industry players and very qualified staff, they 

were basically not advised in any way, shape, or form that this 

government, the Sask Party, had a plan to throw them under the 

bus, get rid of them, not appreciate some of the work they were 

doing, nor recognize the work that they accomplished. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened over time to a number of 

politicians that spoke about values in politics. And, Mr. 

Speaker, one such politician I remember saying the words that 

in order for you to be successful in politics that you must first of 

all acknowledge people. You must then, of course, share your 

vision as a politician, as a leader. And of course that you also, at 

the end of the day, provide hope if you do those two previous 

attributes when you meet and greet with people. 

 

Now what happened, Mr. Speaker, is that the tourism sector 

itself, the players that were involved, the players that were 

involved with the Tourism Saskatchewan entity, they 

participated, Mr. Speaker. And they had great optimism. They 

had great energy. They had great vision. And obviously after a 

number of months of working through this process, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that there was huge disappointment. 

There was extreme disappointment when they were told out of 

the blue that — guess what? — that Tourism Saskatchewan 

entity is now history. We thank you for your work. See you 

later. We are now taking over as the government. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker, what I believe the end result 

was? It’s not about engaging the private sector to a point where 

they should be engaged, Mr. Speaker. That’s really important 

work that needs to be done. I think it’s all about trying to jump 

in front of the parades attached to all the tourism opportunity in 

our province. It’s all about taking credit for some of the hard 

work being done by the private sector players out there, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s all about promotion, self-promotion by the 

Sask Party. And that’s what this Bill is about, Mr. Speaker, 

because obviously it doesn’t do anything else, Mr. Speaker, 

except give them control of the tourism functions and tourism 

opportunities at the expense of the private sector. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is all about marketing, not marketing of the province 

but marketing of the Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

clearly, from our perspective, what this is all about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the review being transparent, well we can 

throw out one of those guiding principles. It was never 

transparent to begin with. About the only thing that I think that 

hits home here in terms of being . . . recognizing the fact there 

was no sacred cows. And I think the Tourism Saskatchewan 

board and the staff and all the people of all the committees that 

worked towards building this entity, they certainly got that 

message loud and clear from the Sask Party that they are no 

sacred cow. And they got rid of the Tourism Saskatchewan 

board and players as quickly as can be. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I think is also important is that some of 

the points that the minister raised in this particular Bill, and I 

want to point at one particular section, and I quote: “Since 2008 

more than 70 events have received support, and we have some 

exciting events coming up that our ministry is supporting.” And 

these include the 2012 Canadian Country Music Awards in 

Saskatoon supported by a grant of three seventy-five, the 2013 

Juno Awards, and I would also point out that they’re very proud 

of their participation in the 2013 Memorial Cup in Saskatoon. 

So, Mr. Speaker, end my quote there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can see that all these events that are coming 

forward that are going to be part of what we would celebrate as 

a province, the plan that I can see, Mr. Speaker, based on this 

particular minister in the Sask Party and their particular plan 

overall, is that they want to jump in front of all these parades 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

and simply say, look what the Sask Party’s doing for this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, that self-promotion is something 

that the people of Saskatchewan can see through. They know 

that’s what the original plan is, and from our perspective as 

opposition, we think it is wrong in every way, shape, and form 

because people don’t appreciate that. 

 

When you turn around and say to the private sector players that 

want to develop a really, truly solid tourism opportunity and 

industry, you should engage them wholeheartedly. You should 

embrace their role and you should certainly learn and listen 

from them. What you shouldn’t do is throw them under the bus 

and say, look, your industry’s not important to the Sask Party. 

Your industry is simply going to be one of the pawns in our 

parades of self-promotion. That’s exactly what this Bill is all 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would point out that the reason why we would allude to 

some of these facts, Mr. Speaker, is that what we’ve seen from 

the Saskatchewan Party, Sask Party government on a continual 

basis, it’s all about self-promotion, Mr. Speaker, and it’s all 

about agendas that are going to . . . such as The Election Act 

that are primarily intended to promote them and support them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to go on to a few other points that I think is also 

important to raise that I think people would really want to hear 

about, Mr. Speaker. Again this is some of the minister’s 

opening comments in reference to this Bill, and I quote, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Once again I’d like to thank Tourism Saskatchewan for 

all their good efforts, their hard work, and to let them 

know we are looking forward to working with them to 

continue to grow this wonderful industry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if somebody fires me, I don’t want to look 

forward to working with them as well. So I think from the 

tourism industry perspective, the Tourism Saskatchewan 

perspective, I would say that, no, you know, once we 

participated in this process with you and then you turn around 

and throw us under the bus for whatever reason. We still don’t 

understand. We weren’t advised of this previously. Now you’re 

throwing us under the bus and now you want to say you 

continue looking forward to working with you. If I was the 

Tourism Saskatchewan member, I would tell this government, 

absolutely not; I’m not planning on working with you. 

 

I think you’ve disappointed a lot of these organizations, a lot of 

these businesses, and a lot of these people, because obviously 

this is all about self-promotion for the Saskatchewan Party. Not 

self-promotion for the people of Saskatchewan, not 

self-promotion for these particular private sector players, not 

self-promotion for tourism. It’s all about trying to control this 

process and to put their faces and pictures and names in front of 

every single parade that they can figure out that’s going to 

happen in Saskatchewan over the next four or five years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now what that clearly shows us as an opposition caucus is that 

these folks, the Sask Party, will do anything to anybody — and 

maybe even some of their own supporters — to make sure that 

they continue flying their flag and continue their shameful 

self-promotion and strategy, which I think people of 

Saskatchewan are going to catch on to very quickly. And that’s 

something that ought to be sung from the highest hill in the 

province of Saskatchewan because we know, in opposition, that 

this is happening. And now the people of Saskatchewan, 

through actions such as this Bill, are certainly getting the 

message. 

 

So I would point out to all those Tourism Saskatchewan players 

that done a considerable amount of work, we think that some of 

the plans they had and some of the comments they made, and 

certainly the willingness that they displayed at the outset, at the 

start of this process, that they’re prepared to come in, many 

times at their own expense, many times with their own time, 

that they wanted to make a difference. They really wanted to 

make a difference to this process. 

 

And after a couple of months and things are going really well, 

in a couple of years things are starting to gel, this government 

pulls the mat out from underneath them and throws them under 

the bus and says, okay, we’re going to do this now because 

things are going so well for Tourism Saskatchewan. They 

noticed things were going very well for Tourism Saskatchewan. 

They noticed how the industry was promoting itself and 

developing strategies and were becoming exciting. In fact, they 

noticed how well the job was being done in Tourism 

Saskatchewan that they decided, well, we better try and get 

some of that credit as opposed to simply giving these guys, you 

know, all the resources, some of the resources that they need to 

do this work. Well we need to get that credit. We need to get 

ourselves in front of those parades, in front of those events, to 

make ourselves look like we know what we’re doing, to make 

ourselves look important so people will continue to elect us, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s all this is about, is about power and control. And using 

people, quality people like the people that were on Tourism 

Saskatchewan, just for their simple own political benefit, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s a crying shame. It is an absolute crying 

shame to see all these great people that done a huge amount of 

work within Tourism Saskatchewan to be thrown out like that 

and disregarded and discarded for a lot of their great ideas that 

they contribute to this process, for no other reason than a 

political agenda. And, Mr. Speaker, people are seeing right 

through that in droves, and they’ll continue seeing through that, 

Mr. Speaker. No question in my mind. 

 

So again I will ask the question in terms of the sacred cows 

point that the minister alluded to, in terms of the number of 

exciting events that are coming forward, the fact that the 

minister himself is talking about, you know, thanking these 

former members of Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

This Bill in every way, shape, or form is just a Bill that just 

doesn’t need to be put forward. And the manner in which the 

minister patronizes the former board members and people that 

played an important role is also something that needs to be 

highlighted, Mr. Speaker. Because you don’t do that to people. 

You simply don’t treat people in that fashion. You sit down 

with them, give them the opportunity to strengthen their 

industry and therefore their businesses and therefore our 

province overall. And then after they work hard and they 

contribute and they commit and you’ve got them on board, you 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

then turn around and say, well because you’ve done your job so 

well, we’re seeing that a lot of people are respecting some of 

the work you’re doing and you’re having success, well we now 

need to take over that success and over that spotlight and point 

it at the Sask Party politicians. That’s what this is about, Mr. 

Speaker, and everybody on this side of the Assembly and the 

people of Saskatchewan, and I dare say the people that were on 

the committee before, also see that this is clearly an opportunity 

for the Saskatchewan Party to simply and primarily promote 

themselves. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that shameless self-promotion is something 

that the people of Saskatchewan don’t tolerate. They don’t think 

it’s a great idea at all. And why is that, that they’re doing this, 

Mr. Speaker? What is so important for the Saskatchewan Party 

to do that to a group of dedicated men and women again? It’s 

totally beyond us as an opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the actual tourism opportunity 

. . . And this is what’s really conflicting and confusing for us. 

Because we think, as an example, the film industry itself, the 

tax credit that was given to the film industry in general, that 

there was a great amount of promotion of our province through 

that film industry and the tax credit that they got. It was 

something that Bill 37 should have been clearly tied to and even 

SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network], Mr. Speaker, 

our own communications network, that also promoted and 

supported Saskatchewan as a province to visit and a province to 

reckon with when it comes to trying to attract people to our 

communities and to our land. And they’ve done away with SCN 

and they’ve done away with the film employment tax credit and 

now they’re doing away with Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

So you sit there and you see all this activity happening. And 

people in Saskatchewan are saying, what is going on? Are we 

here to promote and support our province? And are we here to 

promote and defend our interests? Are we here to promote and 

defend the private sector’s interests when they’re looking at 

different economic opportunities such as tourism? And one by 

one these groups are getting slapped back and knocked down 

and certainly being used by the Saskatchewan Party and, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan have simply had 

enough. They’ve had enough of this kind of activity. And if this 

Sask Party thinks that within two to three years the people are 

going to forget about this, I would remind them that their 

memories will linger for a long, long time. 

 

And a lot of Tourism Saskatchewan members will know that 

they were fired by this particular government. They will know 

that they were used by this particular government. And they 

will know at the end of the day that some of their very best 

efforts, some of their genuine, pure, best efforts were simply 

being used for political gain that they didn’t want no part of. 

And now, Mr. Speaker, they were dragged into and they were 

used and utilized, and that’s again an absolute shame in the 

manner, the way the Sask Party has treated these dedicated 

people, these dedicated men and women of the tourism 

industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out again that we talked a bit 

about what the minister has spoke about. And I alluded to some 

of the board members on how I would feel if I was a board 

member to be treated in such a fashion. And I also spoke about 

the minister himself in terms of why he would allow this 

process to proceed. Because generally ministers do have, should 

have control of the programs and the services they have within 

their appropriate ministries. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, why did the minister not defend the Tourism 

Saskatchewan entity? Why did they, why did he throw them 

under the bus? Why didn’t he speak up for those members? 

Why didn’t he defend the values all those members brought to 

this committee? And I still don’t know the answer for that, Mr. 

Speaker. So I started thinking in terms of why would he do that. 

Why would he not work with a entity or in a group of people, a 

group of organized people, dedicated, successful people, to get 

advice how to build tourism? Why wouldn’t he do that, Mr. 

Speaker? And again it leads us to point out to the people that 

were thrown under the bus, and to the rest of the people of 

Saskatchewan, that his plan all along was simply use them and 

get all the great information that they had and do his own 

self-promotion. 

 

Because I would remind people that are listening to this 

particular broadcast in terms of the opportunity in tourism that 

this was the same minister, Mr. Speaker, that when he ran for 

office, for the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

office, he had a bunch of his staff members sit in a mall, I think 

it was a food court area, where they pretended that he was on 

the campaign trail. He walked in there — and from what I can 

gather; I didn’t see the actual article — but this is the same 

minister that walked in the food court, and before he got there 

got all of his staff members to go sit in there. And as the camera 

was rolling, he walks in and everybody gets up and shakes his 

hand. Well, Mr. Speaker, if I’m your staff member and you 

walk into a mall, I’m going to go shake your hand too. That was 

all staged. That was all staged, Mr. Speaker. And that is a 

shameful act I think overall because that’s poor acting, certainly 

from my perspective. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So if people out there don’t believe self-promotion is the end 

objective of this particular Bill, I would suggest they not only 

look at the minister’s action, Mr. Speaker, but the Sask Party 

actions as well. Because it’s evident from many, many quarters 

that their plan is much greater in terms of the engagement of 

good, common sense, everyday people out there versus their 

political plan overall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think the minister setting up this photo op in a food court at 

a mall is something that people should never forget because I 

don’t think that’s a fair and proper thing to do. You don’t 

pre-organize that thing, organize those events, because that’s 

shameful an I don’t think people would appreciate that at all. 

 

And secondly is you don’t use people to the extent that they 

used the Tourism Saskatchewan players and the people that 

participated in the process. You don’t use them to build a 

successful entity and then turn around saying, we don’t want 

you any more because your work’s going so well; you guys are 

getting all the great credit and things are moving well, but we 

want to be able to put our people in front of those parades. We 

want to be able to put our minister’s picture or our Premier’s 

picture in front of those pamphlets and brochures. We want to 

be able to speak at some of these great events to the throngs of 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

people who might be gathered, say, for a really big hockey 

tournament. That’s exactly what this is about, Mr. Speaker. And 

absolutely everybody and their dog in Saskatchewan knows 

that’s what this Bill is about. 

 

So why would we, from the opposition perspective, sit here and 

simply say to the Sask Party, go ahead and use people? We 

would sit . . . Absolutely not. We’re here to defend those 

interests and to help those folks and organizations that 

genuinely had a belief that these guys were going to do 

something different. And, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t done a 

thing different from what we see from the 1980s Conservatives. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this act before. We’ve seen this 

show before. And now they’re back. They’re back in any way, 

shape, or form. They’re going to try and fulfill their agenda, and 

how they do it is they go through motions of this sort that would 

certainly help them achieve their political plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the point that I raised a bit 

earlier about the tourism industry. Because I can tell you there’s 

so many different programs out there on television, whether it 

is, you know, the dog creek . . . What’s the name of the show? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Corner Gas. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Corner Gas that has incredible recognition 

right across the country. I think Brent Butt and company had 

done a great job. They’ve done a great job in terms of 

promoting Saskatchewan. Little Mosque on the Prairie is 

another great promotion of our province. Wapos Bay is another 

good example. It’s, you know, it’s an animation series. 

 

Like these are programs, Mr. Speaker, that everybody in 

Saskatchewan’s familiar with and I would suggest that the 

people of Canada are also familiar with. So from my 

perspective we say, well why would you turn around and 

actually withdraw funding from those organizations that do an 

incredible amount to market our province and thus develop a 

tourism strategy for Saskatchewan overall? Well not only did 

the Sask Party put the kibosh on this particular tax credit for the 

film industry; they then turn around and shut down SCN. And 

now they’re taking over Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

So people are sitting back saying, what the heck is going on? 

Doesn’t make any common sense, Mr. Speaker. Doesn’t make 

any common sense for the average person out there as to why 

this particular government is doing some of these things. And I 

would say to them that obviously this goes right to the top. It 

goes right to the Premier. He has to account for the actions of 

his ministers, and if he’s standing there, and if he’s standing 

there, Mr. Speaker, allowing some of these activities to occur 

under his watch, then he’s just as guilty as the minister who’s 

promoting the creation of this Crown as opposed to engaging 

the private sector. You can’t deny that, and you can’t separate 

yourself from that whatsoever. 

 

And I’d also point out I think what’s really, really important. 

This is the same minister that set up a photo op for CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] to come along and see 

him shake hands with all these friendly people in a food court in 

a mall, and later they find out all these friendly people were 

indeed members of his family or some of his staff, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think that is absolutely shameful for somebody to 

organize and to preplan a photo shoot just to make themselves 

look good in the public. And, Mr. Speaker, that stuff really 

catches up to you later on. 

 

And I would again point out that this particular Bill is exactly 

what I would characterize as something that the Saskatchewan 

Party saw that was working really well. They’ve seen Tourism 

Saskatchewan move things forward. They’ve seen good 

engagement by the sector players. They’ve seen that the 

industry was building. They were getting events planned. 

People were building a solid plan overall in terms of what they 

wanted to develop in tourism. The people were getting excited. 

They really thought they had an opportunity. 

 

And then, bang, this minister and this particular Sask Party 

government and the Premier pulled the rug out from underneath 

them and sold them down the river and saying, thank you very 

much but we don’t need you any more, and threw them under 

the bus. We are now going to lead the parade on tourism 

because all the great work you’re doing, all the events, we want 

to be able to put our picture and our politicians — and three 

more politicians we hope to do later on — but put them all in 

front of all the parades so we can wave at the crowds for the 

events that the Tourism Saskatchewan industry folks organized 

for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s not the first time we’ve seen this action, Mr. Speaker. I 

can remember when the current member for Canora-Pelly, who 

is now the Finance minister . . . Well many times you bring a 

book to your school and you open the book and usually, it’s a 

book on math or English or whatever. Well now what the 

Minister of Finance did at the time when he was the minister of 

Education, well he got his picture put on many of these 

textbooks that the classes were getting and, you know, the 

young people were wondering, well why is the minister’s 

picture on some of the textbooks for some of our schools? 

 

Well that’s exactly our point. It’s all about self-promotion, Mr. 

Speaker. And we don’t have any kind of credit for the good 

solid management. You don’t have credit for building the 

economy. You don’t have credit for building the, you know, 

breaking down the debt problem we had. We don’t have the 

credit, the historical credit, for all those things, and there’s two 

things you do. Number one is you do shameless and constant 

self-promotion. That’s what they’re doing now. And the second 

thing is you try and gerrymander the electoral processes as we 

witnessed to The Election Act, when you talk about adding 

more MLAs. 

 

So this is what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. It’s a natural 

reaction of right wingers. We understand that, but the shameful 

part of this, Mr. Speaker, in the process, they used a lot of good, 

quality people. And that’s the unfortunate reality that many of 

the people within Tourism Saskatchewan are slowly beginning 

to realize, that they had been had. They had been used by this 

government and now that the work is done — and some of the 

work will be ongoing of course, but the vast amount of work 

has been done —these kind people that have come forward to 

give their perspective and to share their beliefs and to give some 

solid advice in the hopes of helping their industry, they were 

simply used and they’re not happy about this at all. 

 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

And the worst thing, Mr. Speaker, is if they had been told, if 

they had been told. That’s what adds insult to injury, Mr. 

Speaker. Had they been told that over the next two years, we’re 

going to ask your advice to set up a Crown, a Treasury Board 

Crown corporation, and we’d ask you to join us and to really 

push hard to build this Treasury Board Crown. 

 

At the end of the day know well, know very well that your work 

will be done within a two-year time frame. Had these groups of 

people been told that — these private sector players within the 

tourism industry, had they been told that; the staff, had they 

been told that — had they been totally upfront with them and 

honest with them, had they been told that at the end of this 

process you could very well be disbanded, and we’ll build this 

Treasury Board Crown that can do all the work you need to 

make sure there’s constant effort in trying to meet some of the 

issues that you’re raising, then I think maybe some of the 

people within Tourism Saskatchewan may have accepted that. 

But, Mr. Speaker, they were not told this in any way, shape, or 

form. They were set up. 

 

So it’s one thing to use people, but it’s another thing to set them 

up. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what the Sask Party’s 

done. And there’s no question in my mind that it’s a shameful 

act of self-promotion and that’s a disrespectful act towards 

players, industry players that we should value a heck of a lot 

more than what we’ve seen evidenced under the Saskatchewan 

Party government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that from our perspective, from the 

Sask Party opposition . . . from the current opposition benches, 

that we’re going to continue defending those people that feel 

that they have been wronged. And bit by bit, whether it’s the 

teachers, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s the chiropractors, whether 

it’s the Aboriginal community, whether it’s the farmers in the 

gallery today talking about drainage, whether it’s about the 

teachers, and all the different . . . the labour movement, this 

government has been hurting and fighting and trying to go to 

war with. Bit by bit those organizations, those people, those 

entities are going to start waking up. And when they wake up, 

they’re going to get angry with this particular government 

because they know they’ve been hoodwinked. And it’s not a 

good thing to do, to hoodwink people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would suggest to you that as they continue building up the 

base of people that don’t support them any more, Mr. Speaker, 

things will change in Saskatchewan. Things will change in 

Saskatchewan. And I would say to the people of the province, 

particularly the people that are impacted by this Bill, we 

understand. We understand how you’ve been used. We 

understand how you have dedicated yourself to your industry 

and to this process, and now we understand the frustration and 

the anger you feel. We understand all that. We also understand 

the fact that some of the work, some of the work that you have 

done will be of much value to the people of Saskatchewan and 

your industries over time. And that value will be realized 

because of your work. 

 

But as you begin to realize how poorly you were treated by the 

Sask Party, and the anger that you start feeling overall, know 

this: that within the next three and a half years you’ll have the 

opportunity to cast your own judgment as to how the Sask Party 

government is doing and how you’ve been treated by them. 

We know many of them, many of the players that were 

appointed or maybe involved in the private sector may have 

been supportive of the Sask Party, but now they’re beginning to 

realize that they’re simply been used. They’ve been had. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is the reaction of a party that doesn’t know 

what they’re doing. And we’re seeing evidence of that on a 

continual basis after their second term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would say that to the players out there that got impacted by 

this, we certainly would like your support. We certainly want 

you to participate in the process in terms of fighting back, 

making sure that you know that your work was not in vain, and 

that it wasn’t there to be used in the political sense, but there’s 

opportunity to fight back. So we’d invite you to write your 

letters, get petitions going, and bring forward your concerns to 

this Assembly because we can certainly bring those points 

forward for you on a continual, consistent basis. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that people know that 

when we sit here and we see what the Sask Party’s doing, there 

are a great many concerns out there. There are great concerns 

out there on how they’re managing things overall. And as much 

as we sit here today and listen to the right wingers rant about 

how they built this economy, of how things are going so great, 

and how there’s unprecedented revenues, great population 

growth, and a good economy, Mr. Speaker, we are now seeing 

clear evidence that they have abandoned the environmental file. 

They have abandoned many communities. They have 

abandoned many organizations, at one time believed in them 

that don’t, no longer believe in them. 

 

And they were starting to see evidence of two things: (1) is how 

they have mismanaged a lot of things within their government; 

and (2) of how they utilized people to a point where it’s 

shameful and very hurtful, especially to the people that are 

impacted. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a natural reaction, and that’s what I would 

point to people out there now. Perhaps it’s the Sask Party’s 

time. Right now it’s their term. But that time and term will 

come to an end. There’s no question about it in our mind. 

 

And if you look at the history within the NDP, Mr. Speaker — 

I’ve made reference to this on many occasions — we had great 

leaders. We had people like Blakeney who understood a great 

amount of things a heck of a lot better than the current Premier. 

We had premiers like Romanow who had to rebuild this 

province and rebuild a number of other challenges that we had, 

whether it was . . . particularly financial challenges. And then 

we had Calvert that took the torch from Romanow to build the 

economy and change things around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly what I want to recognize today. History will 

be our greatest judge, Mr. Speaker. And history will show that 

it wasn’t in any way, shape, or form the Sask Party that built 

this great province. In no way, shape, or form did they build this 

province whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. They are primarily the 

benefactors of the work being done prior to their arrival. All the 

heavy lifting was done, Mr. Speaker, before this Premier and 

the Saskatchewan Party took over, Mr. Speaker. They are 

simply enjoying the fruits of labour of others, Mr. Speaker, and 

every Saskatchewan person recognizes that and knows that. 

 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

And secondly the boom in this province would have came 

regardless if the Sask Party were in power, and the boom will 

continue in spite of the Sask Party being in power, Mr. Speaker. 

And this Bill is evidence of how disjointed and how confused 

they are and above all, Mr. Speaker, just really how inept they 

are as a government, Mr. Speaker. That is what I think is really 

important for the people that really have to pay attention to how 

politics is going. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we stand here today and look at this Bill. And 

the Official Opposition would like to apologize to all the 

members of Tourism Saskatchewan, the staff, and their 

employees and their directors because we know the manner in 

which you were treated is not fair and unbecoming of an entity 

that had done great work for your industry and thus the tourism 

industry overall. We appreciate those points. We thank you for 

your work, and to say that we’re sorry the manner in which you 

were treated was so unbecoming of a government. And we say 

that because they simply lack vision, they simply lack 

intelligence in terms of respecting your role in developing this 

industry. And, Mr. Speaker, the manner in which you were 

treated was horrible. It was deplorable and it’s not something 

that should not be tolerated in modern-day Saskatchewan, but it 

happened. And from the industry perspective again, we hope to 

work with you to build the industry stronger because it’s an 

important part of our economic engine. It’s an important aspect 

of that, so we understand your role and respect that very much. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would offer the point that we don’t 

support this Bill in any way, shape, or form for a variety of 

reasons that I’ve exposed. And I’m going to simply adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 37. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 37, The Tourism Saskatchewan Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 41 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 41 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal 

Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to enter into this debate, and I won’t speak long 

because this is relatively straightforward. And we do have lots 

of questions and we’d like to get down to the substance of this 

in committee because we do have lots of questions. 

 

We’ve asked questions in question period about this. We 

haven’t got, you know, satisfactory answers because for many 

this Bill is a significant piece in terms of raising taxes. Now the 

minister will say it’s not about raising taxes. But for many, 

especially those who live on limited incomes, how much they 

pay on their taxes are very important each year. And if they can 

get a discount or some way get a bit of a savings, they sure 

appreciate it. And so when we take away the ability to do that, I 

think there’s a lot of folks out there who are unhappy about that, 

and that’s a relatively straightforward issue. 

 

And I can go into a long debate, but at this point we know that 

we’d rather get to the questions about what really is behind 

this? Because really when we saw a government that has 

choices, and from that they talk about their priorities clearly, a 

government that has millions for three more MLAs, but decided 

no, that they’ll cut the rebate on education property taxes. This 

is a serious, serious matter. And it’s one that we’ll have lots of 

questions about, and there is a time to move forward to that. 

 

And also we know that this is a relatively cumbersome piece of 

work to do because I’m sure that the municipal offices that put 

out the tax notices will have to redo their computer programs. 

And all the work that comes along with doing this will take 

some work, and I’m hoping that the department has or the 

government has some way to support those folks who are doing 

it because it’s unexpected and it was something that is not easy 

to do. Not easy to do. 

 

When you think that there’s some things in our province that 

are pretty constant, one of them is people have always looked 

forward to their discounts. It’s always been an important part of 

how we do business here in Saskatchewan. We know that when 

we’ve talked to seniors or other folks, like I said, who look 

forward to being able to pay, save a little bit on their property 

taxes because they’ve been able to do the right thing and pay 

them as quickly as they can, where others who wait a bit, don’t 

get any kind of a penalty. This is sort of an odd thing, an odd 

thing. And it’s an odd thing in terms of a province that’s, you 

know, apparently doing well, and yet this was something that 

they would decide to cut. So I know for many people, it’s a very 

big disappointment to see this kind of ability to go. It is 

unfortunate that we’re looking at this today. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I would now move that Bill No. 41 move to 

committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 41, 

the miscellaneous statutes, miscellaneous affairs, municipal 

taxation amendment Act, 2012, be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 41, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs 

— Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 16 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 16 — The 

Correctional Services Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Glad to rise to participate in the debate on Bill No. 16, The 

Correctional Services Act, 2011. 

 

I’d say off the top, Mr. Speaker, it’s again informed in large 

part, informed by The Road Ahead report, and the way that 

that’s enumerated the government’s action plan in response to 

. . . One thing, Mr. Speaker, that while I’m interested in hearing 

the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote participating 

in the debate from his seat, Mr. Speaker, because he of course is 

very familiar with the terms under which this Bill was put 

forward. One of the main things that this particular piece of 

legislation responds to is The Road Ahead: Towards a Safer 

Correctional System. That in and of itself, Mr. Speaker, was in 

response to the report that was commissioned in August of 

2008. 

 

And I guess at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go on record 

as thanking William Peet, Bob Vogelsang, and Dan Wicks who 

were the external investigation team that were brought in to 

discuss the situation wherein there was a fairly significant 

escape from the Regina Correctional Centre and the 

government’s handling of it at that time. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, if out of that crisis came the external 

investigation team’s report and then in response to that The 

Road Ahead and the way that we see that continuing to evolve, 

Mr. Speaker. I guess if sometimes it takes a crisis to prompt a 

positive response or positive action, and I think that the case 

can be made that out of that crisis, out of that escape of six 

inmates from the Regina Provincial Correctional Centre in 

August of 2008, the fact that the investigation team came 

forward with a series of recommendations, 23 I believe, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And again the way that the government eventually responded to 

that would be The Road Ahead: Towards a Safer Correctional 

System. We think that out of that crisis came something that 

would seem to be positive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I think there’s some . . . It’s a pretty tough job to do, 

working in corrections, Mr. Speaker. And both people that are 

out there on the range, people that are working in daily contact 

with inmates, people that are tasked with managing the system 

and making sure that it is living up to those sort of twin 

objectives of punishment, Mr. Speaker, and people if they’ve 

done the crime doing the time, but also seeing what can be done 

to correct or to rehabilitate, and of course from which our 

system, the corrections system, takes its common name. 

 

So if out of that particular incident at the Regina Correctional 

Centre, if something good can come out of that, we are hopeful 

that there are some measures that did come in the wake of that 

critical incident, and we’re interested to see how this continues 

to play out. 

 

Bill No. 16, the principles being offered up in it, it’s interesting 

that that is now being enshrined in the actual legislation. But the 

protection of the public as being paramount, we certainly agree 

with that, Mr. Speaker. Offenders being required to comply 

with correctional facility rules and community supervision 

conditions, we certainly agree with that, Mr. Speaker. Offenders 

being entitled to fair treatment, again we agree with that. And 

staff members adhering to a code of professional conduct, again 

all things that we agree with. And the fact that these have been 

enshrined in the legislation now, we think is a positive step 

forward. 

 

The way that other jurisdictions will look to, in terms of what is 

in fact best practice or what is common practice at least in terms 

of other jurisdictions, what lessons can be learned from our 

neighbours in Manitoba, Quebec, the Yukon, it’s good to see 

that we’re adopting some of the practices there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again out of a situation that demonstrated very plainly the 

administrative shortcomings in the system, the problems that 

arise from overcrowding in the system, Mr. Speaker, and the 

kind of procedural challenges that existed, again they, I don’t 

think, have been addressed to 100 per cent satisfaction by any 

stretch of the imagination. But I guess what we’re looking for in 

the opposition benches, Mr. Speaker, is demonstration of 

progress on responding to the circumstance that prompted the 

external review. And in many ways, we see that being put 

forward in this legislation. 

 

There are a number of things that are fairly technical in nature, 

Mr. Speaker, that I think will lend themselves to better scrutiny 

in the committee setting for this piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. But one thing I do want to say off the top, or what I’d 

like to say before I take my place and allow this piece of 

legislation to be moved onto committee for that closer scrutiny, 

Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we do have a system that, despite 

changes made in response to The Road Ahead or flowing from 

The Road Ahead report, we still have a system that has far too 

much overcrowding in it. 

 

And the way that remand frustrates a lot of the attempts of work 

towards rehabilitation, and the kind of challenges that a 

significant remand population . . . I think the latest figures, 

according to the minister in estimates, being upwards or just 

south of 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker; I think it was on the order of 

38 per cent of the current population is in on remand. That’s a 

big challenge for the system. And then when you put that 

alongside the fact of significant overcrowding and the fact that 

you’ve got the very sort of facilities that should be there to 

work towards rehabilitation or to correct behaviour — when 

you think about the gyms that are being used to domicile 

inmates, the shops that are being used to domicile inmates, and 

the classrooms that are being used to domicile inmates, Mr. 

Speaker — it’s hard to believe that it doesn’t have a negative 

effect on whatever sort of programming offerings are available 

in terms of trying to give people the tools to make a better life 

for themselves. 

 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

And again we had a good discussion about the Corrections 

estimates the other night, Mr. Speaker, and were able to clarify 

some things in terms of where the impact of Bill C-10 is 

coming, the federal Conservative crime Bill, Mr. Speaker. We 

still have significant questions about a system that 

overcrowding is such a huge negative feature of, the 

correctional system in the province being confronted with 

changes in legislation that — you know, pick your expert — is 

predicting will increase the population inside our correctional 

system, thereby further worsening the situation as exists around 

overcrowding. 

 

[15:45] 

 

We have a great many concerns about that, Mr. Speaker, and a 

great many concerns about the impact it has on the correctional 

aspect of the corrections system and just on the safety between 

inmates and guards, or inmates and corrections workers, 

between inmates themselves, and the way that time is served, 

Mr. Speaker — whether or not it’s dead time or whether it’s 

productive time — and what that does for community safety at 

large, Mr. Speaker, in terms of are we only worsening people to 

send them back out into the general society to get up to worse 

and worse activity, and the way that impacts community safety. 

 

Again we’ve got a system with significant overcrowding. 

We’ve got changes coming to be implemented on the federal 

basis that we know any number of people with expertise and 

knowledge of the correctional system say will increase the 

prison populations, particularly in the provincial system. And 

how that works out, Mr. Speaker, we are very concerned to see. 

We’re also very concerned to see that. We’ll be interested to see 

how this is reckoned with by this provincial government that 

hasn’t been able to come forward with any sort of plausible, 

reasonable response when we ask the questions about what is 

the planning that has been undertaken to ready the system that 

is already under significant stress, Mr. Speaker. But again I 

guess we’ll see how that plays. 

 

But as it relates to this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s something that we’ll have closer conversation 

about it in committee. And in the conclusion of the minister’s 

remarks on December 13th of 2011, in the second reading 

speech that introduced this Bill, where that minister said: 

 

This is our ultimate goal: to reduce crime in 

neighbourhoods and communities across our province by 

providing corrections officials with a strong legal 

framework that speaks to contemporary needs in a very 

complex and very crucial system. 

 

When they enumerate that as the goal of this legislation, we 

agree with that, the worth of that goal, Mr. Speaker. And we 

want to be able to have that closer conversation, that more 

detailed conversation to gain greater assurance as to the 

progress that this Bill might make towards that goal. So in that 

regard, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my remarks and allow 

for this Bill to be moved to committee for closer consideration. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing that Bill No. 16, the correctional services amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 16, the correctional services amendment Act, 2011 

be referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 17 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 17 — The Child 

Care Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 17, An Act to amend 

The Child Care Act. It’s a relatively small Act. There’s only 

two real parts to it. 

 

One is to eliminate the . . . it sounds like the Family Services 

Board, reference to that, because essentially it has not been used 

since it was put in place and is redundant. And so therefore it 

makes some sense to remove that. And then the other part is 

about essentially the funding, the grants and subsidies that, 

some regulations concerning that. 

 

So we’ll have lots of questions in committee about that because 

clearly we’ve seen some work that needs to be done, 

particularly in the funding for child care subsidies for families 

who find it expensive, find that it’s not a very relevant or 

current system that we have in place right now. There’s lots of 

questions we would have about child care, and I know many of 

my colleagues have gone on and really, you know, put the 

record straight in terms of the concerns that we have around 

child care in this province. We think the government has 

overpromised and underdelivered; haven’t really done the 

things that we think should be doing. 

 

And we know, and I know myself, particularly in my own 

riding, at Princess Alex where we see a new child care facility, 

but some of the spaces we would have liked to have seen 

reserved for some of the local families, but it apparently can’t 

be done. And it’s unfortunate that’s the case because I think that 

we need to be able to do more to support our local communities. 

And the government has dodged that, has not really answered 

that. In fact it was interesting when I wrote both the Minister of 

Social Services and of Education, they kind of blamed each 

other. And it was a real case of the government not knowing 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

which hand was looking after which part of the situation. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot to ask. We have a lot of 

questions. And so I want to make sure this gets to committee as 

soon as possible because I think that it’s one that we need to 

hear some answers; we need to get the government on record 

over this. So with that then, I will move Bill No. 17, An Act to 

amend The Child Care Act be now moved to committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 17, The 

Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 17, The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 18 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 18 — The Degree 

Authorization Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

in on the discussion on Bill No. 18, The Degree Authorization 

Act. I do have a few comments to make about this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to some of the implications that it may 

have for the post-secondary sector here in the province as well 

as to get a little bit of feedback on some of the feedback I’ve 

received, some of the input I’ve received with respect to the 

reaction different individuals in the province have had about 

this degree. 

 

The minister’s second reading speech was provided to this 

Assembly on December 13th, 2011 and in it the Minister for 

Advanced Education identified a few different things that this 

piece of legislation will do. Well essentially, Mr. Speaker, what 

this piece of legislation is doing — I’ll put in my own words — 

is expanding the number of institutions in the province who are 

able to issue degrees. 

 

So it’s taking, expanding options, as the minister says, for 

institutions in the province who are able to go through the 

required steps and a required procedure of accreditation and 

quality assurance and then have the possibility of offering 

degrees. As the minister stated in his remarks, this is in 

response perhaps to a number of groups, but the minister 

specifically identified SIAST, Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology, as well as Briercrest College 

at Briercrest, as two institutions that are interested in going 

down this path. And it may be a larger number of groups, Mr. 

Speaker, who want to pursue this, having relevance perhaps for 

regional colleges or other private institutions that exist or want 

to exist here in the province. 

 

The types of . . . There are implications, Mr. Speaker, from a 

policy perspective when considering the expansion of 

degree-granting to the number of . . . to other institutions. 

 

The one issue, Mr. Speaker, raised in some of the feedback that 

I received has to do with the issue of duplication. And there’s a 

strong feeling that for the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], 

U of R, the institutions currently provide university degrees, 

that when it comes to competition for programs that there not be 

the type of duplication that may hurt or may cancel out some of 

the initiatives or work against some of the initiatives that the 

institutions currently have under way with the types of 

programs they offer and the types of students that they wish to 

recruit. 

 

There’s also, Mr. Speaker, a lot of discussion in the 

post-secondary community around the issue of quality 

assurance. And I would say that the feedback that I have 

received on this Bill to date can be grouped into three different 

voices. The one, Mr. Speaker, is a group of colleges that would 

be very much in favour of this legislation and the opportunity to 

provide degrees. 

 

And in that group, Mr. Speaker, I think there would be, well 

certainly Briercrest which has been vocal about this and with 

their desire to have the ability to grant degrees; SIAST may be 

of interest as well; Bethany Bible College as another example 

. . . or Bethany College now, I believe. So that’s one group, a 

group that because of changes that have occurred in other 

provinces and how this has affected their ability to recruit 

students from out of province, as one example or one reason, or 

whether that’s out of province or out of country, this is 

something that’s been important to them. And I’ve heard that 

clearly from the groups identified. 

 

There’s another group, Mr. Speaker, that I would say would be 

the existing kids on the block — U of S, U of R — who have 

been very active of course for many years, have a strong 

reputation, and have a number of concerns about how this 

change could affect them. And I would say that the feedback I 

receive from them has been not necessarily against, but I would 

say would be measured and clear statements that there needs to 

be the correct processes in place in order to ensure that this 

won’t negatively affect U of S, U of R, and won’t affect the 

quality of the reputation of what it means to have a degree from 

Saskatchewan, from the province. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, there’s another group of feedback that I 

have heard from groups, whether that’s faculty associations or 

individuals that are concerned about more private forms of 

delivery of education, who aren’t as in favour of this and who 

are opposed to it and concerns that they have raised. I won’t get 

into the detail of the different viewpoints right now, Mr. 

Speaker, because I do think it might be more constructive and 



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

effective to have some of those discussions with the minister in 

committee when this legislation leaves second reading and goes 

to committee, before it comes back to third. 

 

But there are some other . . . There are some things built into 

the legislation that I think is important to note at this time. The 

minister has identified that the protection of the word 

“university” and “varsity” would be in there. So there would not 

be confusion and there would not be cross-efforts with 

promotion between current activities, I assume, at the U of S, U 

of R, and what new players may want to be doing. So that’s a 

component that is built in. 

 

And something that everyone has voiced in the feedback I’ve 

heard has to do with the quality assurance process. Individuals 

have stated that it needs to be very much so an arm’s-length 

process. It can’t have interference of a political nature and also, 

Mr. Speaker, that it needs to be of the highest standards. And it 

needs to ensure that if an institution is able to grant a degree, 

that it holds the sway and the power that it ought to have and 

that we want it to have. 

 

There is a question though I think, which is an important one, 

Mr. Speaker, that has to do around the issue of funding and 

public dollars. Some people have voiced to me that this 

approach could open the door to more public dollars going to 

private institutions. And I can think back to instances over the 

last few years for example with the knowledge infrastructure 

program, where public dollars did go to private institutions. 

And many people have raised concerns with me that this could 

take us further down that path, which is a drain of resources on 

public institutions and in certain cases, as we’ve discussed at 

length in question period and in committee on different topics, 

presents a different set of challenges that can and should be 

addressed. 

 

There are also concerns, Mr. Speaker, and some questions about 

the details around this that we’ll have in committee with respect 

to the physical presence requirement and how extensive and 

clear that component will be to ensure that if an institution 

wants to deliver degrees here in the province, that the physical 

presence is there. Again, more questions also around the quality 

insurance process in order to ensure that it is as rigorous and as 

rigorous and demanding as it needs to be. And also some 

questions, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the oversight of when an 

authorization holder requests an amendment to the authorization 

that it has, some questions about the oversight there as to 

whether or not it’s only the minister who signs off on that or 

whether it’s part of a larger discussion involving different 

people overseeing the decision. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I understand, as with any change in legislation 

and change in approach, there are those that are opposed, those 

that are in favour, and people that are perhaps a bit lukewarm or 

being measured and clearly stating some concerns and issues 

that they have with the legislation. So I do look forward to 

having a more in-depth discussion about this with the minister 

in the committee process, and asking some of the questions that 

people are seeking answers to. 

 

And at this time then I would conclude my remarks, and I 

would be prepared to have this piece of legislation go to 

committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment 

and Immigration that Bill No. 18, The Degree Authorization Act 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 18, The Degree Authorization Act be referred to 

the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 20 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 20 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into the debate on An Act to amend The 

Planning and Development Act, 2007, No. 20. And of course 

it’s a very important Act, and it really outlines how we do 

business in our communities here in Saskatchewan. And I think 

this is important to keep this as current as possible, and I think 

this is an important piece forward. It’s a tactical piece. It’s not 

one that . . . In many ways it shouldn’t be viewed as a partisan 

piece because it’s not an ideologically driven piece of 

legislation. This is about common sense, how we plan our 

communities. 

 

And so it talks about some of the definitions, and I think this 

one will be very important how we talk about how the district 

plan replaces the previous district or official community plan. 

And I think this is an important discussion that we’ll have to 

have and figure out the logic behind that. I think that’s critical. 

 

And then the other piece that I think we’re going to have lots of 

questions about is the intermunicipal development agreement, 

the IDA. It’s between two more municipal councils. This allows 

municipalities to enter into some sort of planning process and I 

think this is an important thing. And I think we’re going to have 

lots of questions about this because whenever we have 

information like this . . . and I think we have to have the 

technical people to inform us as we have. 

 

We can rage on against this if we want, but really this is a 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

tactical piece where we have to have those planners come and 

explain how they’re going to do their business. And I think we 

need to see more of this. And I know we’ve raised this, for 

example, when we’ve talked about the 10,000 new apartments 

that this government has talked about. In many ways they are 

really promoting the fact that we’re going to see an upsurge in 

rental purpose-built apartment blocks. But my question is, how 

do we absorb those into our communities? That’s where 

planning comes into place. 

 

And so we think this is an important piece, and we’re looking 

forward to having more conversations with the ministry folks as 

to what this really means so we can understand it. And then 

when we come back, about more questions and further 

legislation. That’ll be fine. But this guides that discussion, and 

we need to understand that. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared to see this go to 

committee because we do have lots of questions about that, and 

I’m sure we’ll have a good discussion in committee about that. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 

20, The Planning and Development Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 20, The Planning and Development Amendment 

Act, 2011 be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 23 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 23 — The 

Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and this is a critically important piece of legislation before us 

and, as you would know, that as a former critic of Labour, that 

we’re just approaching the Day of Mourning on April 28th. And 

of course occupational health and safety is a huge issue in 

Saskatchewan as we’ve wrestled to become a province that 

shakes that reputation of being number 2 in terms of workplace 

injuries. And while we’ve come a long way, we have so much 

more work to be done, and so this is a serious, serious piece of 

legislation. 

 

So we have lots of questions about this piece of legislation. We 

understand that this has been arrived at by the committee, the 

minister’s committee on occupational health and safety which is 

made up of equal number of members of employers and 

employees. And so when they come together and arrive at 

recommendations for the minister, it’s pretty hard for the 

minister not to take those recommendations seriously. So we’re 

glad to see this before us. 

 

Again we will have questions about this. Again it’s a very 

technical document, and it’s not a partisan document because 

it’s about making the workplace safer. And so we are willing to 

have this go to committee to have those discussions in the 

committee where we can ask questions, but we do have some 

concerns. We think that we need to make sure that not only can 

you have a good piece of legislation but that you have to have 

the protection by enforcement in the ministry to make sure that 

whatever is passed will be actually enforced in the workplace, 

that we have to see that happen. 

 

We see now that Mission: Zero has reached a bit of a stall 

because actually the numbers have gone back up this year in 

terms of workplace injuries, and the stats aren’t that 

encouraging for this year. We hope that it’s just a bump in the 

road, but we need to doubly reinforce our efforts to make sure 

workplace injuries keep going down, that we lose that 

reputation of being either the first or second or third most 

dangerous province to work in Canada. We should not have that 

reputation. We should be working to lose that reputation, 

particularly as our economy grows. Our economy’s booming. 

Workers are coming here and we need to make sure that, if 

there was ever a time, ever a time . . . But there’s never a time 

where workplace injuries are allowed. But boy, during a boom, 

this is a time to set standards and say, listen, we mean it. We 

mean it that we will do something about it. 

 

Areas that have high workplace injuries, such as health care, it’s 

one that’s going to continue to see a lot of challenges in because 

as our demographics age, we want to make sure those who are 

looking after people who are not well are not themselves 

becoming injured in the workplace. This is a bit of an ironic 

situation that if you work in a health facility, it’s actually a 

dangerous place to be. That shouldn’t happen. That shouldn’t 

happen. I know we’ve taken big gains in that area but we need 

to do more. We need to do more. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to make 

sure that we can do the right thing and ensure that occupational 

health and safety is a priority in Saskatchewan, particularly for 

this government, and particularly for WCB, Workers’ 

Compensation Board. You know, we have about 40,000 injury 

claims each year, and 13,000 of these result in lost time from 

work and 20 result in loss of life. And then there’s others who 

pass away because of long-term cancers that are caused largely 

by asbestos, but others. And so we need to make sure that we do 

the right thing. 

 

So this has a lot of details in it and we will be asking a lot of 

questions in this. And I know that we will be talking about, I 

think it’s section 14, the area around dangerous . . . “Duty re 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

policy statement on violence and prevention plan,” you know, 

because I’ve been talking a lot about Jimmy’s law, and we’ve 

been seeing a situation in Saskatoon where a workplace on the 

corner of Avenue H and 20th has had two violent incidents in 

the last couple . . . actually three in the last two months. And we 

need to know what is happening around ensuring that those 

statements and violence prevention plans are actually in place, 

and what will happen if that isn’t the reality. 

 

And so we have lots of questions about this Bill. And I know 

particularly that in this week when we’re thinking a lot about 

April 28th, the Day of Mourning for people who have lost their 

lives at their work, that we make sure that we do everything we 

possibly can to ensure that when people go to work in the 

morning they come home safe and sound at night. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve often talked, I know I’ve raised this in 

the House around shift workers. So many of our people in 

Saskatchewan are shift workers, and the same thing that when 

they go to work in the evening, when they come back early in 

the morning, that they do come back safe and sound. And we do 

all that we can to make sure that we have done the right thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have lots of questions on this, but I do 

have to say I have some confidence in the Bill because, as I 

said, it was developed by consensus between employers and 

employees. And so clearly when you have that kind of 

momentum behind a piece of legislation, the legislation should 

be sound and we should be listening to those stakeholders. And 

there would be no reason to stand in the way other than to 

understand it because if we understand it then we can support it 

and we can get behind it 100 per cent. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll be looking forward to 

seeing it in committee and we’ll have lots of questions as we go 

through it. I think we’ll need a fair bit of time in committee to 

go through it so we understand it completely, and it’ll be very 

interesting to talk not only to the minister, but also to his staff to 

explain some of the more technical points on it and when things 

will come into place and what some of the penalties will be and 

how the enforcement will happen. 

 

That’s a key piece because I said you can have a consensus, you 

can have the greatest legislation in the world, but if there’s 

nobody enforcing it, then we’ve got a problem. And I know that 

the auditor’s report, the auditor’s report will be . . . informed us 

in terms of some of the challenges in the ministry. And we hope 

we can hear how that will be corrected in terms of making sure 

these new regulations are brought up to speed. 

 

Well so with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be very happy to see this 

go to committee. And I think that it’s important we take that 

next step with this piece of legislation. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the House ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 24, the advocate for 

children and . . . Oh, excuse me. No. 23, The Occupational 

Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be referred? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate that 

Bill No. 23, The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 

2011 be referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 24 — The 

Advocate for Children and Youth Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 24, An Act respecting the Advocate for 

Children and Youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is new legislation which gives independent 

authority to the Children’s Advocate as a structural matter as it 

relates to a legislative officer. And it has clearly the support of 

the Children’s Advocate and the Ombudsman’s office, where 

these two offices have been tied together under the same 

legislation. I think it also meets a few needs of the Children’s 

Advocate that are important. But clearly the most important 

reason for doing this is to make sure it’s absolutely clear which 

part of the legislation applies to the Children’s Advocate and 

which part applies to the Ombudsman. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now as far as any changes in the actual legislation, there are a 

couple of things that are done. One of them is that it makes it 

clear that publicly funded health entities are included in the 

review area of the Children’s Advocate. So that includes 

regional health authorities, health care organizations and 

affiliates, and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. This hasn’t 

necessarily been a problem, but to have it very clear in the 

legislation I think makes it more straightforward if there are 

some issues that arise. 

 

It also gives authority to conduct research and become involved 

in advocacy based on that research as it relates to the rights of 

children and youth. And that’s something that we in the 

opposition applaud because we know that the Children’s 

Advocate has a unique position in our community to be able to 

hear the stories of individuals who come forward to that office, 

but also to do research, talk to experts, and then come forward 

with opinions on different points of public policy. 

 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

The most recent example of that would be where the Children’s 

Advocate has made a number of comments about Bill 36 which 

eliminates the counting of those under 18 when new 

constituency boundaries are created. And I think it’s the 

appropriate role for the Children’s Advocate to do that. 

Obviously that’s possible now under present legislation, but this 

legislation actually makes those kinds of activities even more 

central to the role of the Children’s Advocate. 

 

Another aspect of the legislation is the explicit permission given 

to ministries and agencies to voluntarily share information with 

the advocate, Children’s Advocate, to resolve problems that 

arise. And I think this is once again a policy decision that comes 

out of the practical nature of how most problems are resolved, 

and we applaud that as well. 

 

I think the role of children and youth living in care or custody, 

in other words those who are under the care of the Minister of 

Social Services, have been given some extra, clearly extra rights 

to make sure that they can have privileged communication with 

the Children’s Advocate without getting into any problem 

within their care situation. 

 

We know that another area that was to be included in this 

legislation, but which is not here, relates to the Children’s 

Advocate’s ability to look at issues related to school boards. 

And this is something clearly that has not yet been resolved so 

it’s not in the existing package of legislation, but we would 

hope that the discussions will continue so that the Children’s 

Advocate will have a role in dealing with issues within our 

school systems as clearly the Children’s Advocate has shown 

the value of its scrutiny as it relates to activities in the areas 

where they are now looking at issues. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is one curious aspect to this legislation 

in light of the other legislation that the Minister of Justice has 

introduced into this House. And perhaps it relates to the nature 

of our budgeting process, and I’m not sure if the Minister of 

Finance has been looking at this or not. But the budgets for the 

Children’s Advocate and for the Ombudsman and for the 

Provincial Auditor and for the independent officers of the 

legislature are, basically those budgets are part of the legislative 

budget. It’s not part of the Ministry of Justice’s budget. So the 

Minister of Justice has a slightly different role in presenting the 

positions to this legislature as it relates to the Children’s 

Advocate. 

 

And so on the side of the consumer affairs issues and financial 

services issues, the Minister of Justice has come forward with a 

consolidation Bill where they’ve pulled all kinds of areas of 

responsibility together into one agency and then have created a 

new authority to deal with all of those issues under one person. 

And effectively a whole number of what we would call 

advocates for consumer issues or financial issues have been 

consolidated into one office. 

 

Now it’s curious that that consolidation perspective is taken as 

it relates to an issue which is in the Justice minister’s budget. So 

the deputy minister of Justice and others providing advice to the 

minister have said, well here’s a way that we can reduce the 

costs of government by having less, a lesser budget; or we can 

do it by collecting the fees and then having a whole number of 

services paid for in a way that’s slightly different. 

On the legislative side when we’re talking about legislative 

officers, we’re expanding the numbers of offices, the numbers 

of budget lines, if I can put it that way, in the budget of the 

legislature in a way that’s quite contrary to what we’re doing on 

the consumer and financial services line. I make no further 

comment other than identifying it and pointing out that these 

are different ways of dealing with particular issues. And it may 

be that it relates to the fact that the Minister of Justice is 

responsible for a budget in Justice but not responsible for the 

budget of the legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we I don’t think have a great deal of difficulty 

with this particular legislation, such as it is. It seems to 

accomplish most of the goals that were set out by the Children’s 

Advocate and the Ombudsman as they’ve brought these things 

forward. And we will obviously have some questions about the 

actual mechanics of how this is all going to happen when we 

deal with the matter in committee. But I have no further 

comments right now. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 

24, The Advocate for Children and Youth Act. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour of Bill No. 24? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 24, The Advocate for Children and Youth Act be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 25 — The 

Ombudsman Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader . . . 

The Opposition Leader, sorry. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won’t call you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise and make some comments 

about Bill No. 25, An Act respecting the Ombudsman. Clearly 

this is a bookend Bill, with Bill No. 24 relating to the 

Children’s Advocate. The plan obviously from the government 

is to create special legislation for the Ombudsman which 

effectively moves the Children’s Advocate’s role out of the 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

legislation. And so my sense of that is that the Bill 

accomplishes what was intended. It’s clearly been developed in 

consultation with the Ombudsman’s office and the Children’s 

Advocate’s office. And so the Act does continue the roles that 

are there for the Ombudsman at the same time as it further 

enhances the abilities of the Ombudsman to do the job that we 

all want it to do. 

 

Now as was clear with the Children’s Advocate’s legislation, it 

makes it clear here that the health area — which at some points 

has raised some questions about whether the Ombudsman has 

jurisdiction over health care services — it’s now been clearly 

stated that the authority of the Ombudsman extends to publicly 

funded health entities which includes regional health 

authorities, health care organizations, affiliates, and the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. This is good for these 

health-funded, publicly funded health entities, and it’s also 

good for the Ombudsman. 

 

It also makes sure that the rules are clear about how information 

can be shared with the Ombudsman and protects privacy of 

patients and employees within the system. And so that part and 

the way this has been drafted I think has accomplished a new 

description of what the Ombudsman’s job is and has done it 

clearly with working together with the Ombudsman and 

officials within the Ministry of Health. 

 

Now another aspect of the Ombudsman’s role has always been 

the role of education of the public, and this is also clearly set 

out in the legislation. I think that that makes it straightforward 

that the role of the Ombudsman is to solve problems, but it’s 

also to identify and then make sure that these solutions to the 

problem are publicly known. And so I think that the legislation 

accomplishes what’s needed there. 

 

Now the other issue which is interesting is that the 

Ombudsman, Ombudsman’s office and the Ombudsman as the 

person named as the Ombudsman, clearly have very special 

skills that can be used not just within government but also may 

be used in some other places that are not government. And this 

legislation makes it possible for the Ombudsman to do their 

problem solving and fairness assessments in dealing with 

complaints with groups that are not part of government. Clearly 

they would do this for a fee or based on the amount of staff and 

resources that they have available, but just the ability to do 

those kinds of investigations and help solve other problems 

within the community, I think that’s an important factor. 

 

Communication with the Ombudsman is also absolutely crucial 

for the job that’s done. I know that this legislation allows for 

privilege to attach to communication to the Ombudsman in very 

defined ways which will protect individuals who want to 

contact that office and also protect the staff working with the 

Ombudsman. So that’s another important change that’s here. 

 

As with the Children’s Advocate office, there’s also the whole 

issue of how to resolve matters in an expeditious fashion by the 

voluntary sharing of information, as opposed to the 

Ombudsman requesting, very formally, to obtain information. 

And this legislation facilitates that voluntary sharing of 

information, which is another positive aspect of the legislation. 

 

[16:30] 

There’s one area where some policy choices have been weighed 

and that relates to the health quality review committees which 

are part of all of our regional health authorities in the province. 

Those committees have long had a very careful protection of 

their reports, and this legislation makes it clear that those 

reports are protected for the protection of the health system, but 

it doesn’t eliminate the possibility that some of these reports 

which are protected may be shared with the Ombudsman under 

the appropriate safeguards. And I think that’s also a positive 

factor in dealing with the health authorities. 

 

Now what happens with this legislation is that it obviously has 

brought into 2012 language this role of the Ombudsman. But I 

think we can all be assured that the role of the Ombudsman as 

an independent officer of the legislature has been protected, and 

it is further enhanced by the legislation. 

 

I would once again though make the comment that it’s 

interesting that the Minister of Justice would be consolidating a 

number of roles within the consumer protection and financial 

services area to streamline the operation at a time when, in this 

area which is under the purview of the legislature, we’re 

expanding into a broader . . . and more officers like the 

Ombudsman or the Children’s Advocate. So I think that my 

previous comments would apply to that. 

 

I think that this legislation has had a lot of consultation around 

it, but I know there are questions that we will have once again 

as we understand how it’s going to be implemented, including 

some of the practical aspects of the division into two separate 

offices between the Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate. 

But I have no further comments to make at this time. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 

No. 25, The Ombudsman Act, 2011 be now read a second time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I designate that 

Bill No. 25, The Ombudsman Act, 2011 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 26 — The 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join in on the 

debate on Bill 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. 

And it’s interesting and it’s unfortunate that we have to repeal 

this Act. SCN, and I want to comment on SCN. And we’ve seen 

the outcry from the province when the government decided to, I 

guess cut, do whatever it did to eliminate SCN from the 

province, and the good things that SCN did in the province. 

 

And I commend the group from SCN the way they lobbied. 

They got the community support. They reached out to the 

people and asked the people what they thought of this 

government’s action. And I think that was very clear, loud. And 

unfortunately again, here we talk about governments get to pick 

winners and losers, and if you want to look at that, they made a 

decision. It was unfortunate because SCN did a lot of different 

things when it came to Saskatchewan’s story, whether it was 

Aboriginal programming, whether it was in communities, it did 

a lot of different things to support our province. 

 

And you know, to see the frustration with SCN, and it was our 

own, I guess, opportunity communications for Saskatchewan’s 

people to tell our stories, whether they were at the farms, 

whether it was some of the older cities. They did a lot of 

different opportunities and it was amazing to watch, and the 

good credit that they took. And I think some of the work they 

did was recognized not only in Saskatchewan and Canada. So 

when you see an organization that did such a wonderful job, to 

see a government decide that it wanted to get rid of it, do away 

with it, sell it off, do whatever, and you see the money that the 

government lost — if you want to say that — the investment 

that was there, and we see the way later on it was sold. So there 

are so many questions. 

 

And we’ve seen there was such a lobby group of individuals, 

men and women, families that came to the legislature 

protesting, and there was literally hundreds of them that came 

here. And unfortunately the government did not listen. But here 

we have a government that says, you know, we’re going to be 

accountable, responsible. We’re going to do what the people 

want. We’re going to do what the citizens want. We’re going to 

listen to them. We’re going to be a humble government. And 

we’ve seen time and time again the Sask Party government, the 

way they’ve treated different organizations. SCN was no 

different. Whether it’s some of the Aboriginal groups, whether 

you see the tourism industry — there are so many different 

areas where this government has cut. What do you see in the 

way they’ve put the added cost on seniors? 

 

It all goes back to a government making and choosing. And if 

we look at some of the other Bills that this government has 

brought forward . . . And it’s unfortunate that we’re dealing 

with this Bill. And there’s a number of different things it will 

do, the repeal Act. But SCN is the one for me that really speaks 

loud from the people, from the concern that citizens in our 

province had, made it very clear, whether it was petitions . . . 

There’s been a lot of work done on behalf of SCN trying to 

make sure the government would, I guess, rethink it, reconsider, 

you know, put the decision that they made away. But 

unfortunately the government went ahead with it very clearly 

even though they heard the concerns of many Saskatchewan 

people, of SCN — the staff, their families — and it’s 

unfortunate that that had to happen. 

 

Here we had a government that could have reached out and 

again consulted with the industry, but they did not do that, Mr. 

Speaker. Again we go back to seeing this government likes to 

make decisions based on, I guess, their own ideas, their 

philosophy, the way the right wing government operates 

without consulting, without asking. They want to cut programs. 

They want to cut funding to different groups. 

 

You know, the amazing thing is they don’t ask, is there a better 

way that we could spend this money to the Saskatchewan 

residents? Is there a better way we can take care of our seniors, 

our children, and education? Is there a better way to do it 

instead of cutting programs? Is there better ways we could work 

with the industry, organizations, families, seniors to come up 

with a better plan? And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 

believe in that. They have their agenda and they move ahead on 

that. 

 

And some of my colleagues have expressed it very well. They 

have pointed out . . . And the member from Athabasca has 

clearly. He tells it the way it is. He has a way of doing it, 

presenting what the people are saying and the frustration. He 

has a sense of humour with it. But I know in his heart, the man 

does care, truly does care. My colleague does care about what’s 

going on with this province, and I know sometimes he gets very 

passionate because he cares, he cares about the people back 

home. And he expresses himself very well, you know, if you 

listen to some of his, the debates that he’s been involved in and 

the way he presents, Mr. Speaker, on these Bills. 

 

And I know he spoke to this Bill and he had an opportunity to 

express his frustration, his concern, and he did that very well. 

He made sure that the issues that community members were 

expressing — and it’s not just SCN, but there were community 

members — about the government’s handling of this Bill and 

the way they handled the whole SCN, the whole file without 

consulting, without working. And they always say, oh well 

we’ll work with you. We’ll work with you. But in the end, they 

move their agenda. 

 

And just like we’ve seen with the tourist industry and you see 

the way Tourism Saskatchewan has been treated . . . And let’s 

make it very clear. There is a group that worked hard in this 

province, not only in Saskatchewan, but making sure people 

heard what our beautiful province is about, the interesting 

things that we have, why people should come into our province. 

They had a marketing tool, an advertising tool, and they had 

partners in industry. And we’ve seen another organization the 

way the Sask Party government treats groups. 

 

And if groups out there want to raise concern, and it’s amazing 

how they get treated. And you hear some of the stories out there 

and it’s interesting to watch. People are scared to come forward. 

Yet we pass legislation. And we bring, you know, a day of 

bullying, and we talk about anti-bullying in our province and no 

one should have to put up with it. And we see some of the 

concerns that people are faced with. They don’t want to come 

forward. 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

But I know the people have to come forward, and the people 

have to start expressing to their government when you’re not 

doing what’s in the best interests of the individuals, the 

organizations. When a government thinks it can do better 

without consulting, when it can do a better job of taking care of 

things, that’s something that I think Saskatchewan people truly 

are going to be very concerned about. 

 

And again, SCN and this Bill. It’s a sad day to see this Bill 

come forward. It will go off and do what it needs to do. The 

government has made that decision. This is just to clean up, if 

you want to say, what they want to do. He could’ve left this Bill 

sitting there, but they’ve chose to remove it for whatever 

reason. There could’ve been, you know, an opportunity for the 

government to reach out to SCN, but they chose not to. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I know all of my colleagues have 

spoke, some of them in great detail, to this Bill. I think I was the 

last member that hadn’t spoke to it, so to share in and weigh in 

on the debate on this, and I know there’s going to be a lot of 

work to do yet in committee. There’s going to be some 

questions that people will have and we’ll get the answers to it. 

And maybe we will, and I hope that happens. 

 

But at this time, you know, it’s a sad day to see this happen and 

the way SCN and the way other organizations are being treated 

by the Sask Party government, without being consulted, without 

trying to reach out and say, what’s the best way to do it? What 

would work best for Saskatchewan people for the industry? 

This government does not reach out to the people that are out 

there that it affects, and makes decisions, and sometimes they 

are not good. And I’m shocked at some of the stuff they’ve 

done. But anyway at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know this will go 

to committee and my colleagues will finish answering the 

questions that need to be asked. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question on Bill 

No. 26? The question before the Assembly is a motion by the 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 26, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

be referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill now is referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 27 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi 

de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

wade into the debate on the Bill, The Act to amend The 

Education Act. 

 

What the gist of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is, the government is 

mandating the start of the school year after the Labour Day long 

weekend, which in and of itself is a good thing. Particularly I 

know as a parent that it’s always frustrating. Basically the 

summer holiday would end abruptly when your kids go back to 

school, for all intents and purposes. You register your kids for 

school. If it happens to fall before the Labour Day weekend, 

that sort of signified the end of the summer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And I know where this came out of. I was formerly the Tourism 

critic, and I actually was at the tourism meeting where they 

announced the results of the survey that they did. This Bill 

came out of the Premier’s commitment during the election to 

change the school year, which was informed by a survey 

actually from Tourism Saskatchewan which had 335 

respondents filling out the entire survey. So not a huge 

percentage; that was 16 per cent of the 2,113 businesses and 

communities. But so this was the tourism industry basically was 

saying that there were some huge impacts on their businesses in 

terms of recruitment, the ability to retain staff, and also the loss 

of business because families were less likely to come on Labour 

Day. 

 

So in and of itself, the change after Labour Day for me, I don’t 

mind that idea. But the reality is when you’re in government 

you need to consult, Mr. Speaker. Because I might think it’s a 

good idea, but there could be 99.9 per cent of people who are 

involved impacted, other families. There are also other 

stakeholders — school boards, teachers, all kinds of people who 

are impacted. So I think what people were most upset about, 

Mr. Speaker, was that this was just thrown out during an 

election campaign and did not involve an ounce of consultation, 

Mr. Speaker, which is a huge problem. 

 

I know from looking at a story from CBC news on October 

27th, 2011 — the headline is, “School year pledge slammed by 

teachers, school boards.” So I think their frustration was that 

they were not consulted. And you know what? Actually I was 

interested. When I was at the tourism event where this survey 

was announced the year previously, I was actually interested in 

a private member’s Bill. I thought it was kind of a good idea. So 

you know what I did, Mr. Speaker? I actually talked to the 

school boards in Saskatoon and I talked to teachers, and I 

learned that there were mixed opinions on this. 

 

School boards had said that they had actually polled their 

constituents, the families whom they represent. And they had 

told me that their information, it was split sort of 50-50, because 

the reality is people want . . . We want to start school after the 

Labour Day, but as families we want two weeks at Christmas 

and we want . . . We like the February break, too, generally 



April 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

speaking, Mr. Speaker, a full week off. So the school boards, 

what they had told me two years ago was that it’s not that this 

wasn’t . . . They said their families found they were split on the 

decision. 

 

So as I said, I might think it’s a good idea. The Premier might 

think it’s a good idea. But there’s a whole host of people out 

there who may not think it’s a good idea. And that’s the whole 

point of consultation, is connecting with people who are 

impacted by legislation to find out and see if really it is a good 

idea that’s meeting most people’s needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I might add as well that this piece of legislation was 

informed by a Tourism Saskatchewan survey, as I mentioned. 

Well you know what? There was another Tourism 

Saskatchewan survey just done in the last month or so that this 

government is totally disregarding, which is with respect to the 

government pulling a body, Tourism Saskatchewan, back under 

their control, Mr. Speaker. So what often happens with this 

government, they’re interested in taking one part of what 

someone says, and at one point it’s a good idea. And then the 

same organization might say something and use the same 

process but suddenly it’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I just want to emphasize that I think the biggest 

problem with this Bill, which is often the case with this 

government, is the lack of consultation. When you create public 

policy it’s very important that you’re making sure that you are 

talking to people impacted by the policy. And in this case it’s 

families — tourism industry which was the one piece that they 

had listened to — it was school boards; it was teachers. But this 

government completely failed to do consultation. So I think that 

this is where we take issue with this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But with that I know that I have other colleagues who are 

interested in wading into the debate. So with that I would like to 

move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 27. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 27, The Education Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 28 — The 

Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

wade into the debate again on Bill No. 28, An Act to make 

consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

And I have very few remarks to make on this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, now who’s taking the Chair. This Bill basically is just 

housekeeping items pertaining to the previous Bill to which I 

spoke, Bill No. 27. This is simply housekeeping that goes along 

that is tied to Bill No. 27. 

 

So all I would have to say here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 

concerns with its companion Bill is that there was absolutely no 

consultation done, which is a huge problem when you’re 

governing a province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with that I know that I have colleagues who will be speaking 

to both Bill 27 and Bill 28 again. So with that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 28, The Education Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 33 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 33 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise and make a few comments on Bill No. 33, An 

Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill I think maybe doesn’t meet the mark that 

it set out for itself when the minister started to work on this 

legislation. I know it’s being brought forward by the Minister of 

Justice, but clearly it’s a Bill from the Premier and from cabinet 

to attempt to deal with a tight housing market and tenants who 

needed assistance. 

 

And there are quite a number of ways that one could deal with 

issues around residential tenancies that would actually help the 

tenants to deal with the particular problem. And as the 

government well knows, the suggestion from the opposition 

was to look at the kinds of legislation that are available for 80 

per cent of Canadians that relate to having clear rules between 

landlords and tenants around how rents are established. And so 

rather than look carefully at what’s happening in other 

provinces as it relates to that regulation of rents and regulation 

of the rental relationship between landlords and tenants, the 

government brought forward this Bill. 

 

And it’s clear that the government wants to proceed with this 

Bill, but there’s not very much to it. And I think it probably 

doesn’t accomplish the grand design that the minister set out on 

March 5th where he said, “This Act was designed to assist 

tenants in a tight housing market.” Well I think, with respect, 

we could’ve done a lot better in Saskatchewan if there had been 

broader discussion with both landlords and tenants in this 

particular area, and maybe even with some of the people on this 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2012 

side of the House who . . . We know quite a bit about how some 

of these things should be dealt with. 

 

So what does this Bill do? Well effectively it goes and starts 

talking about timing and notice of rent increases or periodic 

tenancies and it tries to set out some rules that will limit how 

often rents can be increased. The curious part of it is that there 

seem to be different rules if you’re a member of an ethical 

landlords’ association. And that one has been a bit of a puzzler 

for many people within the province because it’s not entirely 

clear how that’s going to necessarily assist in solving the 

problem for tenants who are having increased rents at a very 

rapid pace. 

 

So in one sense, as opposition, we know that we can’t stop this 

Bill. We’ve made some suggestions about how it could be done 

in a more effective fashion, but we’re also quite curious to see 

how the government plans to implement what they have set out 

in this particular Act. And so I think we’ll have a chance to ask 

a number of questions about that in committee, but my sense is 

that it may not be all that clearly developed yet and that we’ll 

get further responses on this legislation that frankly don’t make 

a lot of sense. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have much more to say about this, 

other than I think it’s wrong-headed legislation. The 

government could’ve done so much better with better 

consultation and . . . But I will end my comments there. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 33, The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 33, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 

2011 be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1261 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1261 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1261 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1261 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1261 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1262 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1262 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1262 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1262 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1262 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1262 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1263 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1263 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 University of Regina Runner Wins Vancouver Race 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1263 

 Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Month 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1263 

 Saskatchewan Student Wins Scholarship to Lester B. Pearson College 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1264 

 Film Festival Recognizes Environmentalists 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1264 

 Administrative Professionals Day 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1264 

 Summit Plans for Housing Needs 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1264 

 Ontario Budget  

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1265 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Wetlands Policy and Drainage Management 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1265 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1265 

 Quality of Health Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1267 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1267 

 Literacy Programming 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1268 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1268 

 Relationship with Co-operatives Association 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1269 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1269 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 42 — The Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1270 

 Bill No. 43 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1272 

 Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1274 

 Bill No. 41 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1280 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1280 

 Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1282 

 Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1282 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1283 



 

 Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1283 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1284 

 Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1284 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1285 

 Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1285 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1286 

 Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1286 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1287 

 Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1287 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1288 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1289 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1290 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1290 

 Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1291 

 Bill No. 33 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1291 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1292 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


