




















































Hansard: March 27, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 22B  TUESDAY, MARCH 27, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 809 

 March 27, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, the day’s session will 

continue. I recognize the Minister for Crown Investments 

Corporation. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the support of the colleagues on this side now. Just 

before we adjourned for the supper hour, I had about 10 

seconds on my feet, Mr. Speaker, and my colleagues said that 

was the best speech I’ve ever given in the House. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m very pleased to have the opportunity to add a few 

more remarks to the comments I was able to make then. 

 

The first, Mr. Speaker, is this is a terrific balanced budget. It’s 

the fourth, the fifth, Mr. Speaker, put forward by the 

Saskatchewan Party since 2007. But before I get into these 

comments, I would just like to mention the three ladies that 

work in the Lloydminster constituency office, Mr. Speaker: 

Caren, Marilyn and Rachelle. They do a terrific job. We 

provide the government’s face in Lloydminster and the 

Lloydminster riding, and we deal with a lot of very serious 

issues, and I have nothing but confidence and faith that these 

ladies represent our government and represent it well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget has been profiled as austerity and 

prosperity. The members on the opposite side of the floor, Mr. 

Speaker, have struggled a great deal with how you can have 

both, and, Mr. Speaker, I can’t imagine why that is difficult. If 

you look at a business, Mr. Speaker — I came from a small 

business before I got elected — small businesses have times of 

prosperity. They have times where they have to watch their 

costs very closely. And the best small businesses, Mr. Speaker, 

watch their costs very closely even in times of prosperity. And 

you’ll see very often that you’ll have businesses that overreach, 

overspend, buy infrastructure or products they don’t necessarily 

need when times are good. And when there’s a downturn in the 

economy, Mr. Speaker, they are overleveraged, and often the 

businesses end with a really good auction sale. 

 

I know looking around our community in Lloydminster, there’s 

some terrific business people that have been there a long time. 

The oil industry is certainly one that sees many cycles. And the 

business people that have been successful, are those that have 

been very prudent with their funds through good and bad times, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But if I had to boil it down to one word, if austerity and 

prosperity, Mr. Speaker, are too much to handle, it would be 

responsible. This is a responsible, balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and not just responsible to those that are paying tax, 

paying PST [provincial sales tax] because that’s almost 

everyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it is very 

responsible to those people. But it’s also very responsible to 

those that have a need for the services provided by government, 

Mr. Speaker. And again that is almost everyone in 

Saskatchewan. I would say that is everyone in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government has made decisions to ensure that programs are 

sustainable, that the drug plan, Mr. Speaker, the seniors’ drug 

plan have increased by $5 a prescription in this budget, and that 

ensures that this drug plan is on a solid financial footing and 

going forward it can maintain its record of ensuring that 

appropriate drugs are in the formulary and serve the people 

appropriately. And I just had a town hall meeting in northern 

Saskatchewan in Pierceland on Friday, and that was brought to 

my attention, Mr. Speaker. The strength of the drug plan is 

something that was very important to the people there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca made a comment 

when he was giving his speech about a week ago about and 

trying to take some credit for the in-migration into 

Saskatchewan. And he was trying to make the point, and I 

would argue how successfully, that their government should get 

some of the credit. And I think that politicians don’t do 

themselves a service when they start taking credit for things, 

Mr. Speaker. I think that the people of Saskatchewan deserve 

the credit for the success we see today. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from the member from 

Athabasca’s speech on the 5th of March. It’s page 295 of 

Hansard. And in this portion of his speech he’s trying to profile 

what happened after the election, and he’s trying to say it isn’t 

true. But this is how he profiles it, the member from Athabasca 

says: 

 

. . . November 7th, 2007, there was 60,000 people waiting 

along the Lloydminster border and on the Manitoba 

border, and as soon as they declared the Saskatchewan 

Party victorious in their election bid, they all moved in. 

They all moved in. Now we got more people thanks to 

these guys, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member was being sarcastic and saying 

that that wasn’t true. And the reality is, Mr. Speaker, there 

wasn’t a lineup of cars at Lloydminster — I was in 

Lloydminster that night — but there was a terrific feeling of 

optimism, Mr. Speaker, absolutely was. 

 

And people in Saskatchewan, people in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

they make decisions based on the environment that they have in 

front of them. And Lloydminster is the perfect example. It’s a 

city right on the border of Alberta and Saskatchewan. When the 

city was formed or the two towns, one on each side, formed 

together, Saskatchewan was by far the biggest. Through the 

years, through many years of NDP [New Democratic Party], 

Mr. Speaker, governments, we saw that the Alberta side grew 

very quickly. Lloydminster had one of the fastest growing 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

communities in the country. And through the ’90s, through the 

early 2000s, we saw anemic growth on the Saskatchewan side 

of Lloydminster. And the Alberta side was one of the fastest 

growing communities in the country. 

 

I don’t know if they have a good explanation as to why that 

might have been, but I do have a couple of thoughts, Mr. 

Speaker, because following 2007, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 

reversal. We’ve seen that income taxes were reduced and 

reduced dramatically, Mr. Speaker. Where before 2007, 

families would choose to live on the Alberta side. They work in 

Lloydminster or around Lloydminster, and they had to buy or 

build a house. It made sense to build it on the Alberta side 

because the tax rates were lower. If you wanted to build outside 

of Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, property taxes, Mr. Speaker, 

would say it makes more sense to build on the Alberta side than 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, fortunately in some earlier budgets, those tax 

rates were lowered, and now, Mr. Speaker, in Lloydminster it 

is, for a family of four it’s beneficial to live on the 

Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster. And the result in this past 

year, Mr. Speaker, more housing units were built on the 

Saskatchewan side than on the Alberta side, and I think that that 

is something that I think that our government has been very 

proud of, the increase in population. But in Lloydminster where 

you’re comparing two jurisdictions side by side, we have a 

great partner in Alberta. They have one of the strongest 

economies in the country as well. And for the two provinces to 

be side by side, both providing great opportunity for 

newcomers, for existing residents, it serves us both very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking of the new Saskatchewan, I have had a 

couple of incidents in the last couple months that have really 

stood out for me, and I would like to share them now because I 

think that this budget is really the budget for the new 

Saskatchewan. It’s building upon the previous budgets. And the 

first one, Mr. Speaker, is kind of two different paradigms and 

one that I think is shared by the members opposite. And I was 

the other party in this conversation, Mr. Speaker, and I hope 

that this represents the new Saskatchewan. But it was a social 

evening, and many people were sitting around talking, and it 

was getting later on in the evening, and people were speaking 

very frankly. And one of the people at the table said, you know 

what I hate? I hate those big trucks that are all around. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I was, you know, I drive a truck myself, and I blurted 

out, what are you talking about? I love those big trucks. And I 

articulated to him that I think that these trucks represent, you 

know, prosperity. A lot of them are maybe jacked up and have 

bulging tires and probably make a little more noise than they 

reasonably need to, but it’s a sign that there’s opportunity in 

Saskatchewan, that people are working hard and are being 

prosperous. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of them have welders 

plunked in the back. And it’s an exciting time in Saskatchewan. 

 

The person that had made the comment about big trucks, Mr. 

Speaker, defended his position. To him, it represented all the 

negative. He liked the old Saskatchewan. He made the 

comment, Mr. Speaker, that these people that have now . . . 

driving these trucks, they left Saskatchewan. When the NDP 

were in government, these people left. And now they come 

back, and they’ve got all this money, and they’re driving these 

big trucks. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t see eye to eye that night. But I 

know many of my friends and many people from around home 

that had to leave Saskatchewan to find careers and opportunities 

to earn a living and raise their family in a manner that they 

thought was acceptable, and now they are so grateful that 

Saskatchewan is leading the country. They’re proud of their 

province, and they want to come home and be close to family 

and friends and be a part of the prosperity. They feel invested 

here, and they want to work hard, to work together to make this 

province great. And I’m very proud that this budget enables 

people to do that, Mr. Speaker, and will continue to do so. 

 

The other experience I had, Mr. Speaker, is we took our family 

skiing to North Battleford. They have a great . . . Table 

Mountain. I think that calling it a mountain might be a slight 

overstatement, but it is a terrific ski hill, and we were skiing 

there all day. And the phenomenal thing is, Mr. Speaker, it felt 

almost like I was in Whistler; there were so many foreign 

languages being spoken all around us. There was Spanish. 

There was Russian, Ukrainian. There was a family there in full 

Middle Eastern garb, Mr. Speaker. And everybody was there 

skiing and having fun, everybody was . . . a lot of newcomers 

who were proud to be in Saskatchewan, who recognized the 

opportunity and were there to ski and have fun. 

 

And it was something that when I grew up, we went to Table 

Mountain fairly regularly. And there was a lot of people, myself 

included, skiing in blue jeans or coveralls and Carhartts, instead 

of Sunice, was always a tradition in our family. And now we go 

there, and it’s a multicultural ski resort. And it’s pretty cool that 

that’s, not in my riding, but very close to my riding, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

A couple other things I’d like to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is 

priorities. And the member for Rosemont, today in question 

period, Mr. Speaker, in his last question asked about priorities 

and said that the priorities of this government are all screwed 

up. And I was taken aback by that, Mr. Speaker, because I feel 

that our priorities are fairly well defined. We’ve come through 

an election where we’ve talked about priorities very clearly. I 

later found out that the member for Massey Place, last week in 

his speech, talked about misplaced priorities of this 

government. And I had to give that a little thought, Mr. 

Speaker, because I would ask them, what are their priorities? 

 

This budget clearly lays out the priorities of this government: 

shortening wait times, a balanced budget. What are their 

priorities, Mr. Speaker? Our priorities are a rural locum pool to 

ensure there’s appropriate health care in communities; 

continuing the highway work, Mr. Speaker, at the same level 

we have for the past four years; municipal revenue sharing, Mr. 

Speaker. That is the priorities on this side of the House. 

 

Building more schools to enable the continued recruitment, the 

young families that are moving here, Mr. Speaker — that’s the 

future of the new Saskatchewan. What are their priorities, Mr. 

Speaker? Commitments to long-term care facilities and funding 

in this budget to build them, Mr. Speaker. That’s the priorities 

on this side of the House. I ask those members, what are their 

priorities? And I think they have articulated their priorities 

fairly clearly. Certainly the member from Riversdale in the last 

week, Mr. Speaker, has articulated her priorities. And I don’t 

know if that squares with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

Speaker. 

 

I would like those members to think about the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, the guys driving the big trucks, the families, Mr. 

Speaker, that have moved back to Saskatchewan to start a life, 

to continue on in the careers they are. 

 

I know in my riding, Mr. Speaker, people work extremely hard. 

Farmers, ranchers, they’ve come through a lot of tough years in 

agriculture — the BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy), 

the drought, Mr. Speaker. In the oil field, young men, young 

women go to work, work 12-, 16-hour days. That’s not 

uncommon. They’ll work seven on, three off, seven on, three 

off, all year long, Mr. Speaker. They work very hard. They are 

proud of the work they do, and they are a part of the success 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And it’s incumbent on us as government, as Treasury Board, as 

Minister of Finance, when we are providing funding for 

services, for programs, it’s not our money, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 

individuals that are working hard, that are paying taxes. That is 

who we represent and who we provide services to and who we 

are accountable to, Mr. Speaker. And when the members 

opposite, and specifically the member from Riversdale, has pet 

projects or has priorities that don’t square with the budget, 

maybe . . . And I think it’s important to be clear that what 

they’re putting forward, Mr. Speaker, are a good industry, 

people that work very hard as well. But I want that member to 

know that when we crafted a budget, we had to ensure that 

programs were sustainable and that we were responsible for the 

people paying taxes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when asked about their priorities, the leader 

of their party said that they would find funding. They would 

find funding, Mr. Speaker. They thought that the agricultural 

programs were too rich and that they could go in — the same 

government, Mr. Speaker, that ripped up GRIP [gross revenue 

insurance program], that ripped up GRIP, Mr. Speaker — they 

also, Mr. Speaker, thought that revenue sharing to the 

municipalities was too rich, that if we just, if we just siphoned a 

little money out of the municipalities, no one would notice. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the record of their government. For 

too long, their government was in charge. We came in in ’07 to 

find that municipalities had been underfunded for decades. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want them to think about their priorities, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to end my comments here, but I 

look forward to hearing from the member from Riversdale as to 

what her priorities are and where she thinks we should be 

funding this. Should we be taking it out of agriculture? Should 

we be taking it out of the municipalities? Should we, Mr. 

Speaker, should we be doing a royalty review? Should we be 

doing a royalty review, Mr. Speaker? Those are questions I’d 

like to hear her ask. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity and I look 

forward to the debate. I will be supporting the budget and I will 

not be supporting the amendment. 

 

[19:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Saskatoon Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 

. . . I guess this is my third opportunity to wade into budget 

speech debate, and it’s always an opportunity too to say thank 

you to some very important people in our lives. 

 

I know that the reason I’m here, Mr. Speaker, or the reason I 

chose to put my name forward to run is because I have two 

daughters, and my hope and my goal is to make sure that I 

leave this world a better place for them and for their cohort and 

future generations, Mr. Speaker. So I do this for my daughters, 

but my family has also had to make some huge sacrifices, as all 

our families do. So I would be remiss if I didn’t thank my 

husband, Blair, who makes sure that things are running 

smoothly for us at home and that Hennessey and Ophelia are 

well cared for while I’m here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also actually would like to thank my parents, who for me, 

particularly as a mother of young children in this legislature, 

my life is very dependent on my support system, which again is 

my husband. It’s my mom and dad. It’s one of my sisters and 

the many friends who, when I get home on Thursday night from 

a week here in the legislature, I have friends who will make 

sure that our family’s got a good meal cooked. And I’ve got 

wonderful people in my life to make sure that I am able to do 

my very best representing the people of Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

I want to thank my staff, Vanessa, who’s my main constituency 

assistant, who’s fabulous. She’s empathetic. She’s 

hard-working. She’s thoughtful. She’s brilliant and incredibly 

tenacious and makes sure that the people of Saskatoon 

Riversdale get what they need in terms of services from our 

constituency office when I’m not able to be there. So a big 

thanks to Vanessa, and I really, really, very much appreciate all 

she does for our community. And last but not least, the people 

of Saskatoon Riversdale, who’ve placed a great deal of trust in 

me, Mr. Speaker, to be their voice here in this legislature, and I 

am honoured and privileged to be able to be here and speak and 

represent them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things the Minister of Health said last night from his 

seat . . . It’s been interesting listening to some of the debates 

here, Mr. Speaker, because I think the members opposite have 

some new talking points. The Minister of Health last night 

asked, well why can’t you say something positive? Why is the 

opposition so negative? Why are they so pessimistic? And 

we’ve heard that in several speeches today, Mr. Speaker. So 

clearly their communications folks have tried to come up with 

some new talking points. 

 

But unfortunately for the minister who had those comments last 

night, and everybody else, the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that our 

job is not to be the cheerleader for government. That is the cold, 

hard reality of opposition, Mr. Speaker. There are clearly 

enough pompom wavers on that side of the House. I don’t think 

that they need any more. 

 

Our job, Mr. Speaker, our job, Mr. Speaker, is to stand up for 

the people of Saskatchewan who feel like, on an $11 billion 

budget and a booming economy thanks to our natural resources, 

life should be just a little bit easier. But there are many, many 

people who wonder about an $11 billion budget and can’t quite 

figure out, can’t quite figure out why they aren’t feeling all the 

positiveness that the Sask Party government touts in all its 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

rhetoric and its communications. That message that that 

government delivers isn’t hitting home for many, many people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those people come into our constituency offices. They write us 

letters. They call us. We run into them at community events. 

There are many, many people who wonder about an $11 billion 

budget and wonder why they are not feeling the love, Mr. 

Speaker, as it were. 

 

So despite all that, I want to take a moment to give credit where 

credit is due. And the one thing I’d like to commend the 

government on is the child and youth agenda. I think it’s . . . 

Having worked in government before and having worked in 

community organizations as well, I think one of the problems 

that happens is people do sometimes work in silos. And there’s 

nothing good or nothing positive about organizations that each 

have an impact on an individual not doing their work together. 

It’s important that government ministries are in fact working in 

concert with each other to try to make sure that people have the 

support and the resources to live the best possible lives. And the 

reality is we don’t live in silos and government shouldn’t work 

in silos. So I think I would commend the government. I don’t 

think . . . I would commend the government last year for 

developing that strategy and continuing to support it. That’ll 

provide for better outcomes for families which is investing in 

children and youth. 

 

I’m not quite sure why the members opposite are quite so noisy 

here. They’ve been the ones calling for some positive talk here 

so perhaps they should sit back and listen for a moment, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m saying positive things and I’m the subject of many 

heckles here, Mr. Speaker. Anyway there’s so much anger 

coming across tonight here, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what it 

is. I don’t know what they had for supper over there, Mr. 

Speaker, but it clearly didn’t sit very well with them. The 

bottom line, the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is not . . . When 

government is working together and investing in young people, 

the outcomes for all of us down the road will be much better. 

 

I also have to commend the government on the Saskatchewan 

assured income for disability program. This is something that 

I’ve . . . I worked in the disability community many years ago, 

Mr. Speaker, and I know that this was something people were 

very optimistic about. And the government implemented and 

put about 3,000 people who are now on it a few, a couple of 

years ago, and they have the second intake happening right 

now. I know people in the community have been very eager and 

anxious to hear about it. I’ve heard for the last several months 

people want information, want to know how it’s going to roll 

out, and they’re happy to be getting that information now. 

 

So the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 

program, what it is, it’s for people who have profound and 

enduring disabilities. So I know many advocates in the 

community are very happy about it and there will be about 

7,000 more people enrolled in this program in the next little 

while. One of the best things about the program, people 

mention that it’s an opportunity to, it’s a benefit program that 

has a little bit more dignity. And come July, new folks on it will 

have greater benefits, which is absolutely fabulous, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I do have some reservations and some concerns though. I have 

been told there are about 12,000 people on social assistance 

who have a disability flag on their charts, which means that 

they have a disability, Mr. Speaker. So I understand that in this 

next intake there’ll be about 7,000 people, which means there’ll 

be about 5,000 people who will not be enrolled in this program 

yet. So what we’ll have is we’ve got the SAID program and 

then we’ve got the traditional social assistance program. So we 

will be leaving people on traditional social assistance program 

living on the same rates as they were now. So you’ll have one 

group who has an increased benefit compared to the other. 

 

And I worry about those people on the edge, Mr. Speaker, and 

quite frankly even the people without disabilities who are on 

social assistance because social assistance is not . . . You’re 

living in poverty, Mr. Speaker, when you live on social 

assistance. It’s not a pleasant existence. It’s not an existence 

that people aspire to. And I think that there are few people, Mr. 

Speaker, if any, who make a choice to live that kind of life. 

 

Just for the record here, Mr. Speaker, a single individual, what 

you get to live on social assistance, your living allowance, is 

$255 a month, Mr. Speaker, $255 a month for food, clothing, 

travel, personal, and household items . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . which actually the member from Estevan, the 

member from Estevan is yelling from her seat that it’s a lot 

more the NDP gave . . . My apologies. My apologies to the 

member from Estevan. My apologies to the member from 

Estevan. It was the Minister of Education. 

 

Well in fact it was the NDP who increased that rate and it has 

not increased since that last . . . This government has not 

touched the living allowance despite the fact we’ve had 

increased cost of living here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

People, a single individual on social assistance has to live off 

$255, Mr. Speaker, which is not enough, Mr. Speaker, which is 

not enough. 

 

I’d like to say that the government — again, giving credit 

where credit is due — the government has increased the 

housing allowance, but this hasn’t kept pace, this has not kept 

pace with the reality of the rental market, especially in places 

like Regina where there’s such a tight vacancy rate. Such a tight 

vacancy rate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So even if you get the full rental supplement, the reality is even 

if you get the full rental supplement, there are not apartments 

available in the same, in the price range that you’re allowed to 

rent for, Mr. Speaker. So what’s happening is people are using 

their full shelter allowance and then tapping into their $255 or 

plus living allowance, and living off of even less than that, Mr. 

Speaker. So again I would like to make sure that the members 

opposite know that we don’t think that everything they do is 

bad. There are some good things. But you know what? Our job 

is to make sure that the government is aware of the shortfalls or 

the people who are being left out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So speaking of people who are living on fixed incomes, I’d like 

to talk a little bit about the children’s and seniors’ drug plan. 

This government, Mr. Speaker, is increasing prescription drug 

costs by $5 a prescription. Well if you take a senior citizen who 

averages three to four prescriptions, it’s $240 a year, Mr. 

Speaker. And when you’re on a fixed income, that makes a very 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

real difference. And yes, they have indexed the seniors’ income 

plan, which I would have said is a very . . . increased, which 

this government has in this budget. I would have commended 

this government for a modest increase, for a modest increase. I 

would have commended this government for a modest increase 

in the seniors’ income plan, but when you give with one hand 

and take away with another, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that that 

something should be commended, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My parents, Mr. Speaker, my own parents are both almost 80 

years old. My mother will be 80 years old this summer, and my 

father just turned 79, Mr. Speaker. I know that they’re very 

concerned about people they know who this will be a very real 

issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to read an email from a constituent, Mr. Speaker. I 

can get up here, Mr. Speaker, and say everything that I want, 

and what I need to do though is make sure that the voices of the 

people in Saskatoon Riversdale and elsewhere are heard by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. Because their voice, I think, carries 

far more weight than mine, Mr. Speaker. So this is from a 

constituent of Saskatoon Riversdale: 

 

I think the Brad Wall government should be ashamed of 

itself. In a time of prosperity and growth, they are 

increasing the cost of living for our seniors, the people 

who built this province! On the cost of their medication 

yet! Not luxury items they can do without — but the very 

things they need to live. I don’t suppose any of their 

parents are lower income, or they might see what a 

disgraceful thing they have done — literally taking food 

out of all the mouths of some. I feel any senior with an 

income under $50,000 should not have to pay AT ALL for 

their prescription drugs. What is wrong with these people? 

Have they no shame [Mr. Speaker]? 

 

This is a resident of Saskatoon Riversdale who started the 

message, Mr. Speaker, by saying, “I have nowhere else to go 

with this anger except to my representative in government — so 

that’s you Danielle.” 

 

So this is a letter from someone I received today here in 

Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, some grave concerns about 

the increases to the seniors’ drug plan. 

 

I think another thing we need to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is 

another grab from seniors — $240 a year, Mr. Speaker, for 

hygienic supplies for seniors in long-term care. So is this the 

best place to get more money, from the seniors who have 

worked so hard to build this province to where it is today? 

 

I heard the member from Lloydminster saying, well where 

would they cut? What are their priorities? What are their 

priorities? Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? I would perhaps 

start with cutting in Executive Council, making sure that we 

have our priorities right. I would be cutting in Executive 

Council. I would not be adding three more politicians. The 

members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, would not be 

adding three more politicians at millions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker. So they were very curious about where we would cut, 

Mr. Speaker, and those are two places we could start: the folks 

in Executive Council and the three politicians that the Sask 

Party government is planning to add, Mr. Speaker. 

[19:30] 

 

Another thing in this budget that I have some grave concerns 

about, again representing Saskatoon Riversdale, much of the 

casework that comes into our office, Mr. Speaker, is about 

social assistance. This government, if you look at the budget 

plans, have 100 fewer people working in the Department of 

Social Services. Again, so this government is willing to fully 

staff to its absolute complement Executive Council but not 

willing to staff the people providing front-line services and 

social services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell you what this’ll look like in Saskatoon Riversdale. 

Already, even without the loss of these 100 people, there is a 

hard and difficult, it’s a difficult experience getting services for 

our constituents, Mr. Speaker. At one time, just a month ago 

actually, my constituency noted for me that there is only one 

supervisor in the Saskatoon Social Services office, that there 

were several caseworkers who were no longer in the employ of 

the ministry. We couldn’t, as much as we were trying to get 

responses from people in Social Services to get pressing, 

pressing matters — people who are living so, so close to the 

line, Mr. Speaker, who are desperate — and we are unable to 

get quick, prompt answers because of staffing, Mr. Speaker. So 

we have some grave concerns about 100 fewer positions in 

Social Services. These are the people providing the front-line 

work to our citizens, Mr. Speaker. And that is a real problem. 

 

Another thing that, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to talk about, 

Mr. Speaker. I would like to chat a little bit about child care 

spaces. I know that everybody in this Assembly knows that 

that’s near and dear to my heart as a mom of young children, 

who has many friends who have young children. Child care is 

front and centre in our lives, Mr. Speaker, whether we choose 

to be at home with our kids, making sure that they’re well cared 

for, or whether or not we decide that we, whether we choose to 

or have to go out into the paid labour force to provide for our 

family, child care is front and centre. 

 

So this government has committed to creating 500 more spaces. 

Is that good, Mr. Speaker? Yes. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 500 spaces is 

good. But I can tell you that the francophone child care in 

Saskatchewan right now, just in the francophone community, 

just in the francophone community, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 

wait-list of 300 spaces across the province that they need that 

will eat this right up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing that we heard about just a week and a half ago 

from the people who are on the front lines of child care here in 

Saskatchewan, is you can create as many spaces as you want, 

Mr. Speaker, but if you don’t have the staff to support those 

spaces, what’s the point? The reality is recruitment and 

retention is a huge, huge issue. And when you are making as 

much money working in child care as you are at working at 

Tim Hortons or Wal-Mart, that is a problem. The people we are 

entrusting our children to earning barely above minimum wage, 

who often have families themselves, Mr. Speaker, that is 

unacceptable. 

 

So again I need to point to our neighbours to the east, Mr. 

Speaker. Manitoba has close to 30,000 child care spaces. How 

did they, how did they get there, Mr. Speaker? How did they 

get there, Mr. Speaker? They got there by having a plan. 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

Actually they’re in the middle of their second five-year plan, 

Mr. Speaker. They didn’t just target creating more spaces. They 

targeted creating a sustainable system that worked for families 

and worked for people who worked in the industry, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what they did. So right now, here in 

Saskatchewan, we are working with an outdated subsidy 

system. We don’t have enough money for families. There’s far 

too much bureaucracy. 

 

I don’t know if the members opposite have any clue how child 

care works, with the exception of perhaps the minister. They’re 

laughing, Mr. Speaker. This is a very serious issue for many, 

many people here in this province, Mr. Speaker, who want to be 

employed, who want to get an education but can’t, don’t have 

the confidence in the child care system. They are relying on 

care that people shouldn’t have to rely on, Mr. Speaker. They 

need to know that when they are going to school or to work that 

their children are in the best possible hands, Mr. Speaker, and 

that creates better employees, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So just to give these government, these members opposite a 

little lesson in how it works in terms of the bureaucracy. So 

every child care centre has a list, Mr. Speaker, of its families. 

Every month there is a director who fills out an attendance card 

for every day that that family has a subsidy and doesn’t have a 

subsidy. There’s an attendance card, Mr. Speaker, that gets 

manually filled out that gets shipped off to Regina where the 

subsidy worker then has to input that somewhere. There is a 

huge amount of bureaucracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need to . . . this child care system doesn’t need to be 

tinkered with, it needs to be completely overhauled, Mr. 

Speaker. Again, we have workers whose wages and working 

conditions aren’t enough to keep them in the field, Mr. Speaker. 

So again, there is no point increasing spaces if you don’t have 

the staff to support them — the trained, qualified staff to do 

that. 

 

So when you’ve got subsidy workers who are supporting, I’ve 

been told up to 400 families, the subsidy workers, an individual 

subsidy worker is responsible for about 400 families. There is 

no wonder that it takes months, Mr. Speaker, sometimes to find 

out if you’re eligible for a subsidy. And then what ends up 

happening is child care centres end up carrying debt when a 

family finds out that they don’t get the subsidy and they’ve just 

had their child in the child care for a month, and then they pull 

their child out of child care because they can’t pay the bill. It is 

hugely problematic. 

 

So for this government to not acknowledge that there are some 

very real issues with the child care system, and I urge them to 

talk to parents, to talk to families, to talk to the people who 

work in the industry and come up with a real 

made-in-Saskatchewan plan reflecting our Saskatchewan values 

that service Saskatchewan families the way they deserve to be, 

the kind of services they need and deserve to have, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if we didn’t talk about the film 

employment tax credit tonight. This has been something that 

we’ve been raising since the budget last week, the cut to the 

film employment tax credit which will see, Mr. Speaker, many, 

many people in this community who make their living off the 

film employment . . . off of the film and television industry, 

having to go to places like Manitoba, BC [British Columbia], 

Toronto, other jurisdictions who are willing to participate in the 

world market of the film industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the best quote I heard today, or yesterday, was in order 

to be competitive, if you want to be competitive, Mr. Speaker 

. . . I shouldn’t, I actually am not going to quote that quote 

because I don’t have it in front of me and I wouldn’t want to do 

an injustice to Norm Bolen. So I don’t have it in front of me 

and I don’t want to do his quote injustice, but the bottom line, 

Mr. Speaker, is this government has decided it doesn’t want to 

be competitive, Mr. Speaker. The reality is, the film and 

television industry, 70 per cent of money in the film and 

television industry comes from out of province, Mr. Speaker. 

These are new dollars, money that’s not here in Saskatchewan. 

And those companies that come to Saskatchewan invest in 

Saskatchewan employees who pay taxes here, Mr. Speaker. The 

people who work in the film and television industry here in 

Saskatchewan pay taxes here in Saskatchewan. They buy 

houses, Mr. Speaker. They work and volunteer on community 

boards. They’re members of this community, and they deserve 

to have this support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is very much about economic development. It’s about 

positive benefit for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s about jobs, 

economic spinoff, pride of places. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that I think it feels pretty good for all of us when we see our 

landscapes, when we see Saskatchewan on the screen or we see 

our neighbours or the Premier making a cameo on Corner Gas. 

It’s kind of cool, Mr. Speaker, and not only when we see that 

ourselves but when we have a chance to share that on the world 

stage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The film industry, Mr. Speaker, is about . . . This tax credit that 

this government is cutting, for every dollar this government 

spends, it gets six back in production value. And that doesn’t 

even include spinoff, whether it’s the lumberyards, the gas that 

people are buying at gas stations, the money that’s being spent 

on accommodations, and food, Mr. Speaker, at restaurants, 

catering companies. The spinoff benefits are enormous, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

 But you know what? I can say all these words, and it doesn’t 

seem to ring true for the members opposite. But I’d like to read 

a few stories into the record, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps would. 

These are people who are residents and voters of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, and are citizens and deserve to be treated with 

respect, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to read a few things here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So this is from the petition that this morning was at more than 

7,000 signatures, Mr. Speaker. The petition started up on Friday 

afternoon. As of about noon today, there were more than 7,000 

speakers. 

 

So we have Greg Wensel, Sask Party supporter and business 

teacher: “This decision does not hold water.” Amelia Rogers 

supported the Sask Party: “feels like you slapped our family in 

the face.” Ian Rogers: 

 

Remember me Premier Wall? The guy that shot your 

Christmas Message. Thanks to the SFETC, I’ve had a 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

successful 25 yr. career in the province of my birth, the 

province I love. Raised a family here. Hoped to retire 

here. Now I will be forced to follow the producers that 

leave if I want to continue working on the world-class 

documentaries that I’ve been so lucky to be a part of. 

Merry Christmas to you too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Shane Chapman, Sask Party supporter: “very 

disappointing, please reconsider.” Meet Doug Russell, dad, 

volunteer, editor, TV spots for Riders, Rawlco, and you. Now 

what? So those are just a few little snippets, Mr. Speaker, from 

the petition, but I do have some letters, Mr. Speaker. I do have 

some letters that I’d like to read into the record, Mr. Speaker, 

that I think are quite important. 

 

This comes from Andrea Menard, which I think many of us are 

familiar with and quite proud of here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. So I won’t read entire letters here because they are 

quite lengthy, but some excerpts, Mr. Speaker. So this is from 

Andrea Menard: 

 

I don’t understand how the government can justify cutting 

a program that has generated over $500 million of 

production in our province and has fuelled not just the 

film communities, creative and technical trades, but the 

wider community as well. I am a proud Métis actor, 

singer, and screenwriter whose national and international 

reputation have done Saskatchewan proud. I’ve been an 

ambassador for Saskatchewan because of the very fact that 

my creations could be produced here, my voice could be 

nurtured, developed, and produced here. Many people 

across this country and abroad are now aware of the 

existence of my culture and our Prairie world view 

because my province invested in its film and television 

community, who in turn invested in me. 

 

What other voices are waiting in the wings? Whose 

valuable world view will be silenced if this government 

chooses to cut the lifeline that brings valuable work to our 

province? The cut to this program will devastate the 

livelihood of thousands of film industry employees as well 

as a booming industry. 

 

This letter, Mr. Speaker, is from Dawn Bird: 

 

Last year after receiving the response I got from Hon. Bill 

Hutchinson, I was mostly satisfied and went on to have a 

very fruitful year. I was one of the fortunate who managed 

to work a good 9 months out of the year. This was very 

rewarding for me and my family and I was convinced the 

following year would be just as rewarding, if not better. 

Having said that, my husband and I decided to try for 

another baby and we planned the pregnancy around the 

film industry. I planned to be in my third trimester during 

the slowest time of the film season so that I would not 

miss much work and figured by the time I had the baby, 

things would only just be picking up. Our beautiful baby 

girl was born just three weeks ago. 

 

My husband (God bless him) is currently taking paternity 

leave from his place of employment (RCMP Depot) so 

that I can continue to work within the film industry. Also, 

I am set to produce a full length feature film in the fall and 

have been in collaboration with a local writer to try and 

get another television series off the ground. On top of all 

this, I am also in the process of acquiring a local office 

space for my expanding production company, B.E.ZEE. 

PRODUCTIONS. 

 

I am only one person, but think of how pulling the tax 

credit is going to drastically affect just MY family! 

Clearly, without the tax credit . . . I will not be working in 

the film industry like I had hoped and my husband 

basically took a cut in wages and took paternity leave for 

nothing. Secondly, there will be no point in establishing a 

business location for my Company; and please tell me 

who exactly is going to be working on the film and 

television series I have planned when everyone in the 

industry will have basically moved out of Province??? 

 

PLEASE . . . think of the thousands of people this is 

affecting. It’s NOT just the film industry people . . . it’s 

the people that support the film industry too. Restaurants, 

gas stations, hotels, truck rentals, clothing stores & dozens 

more! 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a letter, and I know this is lengthy, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think it’s important to have this on the record. 

These are the folks who have been in the galleries, who have 

been a part of the action here to help the government see that 

they’ve made a grave mistake, and I think their voices speak 

louder and more clearly than mine, Mr. Speaker.  

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is from Ell McEachern. She says here: 

 

I am writing to you to resign my position within the 

Saskatchewan film and television industry. 

 

I was born and raised in rural Saskatchewan. I suppose I 

never gave up on my career aspirations, in part, because of 

my farm background and the rural work ethic that we are 

all so proud of. After receiving my B.Comm from the U of 

S, I chose to stay in Saskatchewan even though the 

majority of my fellow graduates were heading to Ontario 

and Alberta to work for Proctor and Gamble and other 

large multinationals. As luck would have it, I found a 

career in an industry that allowed me to use both my 

strength with numbers and my creativity — film and 

television production and finance. I got this lucky break in 

1999. Turns out that the introduction of the Saskatchewan 

film employment tax credit created a boom in the film and 

television industry in Saskatchewan. Not only was I able 

to stay in Saskatchewan, but I was able to remain in 

Saskatoon. 

 

I’ve been employed full-time in this industry for over a 

decade. I’ve gotten married, had a son, bought a house, 

bought another property, sent my son to school. 

Unfortunately the marriage didn’t work out — that’s not 

really the point of this letter, but it does matter to me that I 

am a single income household with a young child to raise. 

In my decade in the film industry, I’ve built up some 

expertise in film and television financing and tax credit 

programs. I find some of the statistics being posted in your 

press releases to be a bit curious, and not accurately 

reflecting my experiences in this industry. 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

For example, I know that tax credit dollars are only paid 

out based on the amount of money that we bring in to the 

province and spend here. There are actually guidelines 

around it, minimums in place to ensure that enough money 

is coming in to offset whatever dollars are going out. I 

know very well that we, as producers, carry the cost of 

financing the tax credits for 18 to 24 months at a 

minimum. That is because the tax credits are only paid out 

long after we have brought the money into the province 

and spent it here. It’s unfortunate, because this lag makes 

it appear as though the tax credits are not directly linked to 

production revenues. For example, tax credits on the 

production year 2008-09 are probably paid out in 2011-12 

[Mr. Speaker]. You have the tax credits from a good year 

being paid out in a year when production is declining. 

That is a skewed picture, if the facts are not accurately 

presented. 

 

That’s all a bit technical though. I guess this is the real 

point. If Saskatchewan becomes the only province in 

Canada to be without a film tax credit, the industry here 

will die. It doesn’t matter that you are still putting money 

into the Soundstage. No business person in their right 

mind would bring a production to a province that is more 

expensive to shoot in than its neighbours (in fact, it 

reminds me of oil and gas royalties and tax structures — 

all you have to do to encourage investment in oil and gas 

in Saskatchewan is to be more competitive than Alberta. 

We did that, right?) It will become prohibitively expensive 

for production companies to exist here if all their 

production is happening in another province. So on that 

note, it is with much regret that I must tender my 

resignation as a Saskatchewan resident, and a tax-paying 

member of the film and television industry, if you insist 

on standing behind your decision to eliminate the 

Saskatchewan Film Employment Tax Credit. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many, many more. Actually I’m sure the 

Sask Party government members also have many because I’ve 

been cc’d on many, many, many, many, many emails, Mr. 

Speaker, and letters. Many, many, many speakers . . . I’m sure 

the Minister of the Environment could tell us all about the many 

letters that he’s also received. He’s the former Culture minister, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure he made a valiant effort around the 

cabinet table. Well I don’t actually believe that, Mr. Speaker, 

but you never know. 

 

What I do know is the current minister, by his responses in 

question period, clearly didn’t make a very strong argument at 

the cabinet table, Mr. Speaker, for his own ministry, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there are, there are a number . . . You know what? I’m going 

to read one more into the record here, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to read them all, but we would be here for a couple days, I 

think. So sadly I don’t have quite enough time to do that. So 

this is from Daniel, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I am born and raised in Saskatchewan and went to the 

University of Saskatchewan in order to get my BFA in 

Acting. I’ve been a supporter of the arts every since. My 

family comes from a business/farming background so they 

were at first unsure that I had a future as an artist in the 

province. I proved them wrong by getting involved in the 

Sask film industry and working hard to get to the top of 

my field in Stunt Coordination. It was very possible to 

make a good living in the film industry for me. Now, 

sadly, I may have to give up this career path. Without the 

tax credit, production dollars will go to other provinces. I 

am unable/unwilling to leave this province because of my 

roots and other businesses, and am therefore unable to 

pursue the career I’ve always dreamed of. I will have a 

VERY hard time working in other provinces, as they 

STILL have their tax credits which encourages them to 

hire people from THEIR provinces. Many artists and 

technicians will have to leave the province permanently to 

work, or stay here and switch careers. I care about this 

industry and my province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know what? I’m going to read one more into 

the record just because I know these members opposite are 

perhaps learning a whole bunch about the film employment tax 

credit, Mr. Speaker. And they’re understanding, I hope, and 

seeing that perhaps they can find a clear path to ensuring that 

this industry grows and thrives, Mr. Speaker. Quote . . . This is, 

pardon me, this is from Mark: 

 

In addition to being a taxpayer, home owner, and father of 

three, I am an actor. I’ve never expected to earn a 

full-time living in Saskatchewan’s film and television 

industry, so I’ve continue to take on other work so that I 

can pay my bills, look after my kids, and live as a 

responsible citizen in a province I have come to love and 

call home. 

 

I respect the importance of a balanced budget and, for the 

most part, I have been very impressed with your 

government’s work in areas such as health care. I am not a 

partisan thinker and I appreciate good government carried 

out by any political party. 

 

However, I am writing to you today because, like the 

hundreds and thousands of other Saskatchewan residents 

who work full-time or part-time in film and television, I 

feel betrayed and utterly disregarded by your government. 

And I would suggest that if you really want to lead 

Saskatchewan toward becoming a prosperous, 

cosmopolitan 21
st
 century province, you might want to 

stop beating up on the film and television Industry and the 

Saskatchewan people who work in it. Your policies in this 

area are chasing people out of the province — creative, 

talented people who love Saskatchewan, love their 

Saskatchewan families and friends, and really don’t want 

to move. People who contribute to the life of this province 

every bit as much as the farmer, miner, driller, and health 

care worker. 

 

The short-term budget saving achieved by killing the tax 

credit will be far outweighed by the price of killing off an 

entire industry and the price of trying to rebuild it if and 

when your government finally comes to its senses. It’s not 

too late to change this decision. 

 

Good government is about so much more than money, 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

Mr. Wall. 

 

Pardon me. That’s in a quote. I can say that, can’t I? 

 

Good government is about so much more than money . . . 

It’s about ensuring a quality of life and an abundance of 

opportunity for the people who call Saskatchewan home. 

It’s about having an open, inclusive spirit that values our 

province’s culture, stories, and talent. I’m not asking you 

to jeopardize the province’s finances or triple its 

investment in film and television. I’m only asking you not 

to take away the livelihoods of Saskatchewan citizens and 

not to ensure that talented young filmmakers and actors 

continue to be a prominent Saskatchewan export. 

 

This is a short-sighted, misguided, and ill-informed 

decision. This is not good government. Please, reverse this 

decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, is again every 

dollar invested in this film employment tax credit produced six 

in production value. We know that, Mr. Speaker, every dollar 

invested produced six in production value, and that doesn’t 

include all the spinoff as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Film tax credits are not just the making of social democratic 

governments, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to draw everyone’s 

attention, Mr. Speaker, to what the British government did 

actually less than a week ago. They introduced a tax credit for 

million dollar-plus budgeted TV shows. I’m just going to 

actually read from an article. I’m going to read from an article 

that appeared in The Hollywood Reporter, Mr. Speaker. It says: 

 

Disney and HBO were both name-checked as two major 

companies the British government hopes to lure to U.K. 

shores to shoot high-end television shows with the 

introduction of a tax credit. 

 

The Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, 

delivering his annual budget speech, said the government 

aims to bring in a tax credit to cover video games, 

animation and high-end TV program production. 

 

The aim would be to stop British TV programs such as 

Birdsong, starring Eddie Redmayne, Matthew Goode, and 

Clemence Poesy and banked by NBCUniversal and 

Working Title TV from shooting abroad [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

So this, Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes this is about 

money in, not money out. This Premier today in a scrum 

basically has said, this Premier today in a scrum basically said, 

basically said, we don’t want your money from abroad, Mr. 

Speaker. They said, we don’t want your foreign investment here 

in Saskatchewan. We want local investment. 

 

Local investment’s great, Mr. Speaker, but the reality is about 

70 per cent of money in the film and television industry here in 

Saskatchewan comes from elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. So I think 

this government needs to do some rethinking about the film 

employment tax credit. Clearly they are offside on this one, and 

I hope that they can see their way clear in the next month or 

two, sooner than that, Mr. Speaker. There are people who are 

glad that the delay of the film employment tax credit or the cut 

has been extended until June, but the reality is that basically 

gives people time to pack, Mr. Speaker. They will get their 

season in this summer, but they will not have an opportunity to 

think about a future here, Mr. Speaker. They need to know that 

the home that they own, do they need to list now when more 

properties tend to sell? These are folks who may or may not 

have a career come, here in Saskatchewan, in a year from now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this government needs to get to work and not tell them in 

three months from now what’s going on but sit down . . . I’d 

like to hear the minister or the Premier say that they’ve 

scheduled a meeting for tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, to start ironing 

this out. It’s absolutely imperative. Right now we’re sending a 

message around the world. The film and television industry is a 

global industry, Mr. Speaker, and we’re right now sending a 

message around the world that we don’t want foreign 

investment, Mr. Speaker. So this has to turn around. 

 

Just on one other quick note around arts and culture, the reality 

is I know that being a part of the creative economy is a very 

good thing. It’s incredibly important, Mr. Speaker. Do we want 

to be a part of the creative economy here? I think we do. I think 

our natural resource extraction is great, but being diversified is 

absolutely imperative. The things that make . . . It’s not just 

about . . . The reality is culture is and should be a big part of 

who we are here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We look at expenditures in the budget, whether it’s the Arts 

Board who has been capped at the same amount of funding 

here, Mr. Speaker, a lack of an increase is the same as a cut, 

Mr. Speaker. The reality is the lack of an increase is the same as 

a cut. When you have cost of living increases, you’ve got 

salaries to keep pace with and benefits. When you don’t get an 

increase, you are for all intents and purposes making a cut, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We heard yesterday that the Western Development Museum 

again is feeling the pinch and feels no, they didn’t get a 

decrease, but they feel as if they’ve had a cut. And they’ve now 

had to make some decisions about closing their facilities on 

Mondays to Saskatchewan residents and people coming into 

Saskatchewan as tourists who want to learn about our 

Saskatchewan story which the Western Development Museums 

do very well, Mr. Speaker. So those are just between the film 

employment tax credit, which has been on the minds of all of us 

here for the last week, but there are other areas in culture that 

have not been well supported either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker. I have stacks 

of letters, but I know that my colleagues, I have colleagues who 

would like to wade into the debate here tonight. So with that, I 

will be supporting the amendment and I will not be supporting 

the budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 

address this House and reply to this balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a little under the weather and I hope that 

I don’t channel Tommy the barking seal and bark my hole. So 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

I’m going to apologize in advance if I start to sputter. So thank 

you. 

 

It’s been a little more than four months since the election, and 

in that time it’s certainly been a whirlwind. I wondered whether 

what I heard in the constituents of Coronation Park on the 

doorsteps would reflect the concerns post-election. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Coronation Park want to see themselves 

reflected in the budget. They want to know that they have been 

heard and there is a document that understands the day-to-day 

struggles that working people are facing. They said, don’t 

forget about us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been out in the community and continue to 

listen and ask for opinions. That being said, I have some people 

to thank. Thank you to the constituents of Coronation Park, the 

family and friends, the legislative staff and caucus staff who 

have made my transition into the building seamless. I would 

also like to thank my co-workers for their selfless assistance. 

This is after all a large building, and your assistance has been 

greatly appreciated. I’d also like to thank my constituency 

assistant, Kalee Kent, for her tireless efforts in getting our 

office set up and her excellent rapport with the community. 

Well done, Kalee. 

 

As part of our government’s election platform, our priority was 

to ensure that the quality of life for people with disabilities 

improves in this province. I am always cognizant of the 

struggles that people are facing with disabilities and I was 

extremely hopeful that there would be a reflection of disability 

enhancements in the budget. Mr. Speaker, the 2012-13 budget 

makes an investment of $26.4 million for new or enhanced 

programming and increased program utilization. 

 

An increase of $17.8 million is provided to expand the 

Saskatchewan assured income for disability program, the SAID 

program. The total program will cost $113 million in 2012-13. 

It will expand the number of clients from 3,000 up to 10,000 

adults. Mr. Speaker, these enhancements are proof of this 

government’s commitment to people with disabilities. 

 

I had the opportunity to visit the constituents of Huston Heights 

in Argyle Park for a birthday party and also for a chili night. 

This is a residence for adults with physical disabilities who are 

living independently. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residents anxiously looked on and awaited the 

budget in hopes that they would see some recognition of their 

monthly struggles to make ends meet. They described in great 

detail their struggles to make ends meet and are truly struggling 

month to month. The look on their faces when they received the 

news of the enhancements to the SAID program were truly 

humbling. I was proud to be able, proud to provide the news 

that there would be enhancements to the program, and they 

thanked us as a government for this initiative. Mr. Speaker, 

there were tears of joy in that room and now their lives are just 

a little bit more hopeful. 

 

Some of the specifics of this budget for people who are in 

residential care settings, they’re going to receive another $40 a 

month, increasing to $100 a month in the next four years. 

Single individuals living independently will receive an increase 

of $200 a month, expanding to over . . . expanding to $350. 

Couples living independently will receive $230 a month, 

expanding to an average of $400 a month. 

 

As further evidence of disability enhancements, the 

Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living, the SAIL program, 

will receive an increase of $1.5 million to maintain benefits for 

people with long-term disabilities or illnesses. This program 

provides support such as orthotics, prosthetics, rehab mobility 

equipment, oxygen, insulin pumps for children. Mr. Speaker, 

these announcements resonated with my constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the children and youth agenda was launched in the 

’11-12 budget and brought together a number of programs from 

across government under one umbrella. The intention is to find 

new and innovative ways to approach the key social 

determinants of health and well-being at a very early age. It’s 

further enhanced in this budget with another $6 million. Some 

of these initiatives include a $1 million enhancement to the 

autism spectrum disorder therapies, $600,000 increase for fetal 

alcohol spectrum disorder prevention services, $500,000 to 

continue 20 literacy camps for underprivileged youth, $3 

million for a new risk assessment tool for child protection 

workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the introduction of the child and youth agenda has 

greatly improved relationships with First Nations agencies and 

it’s built new partnerships and improved services to families 

and children. First Nations agencies were provided $3.9 million 

annually to support case management and service delivery for 

First Nations child welfare authorities. Efforts are being taken 

to find placements for children with extended family and with 

First Nations agencies on-reserve so that the children can 

remain in the community. This approach has contributed to an 

increase in the number of children placed in extended family 

both on- and off-reserve. The result is a steady decline in the 

number of children that are coming into care of the ministry. 

 

I was honoured to be in attendance at the ribbon-cutting 

ceremony for FoxValley Counseling Services. FoxValley 

Counseling provides services to assist individuals and families 

based on need. Programs are tailored and therefore more 

meaningful and personal to the individuals they are serving. 

FoxValley Counseling provides its clients with options such as 

mediation, elder services, individual family counselling, talking 

circles, healing circles. All these services are in response to 

needs identified by First Nation members themselves. And this 

partnership will truly enhance family systems within Regina 

and region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other initiatives and enhancements to the 

child and youth agenda, and these include $1.15 million to 20 

out-of-home residential care spaces and infant care centre; $41 

million increase for intensive family supports; three-quarters of 

a million dollar increase for home assessments and treatment 

foster care delivered by community-based organizations; 

$500,000 increase for visitation and supervision for children, 

delivered again by community-based organizations. 

 

Continuing on the subject of youth, Mr. Speaker, I was truly 

humbled to be at another ribbon-cutting ceremony, in particular 

the funds that have been provided by the Ministry of Social 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

Services to Street Culture Kidz project. The funds provided to 

Street Culture is for the operation of the province’s first 

voluntary emergency youth shelter. This 15-bed coed facility 

provides a first stop for youth without immediate housing 

option and will provide a safe, respectful environment while 

ensuring basic needs for up to 30 days, and providing a plan for 

follow-up services. It is indeed unfortunate that youth find 

themselves in unsafe and uncertain circumstances, but there is a 

need for such a service and Street Culture will help to fill this 

gap. I had the opportunity to talk with some youth in the shelter 

and they were truly appreciative and thankful for the help in 

receiving, and in leaving the dangers of the street, truly thankful 

to this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2012-13 budget is also about keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage: balanced budgets, growing economy, 

government services that are affordable and sustainable in the 

long run. Around the world we’re seeing the chaos caused by 

governments that do not live within their means. 

Saskatchewan’s economy and our finances are in much better 

shape. That’s the Saskatchewan advantage. This budget is 

keeping the Saskatchewan advantage by keeping our budget 

balanced, by keeping our spending sustainable, by keeping our 

economy strong and growing, and by keeping the promises we 

made in the election campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget goes a long way to ensuring that the 

province’s most vulnerable are further assisted. It is often said, 

a society is measured by how it treats its most vulnerable. With 

that in mind, our government is continuing to take action to 

better meet the needs of people with intellectual disabilities. 

Starting April 1st, 2012, we’re changing the way we fund day 

programs to one based on actual needs of each individual. This 

will allow us to devote more resources to support people that 

have more complex needs. Through these and other programs, 

we’re working to ensure that Saskatchewan is the best place to 

live in Canada for people with intellectual disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the topic of education, the enhanced 

commitment to education in this province is indeed applauded. 

These enhancements include the new funding formula and 

recognition of the importance of education — truly welcomed 

by my constituents. When asked if this government believes in 

education, now the answer is a resounding yes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to visit schools within my 

constituency, and on a visit to Coronation Park School I got to 

visit three classrooms: grades 1’s, 4’s, and 8’s. Grade 1’s didn’t 

know why I was there, but they certainly knew what the castle 

in the park was. The grade 8’s were a little more reserved but 

had interesting questions through the social studies course, but 

by far the most interesting questions came from the grade 4’s. I 

said they could ask me anything, and, Mr. Speaker, they truly 

took me at my word. 

 

The boys peppered me with sport questions ranging from what 

my favourite teams are to my favourite players and, do you 

actually know the member from Regina Dewdney? And by the 

way, member, thanks for promising to come to the school after. 

Then it was the girls’ turn to ask questions. They wanted to 

know, is your job fun? Well yes it is. What’s your favourite 

colour? Green. Then a girl in the front row turned around and 

says, do you like dragons? I said, now there’s only one possible 

way to answer that question and that’s, well yes I do. She 

follows that up with, do you even like the fire-breathing ones? 

And I said again, yes I do. You can find good in all creatures, 

young lady, and I just think that fire-breathing dragons are 

misunderstood and they just want to be friends. She said, I 

think so too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the government’s principles is a strong 

safety net which protects those truly in need of support while 

encouraging individuals to become self-sufficient. I’ve already 

touched on that principle and cited examples that are imbedded 

in this budget. 

 

Another principle is individual freedom and equality of 

opportunity for all citizens. Mr. Speaker, I believe the rental 

incentive for housing speaks to this very principle. Specifically 

the rental incentive is in place to encourage construction of new 

multi-unit rental housing projects. Government is introducing 

an incentive to encourage private sector investment. The 

incentive is a corporate income tax rebate equal to 10 per cent 

of the rental income generated from newly constructed 

multi-unit rental projects for a period of up to 10 years. This 

rebate, when combined with other housing initiatives, is 

expected to encourage the construction of an additional 10,000 

new rental units in the province. In addition, Sask Housing 

Corp is going to provide $1 million for Habitat for Humanity to 

help an additional 20 low-income families achieve home 

ownership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to thrive and be a full citizen, there are a 

few components that are required. These components are 

housing, employment, and education. It is vital that these 

components do not function in isolation because they have a 

dependent relationship. You need housing in order to succeed 

in education. You need employment in order to afford housing. 

One cannot truly function without the three in harmony, and 

this budget has encapsulated those concepts. 

 

We are a have province, with record population growth and 

opportunities unprecedented in our history. Our vision: 

Saskatchewan will be the best place in Canada to live, to work, 

to start a business, to get an education, to raise a family, and to 

build a life. 

 

The government has identified four new goals to set direction 

for the province: sustaining growth and opportunities for 

Saskatchewan people, improving our quality of life, making life 

more affordable, and delivering responsive and responsible 

government. 

 

In order to fulfill this vision and set this direction, you need a 

benchmark of resources and an investment climate that 

provides a growth plan and incentives. Our province is blessed 

with many natural resources — abundant energy supplies, 

diverse mineral deposits, and a large land base that continues to 

grow high-quality grains and oilseeds. To help manage this 

growth, we’ve seen a strong net migration rate that has been 

growing due to a combination of both international and 

interprovincial initiatives. This is in combination with the 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’ll conclude my remarks, and I am supporting 

this budget and not supporting the amendment. Thank you. 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery here this evening I have two 

very special guests that have joined me here this evening that 

I’d like to introduce. I’d like to start off with introducing Ms. 

Gloria Patrick and Miss Kaitlyn Patrick. Now Gloria is the 

constituency assistant for Regina Rosemont, and I’m blessed to 

work with Gloria. She has such a special way with the 

constituents of Rosemont — empathetic, hard-working, 

determined to finding outcomes. 

 

Gloria’s background, her education is in both social work and 

in English studies, Mr. Speaker, and she’s worked in shelters, 

worked in protection. And she came to us after she was the 

executive director of the Core Ritchie community association, 

so she’s a great pickup in our office and serves our constituents 

so well. So I’m so pleased to welcome Gloria here. 

 

But I’m also very pleased to welcome her daughter Kaitlyn 

here. And Kaitlyn’s a grade 7 student at St. Mary’s School here 

in Regina. She is a fantastic piano player, an accomplished 

basketball player, a great jazz dancer, bit of hip hop, pretty 

talented girl all the way around. And I know tonight, Mr. 

Speaker, she has a little bit of homework in math yet here this 

evening, so I should conclude my remarks and let her get to 

that. 

 

They came in to meet with me briefly here tonight, and I just 

want to thank both of them for the support they provide to our 

constituency. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before I 

begin, there’s a few thank yous I would like to do. I would like 

to once again thank the voters of the beautiful Batoche 

constituency. I would also like to thank my board of directors 

who’ve been so devoted and with me all the way. I thank them 

very much for their time and their effort. I would also like to 

thank team Telfer, Don and Mary Anne, who run my office. 

Fantastic people and I much appreciate their help, their 

assistance, and the time they offer us. Once again I would also 

like to thank my wife, my partner, my friend, my confidant who 

always stands by my side. 

 

I would also like to thank the Premier, the member from Swift 

Current, and the Finance minister, the member from 

Canora-Pelly, for their leadership in bringing this fantastic 

budget to fruition. Also I would like to thank all the members 

of the Sask Party. It’s a fantastic team and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is that all of us? 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — You betcha. It’s even including you, yes. 

Thank you one and all and also thank you to our office staff. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for my speech. It is with great pleasure that 

I rise to speak on this year’s budget. This is the Saskatchewan 

Party government’s fifth balanced budget. And like the last 

four, I’m very proud of the results. The people of Saskatchewan 

have been very, very pleased with the last four budgets judging 

by their endorsement on November 7th. 

 

The only ones that have a problem with the last four budgets 

have also had a problem on November 7th. So where does the 

problem lie? With the budget or with the NDP? Mr. Speaker, I 

would suggest, if I may be so bold, that the problem lies with 

the NDP and their politically blind followers. The member of 

Regina Rosemont, as the opposition Finance critic, is following 

in the path of his mentor, the late and not so great former leader 

of the NDP, long gone Dwain, and his philosophy of not letting 

the facts get in the way of spinning a political story. 

 

[20:15] 

 

For the past four budgets, the member of Regina Rosemont has 

wailed and hollered that the budget is not balanced. Like a child 

having a temper tantrum, waving and yelling because he didn’t 

get his way, so he’s going to cause a scene. For the last four 

years, the member of Regina Rosemont has demanded the 

budget be balanced two ways, both General Revenue Fund and 

summary financial statement, something the NDP never, ever 

did. So this year, just to put a little smile on his face, we 

balanced the budget both ways. Mr. Speaker, did it make him 

smile? Or did he say, thank you, good job? No, Mr. Speaker. 

As a true apostle of the doctrine of Dwain, he said the budget 

was not up to his delusional standards and rejected it totally. 

Mr. Speaker, he couldn’t find one item, not one line in this 

budget, that he approved of. Mr. Speaker, using his, shall we 

say, questionable accounting practice, I can show you 16 

consecutive unbalanced NDP budgets. One year the NDP even 

used a credit card-like style to balance the books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is balanced. Like a man on a tightrope, 

we’ve even calculated for the winds of change. This is a 

balanced budget, probably the only one in Canada and most 

likely all of North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have not backed away from any of their 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

election promises. The number is somewhere in, and/or about, 

well maybe kind of, or something like, well maybe 4, 5 billion 

over and above the provincial budget. I would respectfully ask 

the member for Regina Rosemont, where would you get that 

kind of money from? You have two choices. You would either 

go much deeper into debt or like past NDP governments you 

would say, election promises are just election promises. 

Nothing more. They were never meant to be kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are done with that. 

They are smarter than that, and they will no longer tolerate such 

abuse. They demand better, and they received better on 

November of 2007 and even louder on November of 2011. I 

would say to the member from Regina Rosemont, you can’t 

suck and blow at the same time. This is either a balanced 

budget or it isn’t. You can’t have it both ways. 

 

While in the rotunda after the speeches, I was listening to 

comments about the budget. They were very positive, and I was 

pleased to hear them. The comment that said the most, and I 

heard it twice, was the comment not about the budget but about 

the NDP reply to the budget. The comment was, what planet is 

he from? When our province is doing the best it has done in 60 

years, how can he be so negative? It’s really sad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is really gaining admiration and 

respect across Canada and on the world stage. It is wonderful to 

witness this great transformation from a wee province under the 

NDP to the resource rich have province that has become the 

envy of the nation. Even our small rural communities have felt 

and see the change. They are proud of the new Saskatchewan. 

 

In my own constituency of Batoche, we are seeing changes — 

changes that a short time ago under the NDP weren’t 

happening. Now there is hope. Now there is optimism. Now 

there is a new bridge being built at St. Louis. Now there’s a 

new school being built in Duck Lake. Now there’s the twinning 

of Highway 11 to Prince Albert and will be completed this year. 

Now Highway 368 is a highway again. Now we see the access 

road to Cudworth from No. 2 Highway being rebuilt. Now we 

see the Wakaw Lake road up for rebuilding this year. Now we 

see a short stretch of No. 20 Highway to Middle Lake being 

rebuilt. Now we see a new daycare centre in Lake Lenore. 

Finally we see surgical wait times being shortened. We will be 

adding 8,000 surgeries this year. Truly an amazing step forward 

and much needed. 

 

Now we see provincial income tax being lowered. For a single 

person with an income of 25,000, we see tax savings of over 

$800 since we became government in 2007. For a family of 

four with an income of 50,000, we see a savings of over 2,600 

since 2007. Also we see low-income seniors getting a large 

boost. The end of this term, their income will have tripled from 

what it was when we first took office. 

 

The people of Batoche like what they see. They know we need 

more, but they see progress and a brighter tomorrow. Mr. 

Speaker, the page has been turned, and the people of Batoche 

are never going back. Saskatchewan is the new promised land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the job of the opposition is to oppose bad 

legislation, not all legislation. If a Bill is good for 

Saskatchewan, they could endorse it and help improve this 

province for all its people. But what we see here daily, the 

opposition hasn’t read that far yet in Her Majesty’s operator’s 

manual to being a good opposition. Surely in four years, as 

satisfied as the people of Saskatchewan are, we must have 

brought forward some good legislation. The people of this 

province have unequivocally endorsed the Saskatchewan 

Party’s policy. The NDP have demonstrated they will keep on 

opposing all legislation, even the right legislation that will 

advance our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has stated that we would add 

three more seats in the legislature by the next election in order 

to better serve our growing population. We are presently at 58 

seats, so that would bring us up to 61 seats. Considering we 

were once at 66 seats with a much smaller population, this 

seems very reasonable. The opposition says that three more 

seats will cost not just 1 million but millions of dollars more for 

the Saskatchewan taxpayer. Our government has stated that the 

cost will be no higher than when the NDP were in power. We 

are operating a more efficient government, thus we would not 

incur an additional cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not all of any budget is gold, and some hard 

choices had to be made. It was a very difficult decision, but the 

decision was made to wind down the film employment tax 

credit. It’s all about balancing a budget. Not surprisingly the 

NDP opposed this part of the budget. What is surprising is 

when asked by a CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 

reporter, the Leader of the Opposition, the member from Regina 

Lakeview, replied without hesitation he would take the money 

from agriculture and municipalities. He then said the 

government is forgetting how much money is generated in the 

film industry. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is 

forgetting how much money is generated in the agriculture 

industry, and how vital agriculture is to our economy. 

 

Agriculture is not only important to our economy; it is the 

cornerstone of our economy. I would like the entire opposition 

to listen very closely to the words of Daniel Webster, the father 

of Webster’s dictionary, a very wise and learned man. He said, 

society is based on agriculture. When agriculture flourishes, all 

the arts follow. I would like to say that again in case anyone 

missed it: when agriculture flourishes, all the arts follow. 

 

Agriculture is not just a budget line item. It is what we are. 

With 47 per cent of Canada’s cropland, we are the nation’s food 

producers — not only this nation but the world’s food supplier. 

The Prairies have been referred to as the breadbasket of the 

world. Any nation that cannot produce its own food is at the 

mercy of world markets. The men and women of agriculture 

have dealt with hail, fire, insects, blight, BSE, drought, floods, 

and all forms of adverse weather conditions. Farmers work the 

land, struggle and toil against many adverse conditions, and still 

stand proud. 

 

By far the biggest adversity that they had to overcome is 16 

years of NDP rule. This meant 16 years of program cuts, 16 

years of neglect and crumbling roads, higher and higher taxes, 

and empty promises. Our agriculture community has to be 

competitive in extremely challenging world markets, and with 

government support, we can be on the cutting edge of the future 

of agriculture. All they ask is our support and respect. We, the 

Saskatchewan Party government, are supporting them because 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

it is the right thing to do. The NDP have time and time again 

criticized their agriculture policies. They did nothing for 16 

years and the comments of their leader to CTV removed any 

shadow of a doubt as to where they really stand. For them, 

agriculture is just a political tool they can wave around to try 

and make political points. 

 

In the past, the NDP have divided this province into rural and 

urban. They would try to do it again. They have no qualms 

about splitting rural and urban if they see political gain. The 

strength of this province is in staying united, and this 

government stands for all of Saskatchewan from north to south, 

east to west, rural or urban. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all of the above reasons, and for many more, it 

gives me great pleasure to support the Saskatchewan Party 

government’s 2012 budget and to reject the amendment. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased tonight to be able to join this budget debate, and 

certainly in helping to ensure that the theme of the budget, 

Keeping the Saskatchewan Advantage, remains the key focal 

point not simply for this debate but actually for the duration of 

this year as we work on behalf of the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t start by paying homage to 

the people of Saskatoon Greystone. And I remain very humbled 

and honoured by the opportunity to continue to serve as the 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for this wonderful 

riding. 

 

I would also be remiss if I didn’t thank several of those that 

helped to ensure that I can continue to focus on the work at 

hand on behalf of the Premier and behalf of the people of 

Saskatoon Greystone: to my family, to my wife, Martha, and to 

our daughter Jacqueline, our wonderful daughter, a special vote 

of thanks for your continued support. 

 

Jacqueline is in grade 7 this year at the Saskatoon French 

School. She’s also just been promoted to lance corporal within 

the North Saskatchewan Regiment’s army cadets, that’s the 

2293 Royal Canadian Army Cadets. She’s a soccer player in the 

East Side Youth Soccer Association, and she also plays the 

violin. But most especially, I am so very proud of her for she 

continues to teach me some very humbling lessons about ways 

to see the world with fresh eyes and an open mind. 

 

I’d also like to thank my mom and dad, Bud and Elaine, as well 

as my sister Leah and my grandmother, Sheila, who continues 

to be an inspiration in my life. 

 

A great team of volunteers came together, led by two very 

talented Co-Chairs and a great team, and really helped to drive 

a successful election in Saskatoon Greystone. And some would 

say that’s despite the candidate that they were working on 

behalf of, but certainly, all kidding aside, that’s in great debt to 

our Premier and the central election team. 

 

Within the office in Saskatoon Greystone, the constituency 

office, a special thanks to Kathy, who helped us out last year, as 

well as Kacey, who was helping us out just recently. And 

Kalle’s now back from maternity leave. And here within the 

legislature, Dawn and Tessa, Amanda and Lisa, and Greg, and 

of course Mary, the chief of staff, who continues to make sure 

that we’re all on time and on track with our work. 

 

I’m especially pleased tonight to return to the theme of keeping 

the Saskatchewan advantage because it’s an opportunity for us 

to highlight some of the fundamentals that continue to ensure 

that we have a solid foundation for growth, fundamentals like 

the fact that there are now in Saskatchewan 1.067 million 

people and growing. And, Mr. Speaker, the significance of a 

growing population can be summarized most recently by Tony 

Blair’s memoirs. And what he says quite simply, and I’ll 

paraphrase, is this: jurisdictions either have a growing 

population or a shrinking population, Mr. Speaker. And in 

Saskatchewan after years of out-migration, Mr. Speaker, where 

more than 800,000 people left this province largely during the 

rule of the New Democratic Party, what we see is that the 

population has grown by more than 60,000 people in the course 

of the last five years. 

 

[20:30] 

 

In addition to the population growth, we see that Saskatchewan 

is now seen as a growth leader. Whether it’s through the 

Conference Board of Canada, the Bank of Montreal, RBC 

[Royal Bank of Canada], or a number of other independent 

institutions and entities across the country, Saskatchewan has 

been selected to finish as one of the top economic performers in 

the country. And what does that mean? It means that for the 

month of February, the last month that we have statistics for, 

there were more than 520,000 people working in Saskatchewan. 

That’s an all-time record for the month of February. We have 

not only a record, Mr. Speaker, as far as employment; we have 

a record as far as full-time employment in the province, more 

than 420,000 people working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have the lowest unemployment rate in the 

country, tied with Alberta at 5 per cent. And importantly, we 

not only see more people working and more people working 

full-time, but we also see our workforce becoming more 

inclusive. In fact what we’ve seen for the ninth consecutive 

month is real gains. These are real gains for First Nations and 

Métis people, Mr. Speaker. What we have is a 17.4 per cent 

growth rate in employment, almost 6,000 jobs for First Nations 

and Métis people who are now at an all-time record, nearly 

40,000 First Nations and Métis people working in the province 

of Saskatchewan, an all-time record. Mr. Speaker, the 

significance of this, when we think about more people working 

and we talk about an outcome that’s logical, is the average 

weekly earnings continue to go up. In fact they went up 3.3 per 

cent year over year for December over December 2010. That’s 

among the second highest increase, especially when we focus 

on payroll jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatchewan continues to make 

progress, but in order to ensure that this progress can be 

sustained, we’ve needed to focus on some key elements and 

that’s why I am very pleased to be supporting this budget as it 

is a balanced budget, one of the only balanced budgets that 

we’ll see in North America, Mr. Speaker. That reflects and 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

reinforces the strength of the AAA credit rating that our 

Minister of Finance recently announced for the first time in our 

history. It also reflects the fact that this government has helped 

to reduce the debt by nearly 44 per cent. That’s about $3 

billion, Mr. Speaker. We know that’s the kind of ethos that 

informs the work of this government. But it’s not simply about 

making sure that the bottom line is taken care of. It’s also 

helping to ensure that the people of this province are taken care 

of. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let me highlight that in this most recent 

budget that the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has seen an 

increase of $16.9 million. Mr. Speaker, we know how important 

that is to everyone across the province. We also know that we 

have seen an additional $5 million for the planning and design 

of the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford. And the list 

in health care goes on. 

 

We also know that there are significant investments for seniors: 

in keeping with our platform promises, an additional $3.5 

million for the new seniors’ personal care home benefit and, 

Mr. Speaker, an additional $3.3 million, an increase to provide 

seniors’ income plan, another benefit for our senior citizens. 

 

We can talk about the progress that we’ve seen regarding the 

Saskatchewan assured income for disabilities eligibility where 

the number of clients will expand from about 3,000 to about 

10,000 adults, and these benefits are going to be increased per 

month. Mr. Speaker, this is important for families just as the 

new dollars are important to help ensure that we continue to 

make enhancements to those suffering from autism spectrum 

disorders. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re also moving forward on 

new child care spaces and we know how important that is in the 

new Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d also like to highlight that we’re making real progress, 

especially in the construction and renovation of some of our 

schools. And I’d like to highlight a couple of those. Work 

continues at St. Matthew, right in the heart of Saskatoon 

Greystone, and work continues as well at Holy Cross, which is 

just outside of the riding in Saskatoon Eastview where a 

number of Greystone families have their students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on, but what I’d like to do is be able 

to highlight on behalf of the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration some of the vital investments 

that we continue to make. Regarding post-secondary education 

in the province of Saskatchewan under the leadership of 

Premier Brad Wall, Mr. Speaker, under the leadership of our 

Premier, we know that there have been $3.5 billion invested in 

post-secondary education — an all-time record, Mr. Speaker. 

For example, there has been an increase of more than 3,000 per 

cent in student housing, Mr. Speaker, because we know how 

vital this is. And that includes, Mr. Speaker, new dollars to 

support the planning for a student residence and child care 

facilities and other associated services right here at the 

University of Regina, and that’s been contained within this 

budget. 

 

We’ve also seen, Mr. Speaker, as part of the $890 million 

budget — which is a 4.1 per cent increase for the ministry — 

that we have millions of new dollars for our post-secondary 

institutions. We have over $107 million in support for our 

students through such programs as student financial assistance 

and bursaries, provincial training allowance and the 

apprenticeship training allowance, the skills training benefit, the 

graduate retention program. And I’d like to highlight, Mr. 

Speaker, with the graduate retention program, more than 30,000 

Saskatchewan graduates are benefiting from this, the most 

aggressive youth retention program in the country. 

 

I’d also like to highlight, Mr. Speaker, more than $109 million 

being invested for skills training and labour force development, 

as we know how important that skills training is today and will 

be in the future for people right across our province. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to highlight the more than $47 million that’s 

being invested through this budget to support post-secondary 

education and skills training for First Nations and Métis people 

right here in the province. And in fact just yesterday, with the 

partnership of the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] and the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, we had taken a 

bold step to move forward in helping to address and eliminate 

the education and employment gaps that exist for our First 

Nations and Métis students right here in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, because we know how important it is. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan there are more than 12,000 jobs open 

and available, and we anticipate that that’s going to grow to 

between 75 and 90,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker, over the course of 

the next 5, 7, to 10 years — pick your rates of growth. Mr. 

Speaker, what we know though is that, importantly and 

increasingly, it’s levels of education and skills training that will 

provide the opportunity for our students, no matter where they 

come from, no matter who they are in Saskatchewan, to access 

those new career opportunities. It’s one of the reasons that 

we’re moving forward with the new Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship which offers $500 a year to new Saskatchewan 

grade 12 graduates. And they’ll have up to $2,000, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure that post-secondary education is 

increasingly affordable and accessible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have undertaken to ensure that a portion 

of student loans will be forgiven for doctors and nurses and 

nurse practitioners who are willing to serve in rural and remote 

communities across our province, helping to make sure that 

we’re serving all of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we’re also 

continuing to move forward in some key areas of health care 

and that is $13.5 million in this budget to continue to fulfill our 

commitments to train 300 additional nurses in Saskatchewan 

and to have 100 additional physicians a year, Mr. Speaker. 

Those are ongoing commitments and we know how important 

these are to ensure that people of this province will be, continue 

to be so well served by our health care providers. 

 

Regarding key areas of innovation, Mr. Speaker, the budget 

provides for $17 million. New dollars for the international 

vaccine centre recently opened by our Premier and the Prime 

Minister, among others, including President Peter MacKinnon 

at the University of Saskatchewan. New dollars for the 

Canadian Light Source synchrotron, one of the foremost and 

largest science projects within the country, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

also making good on our commitment to provide additional 

dollars to our national water chair. That was a national 

competition, 19 special chairs open and available for 

competition across the country. The University of 

Saskatchewan secured that, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a $30 million 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

commitment combined from the federal government, the 

provincial government, and the University of Saskatchewan, 

and it’s helping to ensure that the University of Saskatchewan 

will have one of the foremost centres of excellence in water 

research anywhere in the world. And that’s being led by Dr. 

Howard Wheater. And, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

other initiatives regarding science and innovation that will 

continue to be important. We’re also putting $1 million for the 

continued construction of the Southeast Regional College and 

we know how important that is, especially for some of my key 

colleagues in that busy corner of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I highlight these types of investments for some 

key reasons, Mr. Speaker. Because not only has this 

government, the government of the province of Saskatchewan, 

come forward with a balanced budget; not only has it focused 

on ensuring that we’re helping to serve, through new 

investments, our senior citizens and our families, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re also putting our students first, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

our scholars and our researchers, and we continue to focus on 

key areas. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that stands in stark contrast to the members 

opposite who, when asked through their interim leader what is 

it that they would do differently and where is it that they would 

find some additional dollars, Mr. Speaker, they casually 

commented — casually, Mr. Speaker — that probably they 

would look to municipalities and to our agricultural 

community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s dust that off a little bit. As a government, we have moved 

forward in record ways with municipal revenue sharing. That’s 

a partnership approach, Mr. Speaker. And the very first note 

that we hear regarding alternatives, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

opposition members would go on the attack to pull dollars back 

from cities like Saskatoon and Regina and growing 

communities right across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, then 

we’d see the NDP go back to their old track record of going 

after rural communities and agricultural producers, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad commentary where they had 

turned and said to citizens across the province, it’s to 

municipalities and to agricultural producers right across 

Saskatchewan, that’s where they would go and get more 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as far as balancing the budgets of this province, 

this has been a key priority for our government. It’s also 

speaking to the priorities that we put forward: priorities like 

fiscal probity; priorities like sustainability to make sure that as 

we put programs in place, we can ensure that they’re 

sustainable for the people of this province. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what we hear from the members opposite is that they would 

begin to undermine some of the very foundations of growth that 

have made Saskatchewan great, not simply over the course of 

five years, Mr. Speaker, but over the course of more than a 

century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our goal is to make sure that as people look back 

on this era they see that the commitments made by this 

government are kept because they’re clearly aligned with the 

people of this province, but that they’re also sustainable and 

realistic. Because when we were out on the doorstep during the 

recent provincial election, Mr. Speaker, we heard it very 

clearly: make sure you continue to manage the dollars of this 

province as if they were your own, with the same care and 

attention that goes with the office to which you are being 

elected. We’ve taken that task very seriously, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s why I’m very pleased tonight to speak in support of this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, and certainly opposed to anything on offer 

from the NDP opposite. 

 

[20:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

honoured to be able to stand in this Legislative Assembly and 

take my place and speak to the budget that was presented last 

Wednesday by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, the 

member from Canora. 

 

First of all I’d just like to comment a little bit about the 

constituency of Moosomin and recognize those members who 

have been very supportive of me, which has allowed me to 

serve in this Legislative Assembly for the past number of years. 

First of all I would like to say thank you to my wife, Lois, and 

our family, who have been very supportive. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I think back to when I first was asked to run and the 

young family I had. My son was eight, my second son was six, 

and my daughter was two. And the two boys are now married. 

And just the other day, our second son provided us with our 

fifth grandchild, a granddaughter. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, the realities 

are if you’ve got family, if you’ve got friends, people who 

appreciate you, that’s the most important thing that you can 

hold to because in politics you’ll have those who will support 

you one day and the next day they are not very happy with 

some of the choices you’re forced to make. But I have been 

really privileged to have a family who has been always there 

and certainly a brother that I farm with who’s carried the 

burden on the farm while I have carried my responsibilities as a 

Member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And a number of members have also mentioned, and the 

member from Regina Rosemont introduced us to a very 

important person in his life as well, his CA [constituency 

assistant]. We as members have been truly privileged through 

the years and I know I’ve had a couple of gals that have worked 

for me for the past, well let me say this, 20 years. And in fact 

one of my CAs is basically kind of hinting very strongly, she’s 

at that point in her life where she’d like to have it a little easier 

and enjoy her grandkids too. But I want to thank Tina Durbin 

and Audrey McEwen for their work, and also Audrey has been 

a very strong support this past winter. She unfortunately lost 

her husband and so we were there to offer her support and just 

to say, support her in her loss but to also say, thank you for the 

way you have provided your support and supported us in the 

office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected to this Legislative 

Assembly — and speaking about boundary redistribution — the 

Moosomin constituency was a very little rectangular 

constituency, very easy to get around. I remember my first 

election and going to every one of the polls and saying thank 

you to all the poll workers. 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

And then the 1991 election came along and at that time, Mr. 

Speaker, I worked, I had to work awfully hard. In 1986 I was 

elected with a pretty good majority; 1991, I had the nickname 

of landslide Toth. But since then a number of other members 

have had that opportunity of having that, being graced with that 

comment. But it took a lot of work and then ’91 came around 

and by the time the ’95 election was on, we had another 

redistribution and the boundary changed. And even to this day, 

some of the areas that, Mr. Speaker, you now have the privilege 

of representing, still call me and they comment on how much 

they enjoyed my representation for them. And I’ve never 

forgotten the people that were back in that original riding. 

 

And then — what was it? — 2005 I think, was the next . . . No, 

2001-02 was the next redistribution and the boundary changed 

again. So it’d be interesting to see what the new Boundary 

Commission comes up with for boundaries in the Moosomin 

constituency. 

 

But when you look at, I guess I would say of all the members, I 

may have one of the easier ridings to represent because as you 

proceed east of Regina, once you start at Sintaluta, right 

through to the Manitoba border, that’s my riding. All those 

communities very easy to get to, and then on 48, there’s a half a 

dozen communities that are accessible and that’s on my way 

home — very easy to get to. Whereas a number of other of my 

colleagues in rural areas, their communities are here and there 

and really spread around. There’s no direct link. And so I can 

say the Moosomin constituency certainly is one that’s made it 

very convenient to communicate with the public. 

 

So it’s been an honour to serve the Moosomin constituency for 

the past number of years. And over that time I’ve seen a 

number of budgets. I’ve seen governments make choices. And I 

can say with gratitude, I’m thankful that there was a 

government in the ’80s that thought of people and their needs. 

There was, in the area that I represent, there was a new care 

home built in Whitewood. There was a new care home built in 

Wawota, a new care home built in Wolseley. And I don’t know 

where we’d be today if those care homes would not have been 

built at that time. Even today we’re facing struggles as we have 

more and more seniors needing heavy care. So I go back to that 

first period when I was elected and I say thank you to that 

government which I happened to have been a part of. We’ve 

seen some tough choices and some tough years, but choices that 

have been a benefit today. 

 

Then I see after 1991 . . . The Leader of the Opposition was 

talking about some of the choices that governments make. And 

I think he was lamenting the choice about the film tax, or the 

film grant, that as a government we had to look at and say, no, 

we can’t just continue going on giving out grants to everybody. 

But I remember back in ’91 a government that decided that they 

were going to close 52 rural hospitals, plus the Plains Health 

Centre. And I’ve experienced that. And also, for the agriculture 

community, they . . . a government that decided, no, we’re not 

going to support farmers. And they tore up the GRIP program 

— retroactively tore up that GRIP program — something that 

farmers were nicely becoming used to and recognized, well if I 

want, I can buy insurance to protect myself. And I’m grateful to 

see over the years that we have actually moved back and we are 

working towards farm security programs. 

 

So what we saw just a week ago, Mr. Speaker, a minister who 

struggled, along with this government, to put forward a budget 

that recognized the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, 

looked at the commitments and the promises made by the 

Leader of the Saskatchewan Party — Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan — in the last election, and said, how do we 

balance it? How do we move forward to maintain the 

Saskatchewan advantage? And what the Premier and this 

government, under the leadership of the Minister of Finance, 

came up with was a budget that will keep our budgets balanced, 

will keep our spending sustainable, will keep our economy 

strong and growing and is keeping the promises made in the last 

election campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked a lot about balanced budgets. And I 

always find it interesting to hear, whether it’s the Finance 

minister or the Finance critic respond to budgets when they are 

presented. And somehow or other the critics always seem to 

find a negative. I don’t know how that happens, but I appreciate 

the fact that those individuals who have been critics of Finance, 

Finance critics on the opposition side regardless of what party, 

we always tend to find a few things to criticize. But I think it 

must be very difficult right now for the current Finance critic to 

find a lot to criticize because there are so many positives in this 

budget — balanced and sustainable, Mr. Speaker. There’s just 

so much to be positive about in this budget. 

 

In fact, I would talk about, we’re going to talk about for a 

moment about the first-time homeowners’ tax credit. I 

remember in 1982, while I wasn’t elected at the time, I 

remember a government of the time was elected when interest 

rates, people were facing interest rates of 19 and 21 per cent, 

losing their homes, and a government came in and said, we’re 

going to subsidize that. Anything above 13.5 per cent we’re 

going to subsidize. There’s people still saying to me, I’m 

grateful for Grant Devine and that government because I’d have 

lost; we were on the verge of losing our home. And they had 

their homes. 

 

And I am sure that first-time homebuyers using the tax credit 

that was promised in the last election are going to be saying 

thank you to this Premier, this Finance minister, and this 

government as they move forward and buy their first home. 

 

I believe as well many families will really appreciate the fact 

that this government has expanded the PST exemption on 

children’s clothing to age 17 and under. And we’ve heard, all of 

us as elected members understand the challenges of raising a 

family nowadays. So to be able to clothe your children and 

have that exemption up to 17, I’m certain will be appreciated. 

 

It’s also what I’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, what 

I’ve noticed is there is a lot of young families nowadays are 

getting their children involved in many activities. They don’t 

want to see their children just sitting in front of the TV with a 

video game on. They want to see their children active. And this 

province has recognized that — this provincial government — 

and have said, you know, we think that’s good. We want to see 

active families. And so this provincial budget has come forward 

with an active families tax benefit for those as well 17 and 

under. 

 

And as many of my colleagues have commented, we’re also 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

putting money in to fund 500 more child care spaces. Let me 

say a bit about child care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With this 

growing province, one thing I have noticed in the Moosomin 

constituency is there is a need for child care. It doesn’t matter 

which community I go to, people, young couples are looking 

for people who will be able to provide child care. And while 

there’s been some publicly funded child care spaces in the 

constituency, there just aren’t enough to meet the needs and . . . 

because of the fact that there’s demands all across the province. 

And so we’ve got some private child care, and people are 

stepping up to the plate and providing child care. So while the 

province is making a commitment to new publicly funded ones, 

I want to say thank you to the many private daycare operators 

out there for providing care for these young families. 

 

And then the Minister of Advanced Education just spoke about 

a $2,000 scholarship, Saskatchewan advantage scholarship 

which will be available to young men and women leaving high 

school as they move forward in their post-secondary education, 

and the fact that there’s a government there wanting to stand 

with them. We’re not paying the total shot, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I don’t think we should. But if we can help in any 

small way, I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people are going to 

be saying thank you to this government for a balanced budget 

and a budget that gives thought to the needs of individuals. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no doubt over the past four and a 

half years this provincial government, our government, has 

worked hard to expand and to support the agricultural 

community. And one of the things, I want to acknowledge and 

say thank you to the Minister of Agriculture, who has indicated 

that he wants to step back from that position and enjoy his 

grandchildren, for the work he’s done over the past four and a 

half years. As a result of his work, we have seen many 

improvements to a number of the agricultural programs in this 

province, such as crop insurance which now includes record 

coverage and more options than ever before. In fact, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, almost three-quarters of this year’s budget will 

go toward fully funding business risk management programs 

such as AgriStability, AgriInvest, and crop insurance, which 

has a record budget of 177 million. 

 

Let me speak about one of the changes to crop insurance this 

year. Last year the Minister of Agriculture, along with his 

federal counterpart, increased the flooded acreage coverage 

from 50 to $70. This year farmers will have the option to 

choose an additional either 15 or $30 an acre, bringing it up to 

$100 an acre for flooded acres that are unseedable due to 

flooding. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I need to also remind producers, who may happen 

to be paying attention tonight, that the Minister of Agriculture 

said last year, no more AgriRecovery. And this year we have 

determined that there is no more AgriRecovery. In fact I’m sure 

that, certain that the federal Finance minister will be pointing 

out in his budget coming up, I believe on Thursday, no more 

AgriRecovery. So farmers need to be aware of the fact that 

there are some significant options out there for you, and before 

you get to the end of this week, March 31st, take a look, a 

serious look at crop insurance and what has been done by this 

government over the last four and a half years to assist you in 

providing the necessary securities such as crop insurance and 

AgriStability and AgriInvest. And take the time to look over the 

program and determine — it’s your choice — do you want to 

ensure that if you have a crop failure that someone’s there to 

help you? The province will be there if you work together with 

the province. So I just want to mention that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, we’ve also seen how the government has 

stepped forward to help rural municipalities. I shouldn’t say 

rural — municipal governments. The fact that four years ago 

the Saskatchewan Party campaigned on a promise to share one 

point of the 5 per cent PST with municipal governments. And 

what have we seen as a result of that? I believe, having been a 

councillor in an RM [rural municipality] a number of years ago, 

what that has done has created a lot more security for municipal 

governments. They now know from one year to the next 

roughly what kind of money they can expect to receive from the 

provincial government through this agreement, and as a result, 

have a better way of managing their own fiscal responsibilities 

and budgets. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the growing economy, this 

year municipal governments are going to see, I believe, it’s 

roughly around $37 million more than they did last year. Not 

something new, because they already had an idea of what was 

coming. But with the fact that they are guaranteed 20 per cent 

of the PST, they know exactly what they will be, or close to 

what they will be, able to work with, which makes it much 

easier for them to plan their own budgets and try to address the 

fiscal responsibilities that they have to deal with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the constituency of Moosomin, 

health care is a very important factor, and one of the major 

concerns certainly not only in this province but especially in 

rural Saskatchewan is the need for medical professionals, for 

doctors. And this budget provides more money to — $1.5 

million exactly — to implement a rural physician locum pool to 

improve access to physician care. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 

a number of excellent doctors working in rural Saskatchewan. 

Unfortunately in some cases it’s a one-man practice. And you 

can appreciate the fact that one man or one individual practice, 

either a gentleman or a gal, who is practising and to be working 

every day, seven days a week, is not very easy. So this locum 

pool, I trust, will help alleviate some of the problems and give 

some of the single-practice physicians an opportunity to have a 

break so that they can keep themselves refreshed. 

 

But I need to make one comment about what is happening in 

the Moosomin constituency. In the community of Moosomin, 

we had a number of doctors who saw some of the challenges 

just by being individual physicians, and what they did was form 

a team concept. They have what they call the Moosomin Family 

Practice. Currently I believe there’s seven doctors working in 

that. They all work together. They all share the load. And what 

it has done is that it has created a better environment for them 

to enjoy and raise a family and also have time off because they 

know that there’s somebody they can count on to be responsible 

for the 24-hour care at the hospital or the emergency care, Mr. 

Speaker. And I believe they have set an example that could be 

looked upon and could be built upon around the province as we 

look to try and recruit more rural physicians for rural 

Saskatchewan.  

 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

We’ve also put more money into the nurse assistant, 

practitioner care, and looking to expand that program because 

we have some of that working on our part of the province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I know that people appreciate it. And I 

know in many cases, from a lot of people, if it wasn’t for the 

nurse practitioners, they really wouldn’t have access to health 

care and medical care delivery services. So to the nurse 

practitioners who are out there, we say thank you. And we say 

thank you to the nurses and the LPNs [licensed practical nurse] 

who enjoy working and living in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the other areas that we’ve talked about and a number of 

my colleagues have talked about as well is the money going 

into the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

unless you’ve been there . . . And I’m not sure there’s anyone 

sitting in this building who has not been impacted or affected at 

some point or other by someone having to deal with cancer. 

And it’s a disease that really creates a burden on individuals 

and families, and it’s a horrendous disease. And so how 

important it is for us to expand the research in that area. How 

important for us to expand screening like the colorectal cancer 

screening program that was announced, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know I am just hitting on some of the 

small things or just a number of the . . . a few of the initiatives 

that have been brought forward in the area of health. But I think 

those are very important. And I know that people across this 

province really appreciate a government that looks at the needs 

of individuals and doesn’t just speak about them but actually 

takes the action to try and address those problems. So that’s 

what we saw when the budget was brought down by the 

Minister of Finance a week ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We do look at rural Saskatchewan, and there are a number of 

MLAs seated in this Legislative Assembly, who also know in 

rural Saskatchewan highways is very important. And there are 

concerns through the years. And I have had the privilege of 

raising a number of my highways. And unfortunately, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, one of the highways that I spoke about for 

years and years, when the boundary redistribution came in 

place, they put that highway into Cannington Manor. And, 

unfortunately, when the minister announced it was under 

construction, by the time construction moved forward and was 

completed, my colleague, the member from Cannington, was 

able to brag about the completion of Highway 48, even though I 

probably had done more to see that it was actually brought 

forward and construction was completed on. 

 

But let me say this. There was one little section, one little 

section of Highway 48 from White City to the Manitoba border 

still left under construction. And I remember a gentleman that I 

became a good friend with, a shoemaker in the town of 

Kennedy. And he said, I would love to live to see that highway 

completed. Unfortunately he didn’t, but thanks to former 

minister of Highways and the current Minister of Highways, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve moved some dirt last year. 

 

I have to add this story because it was quite interesting. A 

gentleman came up to me shortly after the election, and he said, 

now wasn’t that neat? And I said, what do you mean? He said, 

well you know, just as the Premier called the election, this 

contractor moves in and starts to move dirt. Four days after the 

election, they pulled out, and we’re stuck with this highway full 

of holes. So I came to the minister and I said, at least fill the 

holes so that they can travel on them in the wintertime. And the 

department did a pretty good job of making the highway 

passable.  

 

I trust that by the end of this highway construction season, we 

will see that highway complete. And from White City right 

through to the Manitoba border, we will have a road that will 

see, I believe, once it’s completed, we’re going to see added 

traffic along that road because it is the shortest route from 

Virden, Manitoba, right through to Regina. Not just that, but 

it’s also a major route to one of our highly travelled tourism 

destinations, the Kenosee park. So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of 

people looking forward to seeing that highway completed, and 

so am I. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could talk about a lot of other highways, 

but I’ll let my colleagues just fill in on all the debate regarding 

their highways. 

 

I realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I’m not trying to speak out 

the clock, but there’s so many things to talk about. There’s 

certainly so many things to talk about. And a couple of areas 

that when I was first elected that I really took an interest in was, 

and I really felt through the years we need to, we need to ensure 

that we are looking after those who are less fortunate in 

amongst us, seniors with and people with disabilities. 

 

And I’m pleased to see that as a result of this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan assured income for disability or the 

SAID program is going to see more funding made available so 

that people with disabilities can live with their heads held high. 

The program was designed to address two public policy goals: 

to assure a socially acceptable income for people with 

disabilities, recognizing the range of additional costs associated 

with disability; and to encourage and empower persons with 

disabilities to participate as fully as possible in community life 

according to their capacity and aspirations. 

 

And I can assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you’re probably 

aware of and many of my colleagues, that there are many 

people across this province today are grateful that there’s a 

government that recognizes that people with disabilities are just 

as important as each and every one of us who are blessed to 

have sound natural health. And they’re certainly grateful for 

what has been done. Could more have been done, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Always more can be done, but the fact that we’ve 

moved forward and worked to address some of those needs is 

certainly appreciated. 

 

The Saskatchewan seniors’ income plan is another area, and a 

number of my colleagues have spoken to that, so I’m not going 

to expand on that a lot any more than the fact that it’s been 

addressed on a number of occasions. But that’s another 

program that people are really appreciative of. 

 

And another one that I was certainly pleased to hear, and I 

know a lot of my constituents were pleased to hear, that we are 

also stepping forward to help people who . . . seniors living in 

personal care homes. I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I 

indicated earlier, we lack the beds to meet all the needs in the 

publicly funded care homes, and as a result, a lot of personal 

care homes have had to step up. And those homes cost a fair bit 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

of money. The fact that this government has now said, if you’re 

in a personal care home, we’re going to step up and we’re going 

to help with some of your financial costs. And I believe, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that will certainly be welcomed. And I know 

many of my constituents were pleased to see that as well. 

 

We’ve seen my colleagues have talked about funding for 

expanded affordable housing. And as was explained earlier by 

the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Social Services 

even today spoke about an area where, as government, we’re 

moving forward to address the needs of individuals. Affordable 

housing is a major concern in our province. Why, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Because with our growing province, growing 

population, there isn’t a community in my constituency . . . We 

take a look at the city of Regina or Saskatoon. We can see how 

they’re expanding. People need places to live. Unfortunately 

not everyone can build the 2 or the 3 or the $500,000 home. 

Affordable housing is important. And while the money today 

may not meet all those needs, it certainly will go a long way. 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of people will be grateful 

for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to wind up my comments by 

speaking about funding for education. Education, Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association was pleased to see that, and they’ve 

said education is recognized as a foundation to our province’s 

growth. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the past few years we’ve had a 

lot of debate about coming up with the new funding formula. 

And unfortunately when you look at trying to build formulas, 

sometimes when you come up, change the formula, and you try 

to make it fair and treat everyone equally, people get left out. 

And when the Minister of Education was able to finally 

announce we’ll, over a number of years . . . And I know last 

year the debate was, why is that formula not available to us yet? 

And there were a number of things that needed to be done to try 

and ensure that it treated boards of education fairly. 

 

And this year, when the minister finally announced that we’ve 

now come up with the new funding formula, unfortunately 

there were roughly four, half a dozen rural school divisions that 

were going to be facing some significant challenges because of 

the new formula. And after a lot of discussion and discussion 

with one of the boards of education that comprises the 

Moosomin . . . constituency of Moosomin, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I was pleased to see that the Minister of Education 

recognized that there was some great inequities in this formula 

and that we needed to find a way to balance how the formula 

was implemented so that school divisions wouldn’t find 

themselves at a major loss. 

 

And the Prairie Valley School Division was looking at a 

roughly . . . almost an 11 per cent decrease in funding which 

would have been a catastrophe for them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And what did this government come up with? The minister, 

under the leadership of the Minister of Education, Minister of 

Finance, this government came up with some interim funding to 

help in that transition period, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I know 

that moving in that area was certainly something that was 

recognized. And the Prairie Valley School Division and other 

school divisions were certainly pleased to see that the 

government recognized the challenges they were facing. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there’s so much more that I could 

speak about, but a number of my colleagues would also like to 

enter debate, and I believe there’s a couple or two or three 

opposition members still want to speak to the budget before us. 

But I can say this: I’m pleased to stand here today and 

recognize and speak about a budget that’s forward-looking, a 

budget that didn’t go way out on a limb and spend beyond our 

means, a budget that is balanced on the general revenue side. 

It’s balanced on the summary financial statements, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

[21:15] 

 

And a budget that also is putting aside money for a rainy day, 

because we saw what happened last year with the flooding that 

took place across a good part of the province. If the provincial 

government hadn’t stepped up to the plate with PDAP 

[provincial disaster assistance program] with some significant 

dollars, if we wouldn’t have had the rainy day fund, that would 

have been very difficult. So having a rainy day fund with 

$700-and-some million — $766 I believe million — in it gives 

the government a little bit of a flexibility and a buffer. 

 

And I know, anyone in the personal finances also recognizes 

that it’s not just good to run with a financial statement that’s 

balanced every day. It’s also good to have a little bit of a buffer 

because sometimes . . . Well as a wage earner and as one of my 

children was saying the other day when the struts and the 

springs went on his vehicle and $1,000 expense repair hits you, 

it’s good to have a little additional money sitting on the side 

because we know what it is to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Especially Highway 48. 

 

Mr. Toth: — That’s correct, member across the floor, 

especially on Highway 48. However, the minister’s been 

looking after that. I’ll let the member know that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve had all kinds of accolades from 

the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association, Canadian home builders, and the 

vice-presidents of both, of cities . . . [inaudible] . . . the 

Canadian taxpayers. And every one of them have spoken about 

how pleased they were to see the government come forward 

with a budget that was forward-looking, that was balanced, that 

will allow the province of Saskatchewan to maintain its 

advantage. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to stand here in support of the 

budget presented by the member of Canora, the Minister of 

Finance. And I stand opposed to the amendment that was 

brought forward by the member from Rosetown, or Rosemont. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I welcome this opportunity 

to enter into this budget debate. And at the onset, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m proud to support this balanced budget and will be voting in 

favour of its adoption. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Finance minister has tabled one of the 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

few balanced budgets in North America that will make life 

more affordable while ensuring spending remains sustainable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget focuses on fulfilling promises 

made in the recent election campaign while keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage through sound physical management, 

to ensure our economy remains strong. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

2012-13 budget makes important investment in Saskatchewan 

infrastructure by boosting capital spending on schools, 

hospitals, highways, and other infrastructure projects by 193 

million, or 32 per cent, to $788 million. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget will also provide record 

revenue sharing of $237.4 million in 2012-13 to ensure our 

cities, towns, villages, and RMs can meet the demands of a 

growing province. That’s a 9.5 per cent increase from the 

previous year and an 87 per cent increase over the 2007-08 

budget. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population jumped to an 

all-time high of 1,067,612 according to new data from Statistics 

Canada. That represents growth of 17,064 people in 2011, the 

largest increase in one year since 1953. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 

the Premier said, this speaks to the strength of our economy and 

illustrates a clear shift in the economic fortunes of our country 

to Western Canada and to Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is now 

a have province with a vibrant economy and growing 

population. That’s a big change from just a few short years ago. 

Saskatchewan’s 2011 growth rate of 1.62 per cent was the 

second highest in Canada, behind only Alberta. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 2012-13 budget is about keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage — balanced budgets, a growing 

economy, and government services that are affordable and 

sustainable in the long run. Mr. Deputy Speaker, around the 

world we are seeing the chaos caused by governments that did 

not live within their means. Here in Canada, other provinces 

like Ontario face severe choices in the years ahead. 

Saskatchewan’s economy and our finances are in a much better 

shape. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan advantage, this 

budget, is keeping the Saskatchewan advantage by keeping our 

budget balanced, keeping our spending sustainable, keeping our 

economy strong and growing, and keeping the promises we 

made in the election campaign. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, overall we will be held to a 4.7 per cent 

increase this year; 3.9 per cent of that increase is operating 

spending, and the remainder is capital investments. Overall 

spending will be $11.2 billion, virtually identical to the 

spending level we promised in the election campaign. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this allows us to meet our priorities and keep 

our election promises. It also means responsible spending 

choices. Saskatchewan is the first province to table a balanced 

budget this year. It is balanced in the General Revenue Fund. It 

is balanced in the summary financial statements. And the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund will maintain a balance of 

$756 million. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy remains strong. 

In 2011, the Saskatchewan economy grew by 3.6 per cent, 

second highest in Canada, even with the challenges caused by 

the excess moisture and flooding. The private forecasters expect 

us to lead the nation with 3.1 per cent growth this year and to 

lead again with 3.3 per cent growth in 2013. Our non-renewable 

resource revenue from potash and oil are both expected to be up 

in 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last campaign we made some targeted 

election promises designed to make life more affordable for 

Saskatchewan people. Increased revenues will allow us to keep 

our election promises with a balanced budget. In total they 

amount to about $83 million this year, less than 1 per cent of 

overall spending. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to now 

highlight some of these promises. 

 

For those buying their first home, we are keeping our promise 

for the new Saskatchewan first-time homebuyers tax credit up 

to $1,100 against Saskatchewan income tax payable. 

 

For families, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have extended the PST 

exemption on children’s clothing to under age 17 and under. 

We have expanded the active families tax benefit to those 17 

and under. We are also keeping our promise to provide funding 

for 500 new child care spaces. 

 

For students, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are keeping our promise 

to add $4.6 million to meet the 2011 platform commitment of 

establishing the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship program 

that provides any high school graduate from 2012 onwards with 

up to $2,000 over four years to be applied towards tuition fees 

at any Saskatchewan post-secondary institution. 

 

For persons with disabilities, we are keeping our promise to add 

$113 million, a net $17.8 million increase to provide expanded 

Saskatchewan assured income for disability eligibility. The 

number of clients will expand from 3,000 to 10,000 adults. And 

benefits increase by $200 per month, couples up to $230 per 

month, in the July 2012, and by $350 per month, couples up to 

$400 per month, in the fourth year. Our goal is to make 

Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for persons with 

disabilities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for low-income seniors we are keeping the 

platform commitment of $3.5 million for the new seniors’ 

personal care home benefit estimated to be $278 per month, 

rising to $369 per month by the fourth year. We have 

committed $24.2 million, a $3.3 million increase to provide 

seniors’ income plan benefit increases up to $50 per month 

starting July 2012, with increases up to $10 per month in the 

next three years. In our first term, we doubled this benefit for 

low-income seniors, and by the end of this term, we will have 

tripled it from what it was when we took office. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re improving access to health care. 

Regional health authority funding increases $98.2 million, a 3.5 

per cent increase; $60.5 million for Saskatchewan surgical 

initiatives to add 8,000 more surgeries, additional physician 

services, home care, and rehabilitation services; $2.5 million 

increase to reduce costs for those with diabetes by adding two 

forms of long-acting insulin to the drug plan and expand the 

children’s insulin pump program from age 17 to age 25 years 

old; $4 million to expand colorectal screening programs 

province-wide, providing early detection and prevention of later 

treatment — Prairie North Health District will be providing this 

service in my constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford. 

 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

$5.5 million increase for the Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society, 

STARS helicopter ambulance service; 16.9 million increase in 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency for drug, medical, and operating 

costs, funding new patient referral, chemotherapy treatments, 

and mammograms; $42.7 million to begin construction of seven 

previously announced long-term care facilities in a new shared 

ownership model which will continue to use the 80 per cent 

local cost share; $5 million for planning the redesign of the 

Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford, which is in the 

constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford but has a great interest to 

my friend here next to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

education, this budget also introduces new education funding 

and increases K to 12 funding to help with the transition to the 

new formula. As a result of the new funding formula and the 

education funding increase, all schools divisions will see a 

funding increase ranging anywhere from 1.7 to 14.4 per cent. 

This affects the Living Sky School Division and the Light of 

Christ School Division in the Cut Knife-Turtleford 

constituency. $1.74 billion in total school operating funding, a 5 

per cent increase; $38.6 million to begin construction of six 

new school projects in a new shared ownership model; $50.1 

million in third party grants for 15 major school capital projects 

which are already under construction or are major renovations; 

$4 million in planning for three school projects. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, post-secondary education and labour force 

development, our government has invested a record amount 

into post-secondary education and skills training since 2007 

with a significant support for First Nations and Métis students. 

New initiatives include: the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship; forgiving student loans for new doctors, nurses, 

nurse practitioners that serve in underserved rural and remote 

communities for five years; a matching grant for parents 

making the RESP [registered education savings plan] 

contributions; $36.5 million for the Student Aid Fund, an 

increase of $6.7 million; $12 million increase to support 

operating costs of post-secondary institutions; $10.3 million to 

continue to meet government’s commitment of expanding the 

registered nurse training program by 170 seats. The growth and 

development of Saskatchewan’s labour force is a priority for 

our government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, on highways, our provincial government 

continues to repair and improve our highway system to support 

our thriving economy and growing population. We will see an 

estimated 1,200 kilometres improved this year. We promised 

during the recent campaign to invest $2.2 billion over four 

years, and we’re on track to fulfill that promise with a total 

highways budget of $581.5 million. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 

continues to work with First Nations and Métis in this 2012-13 

budget. The 2012-13 budget continues to support First Nations 

and Métis by providing $172.4 million for important initiatives 

across government, an increase of more then $4.7 million or 2.8 

per cent. Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the budget highlights for 

this category are an increase of $2.5 million — $67.6 million 

total — for grants that support First Nation and Métis 

community economic and social programs under provincial 

gaming agreements. 

 

The Ministry of First Nations and Métis Relations also provides 

continued funding for treaty land entitlements and the First 

Nations and Métis Consultation Participation Fund; education 

funding of $9.4 million which will include an increase of 38.5 

per cent to pre-kindergarten programs; capital targeted to 

high-need areas, summer literacy camps, continued support for 

First Nations and Métis education initiatives funds, the high 

school completion initiatives fund, and the Aboriginal 

individual achievement grants. More than $1.5 million for First 

Nation forestry agreements; continued support for year two of 

the northern action plan to improve the well-being of at-risk 

individuals in northern Saskatchewan. An increase of $324,000 

for initiatives in the Ministry of Social Services, including First 

Nations group homes, First Nations case management payments 

programs, the Family Finders program, Saskatchewan’s First 

Nations Family and Community Institute, and First Nations 

response model group home. Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport’s support in 2012-13 of $1 million for the North 

American Indigenous Games as well as support for 

Wanuskewin Heritage Park and urban Aboriginal community 

grants; continued support for First Nations and Métis 

engagement related to child and youth agenda. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to agriculture, Saskatchewan 

farm and ranch families are the backbone of our province. The 

$430.8 million budget this year is the second largest budget 

ever announced — $321.4 million to fund crop insurance, 

AgriStability, AgriInvest. This is a record $177 million for crop 

insurance. Mr. Speaker, this government has a continued 

commitment to agriculture. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to see that the community 

rink affordable grant will provide an annual $2,500 grant to 

assist communities to pay for the cost of operating indoor ice 

surfaces. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan, ice rinks 

are a social meeting place, and in the Cut Knife-Turtleford 

constituency, there are some 15 indoor ice surfaces. This grant 

is the difference needed to keep these rinks open. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in closing I would like to thank all the 

ministries for allowing MLA input into the budget. As a new 

member, it truly makes you feel you are a united team. Once 

again, Mr. Speaker, I proudly reiterate my support for this 

budget, and I will be supporting its passage. And I will most 

certainly be against the motion put forth by the member 

opposite. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise today to speak to the budget. 

And before I begin my formal remarks, I’d like to just extend 

my appreciation to a number of people. 

 

First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the constituents of 

Saskatoon Northwest, my thanks for the opportunity to again 

represent them in this legislature. It’s an honour that very few 

people get, and so it’s my pleasure to be here again for another 

term. 

 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

I’d also like to thank my executive for all the hard work that 

they have done for me leading up not only to the election but 

throughout the year. We recently had a successful fundraiser in 

Saskatoon Northwest and that success is their credit. 

 

I’d also like to thank Ted Merriman who, as most of you know, 

is the former MLA from Saskatoon Northwest who ably 

represented those constituents during his term here, for again 

chairing my campaign. Ted was actually the gentleman that got 

me involved in politics. I need to thank him for that, and I 

especially want to thank him for his guidance and his friendship 

over these many years. 

 

My thanks to my CA Kelly Merriman for all her hard work in 

running the office. It’s a thankless task sometimes, but she does 

a wonderful job. She’s very empathetic and keeps the office 

running quite well when I’m not there, and when I’m there as 

well. 

 

I’d also like to special thanks to my family, especially my wife, 

Christine. As everyone in the House knows, without the support 

and the love of your family, it’s very, very difficult to do this 

job. Chris has stood by me throughout my political career, since 

I started on the school board in Saskatoon in 2000, the year 

2000. So I have to thank her very, very much for her support 

and her love. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand in my place today and 

provide my comments with respect to the provincial budget, 

which was presented by the Minister of Finance last 

Wednesday. This budget, Mr. Speaker, is about keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage and moving Saskatchewan forward. In 

the minister’s own words: “Over the past few years, 

Saskatchewan people have helped to create the “Saskatchewan 

Advantage,” a combination of balanced budgets, reduced debt 

and lower taxes . . .” which has led to a growing and strong 

economy and the tremendous quality of life that we all enjoy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a tremendous place to live. Since 

forming government in 2007, we have seen a tremendous 

expansion in our economy. We have seen expats move to 

Saskatchewan, and we have seen new immigration in numbers 

which would have been inconceivable to governments of the 

past. People are coming here from all over Canada and from all 

over the world. They are coming here because Saskatchewan is 

a place of opportunity for them and their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my family moved to Canada, immigrated here in 

the early 1950s. They did so because my parents wanted a 

better life for their family, and we’re seeing that in the 

immigrants of today. We hear the same comments today from 

people that are moving here. Our economy is robust, and we 

have industries that need people to fuel that growth. Industrial 

growth fuels our economy and by extension expands our tax 

base, which in turn provides the government with resources to 

enhance the services which Saskatchewan people have come to 

expect. That, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

This budget is balanced, and we’re very proud of that. It keeps 

the economy growing by maintaining lower debt, by investing 

in key capital and programming areas, and sustaining and 

enhancing core government services. Mr. Speaker, while other 

jurisdictions are posting deficits, Saskatchewan will once again 

balance its budget. 

 

We all know how important it is to live within our means, and 

this budget sets an example for everyone in Saskatchewan and 

indeed, Mr. Speaker, sets an example for other provinces. 

Instead of mortgaging our future with deficit budgets, this 

government is paying down debt so that we can better secure 

the future for the children of this province who will one day 

take up the mantle of leadership. The example that we are now 

setting today will serve not only as a testament to this 

government’s commitment to the future but will serve as an 

example to future leaders that responsible budgeting is the only 

way to secure our future successes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the direction which our 

government received from the people last October. There was 

at that time a stark choice, one of fiscal probity and 

responsibility on the one hand, and on the other, wild spending 

promises, promises that totalled billions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker. And that wasn’t the end of it, Mr. Speaker. Some of 

the promises made by our friends opposite could not be costed. 

The people of Saskatchewan chose a path of responsible 

financial planning, and that is what this budget does, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, access to health care is one of the most important 

issues for the people of Saskatchewan. In this budget, we’ve 

continued to address this issue by increasing funding to regional 

health authorities by $98 million, representing a three and a half 

per cent increase. We have enhanced funding for the 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative by $60.5 million to add 8,000 

more surgeries, additional physician services, and home care 

and rehabilitation services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have added two and a half million dollars to 

reduce the cost for those with diabetes by adding two forms of 

long-acting insulin and expanding the children’s insulin pump 

program from ages 17 to 25 years. Mr. Speaker, during the 

election campaign, I had the opportunity to meet an elderly 

couple in my constituency. Adding the two forms of insulin to 

the drug plan will answer their concerns and the concerns of 

many other diabetics in Saskatchewan. It will improve their 

quality of life, and that, Mr. Speaker, is part of the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

We’ll add $4 million to expand the colorectal screening 

program province wide, providing early detection and 

prevention of later treatment. Mr. Speaker, the more we can do 

to screen for this disease and others, the earlier we can treat 

people, which will have a dramatic effect on the future health 

costs and our future budgets. 

 

We’re adding five and a half million dollars for the Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society helicopter ambulance service, and 

we are adding $16.9 million in funding to the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency for drug, medical, and operating costs for 

funding new patient referrals, for chemotherapy treatments, and 

mammograms. 

 

There is $42.7 million to begin the construction of seven 

announced long-term care facilities in the new shared 

ownership model which will continue to use the 80/20 cost 

sharing model. 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

There are additional third party grants to continue with six 

long-term care facilities currently under way in Radville, 

Redvers, Rosetown, Shellbrook, Tisdale, and Watrous, and $5 

million to the planning and redesign of the Saskatchewan 

Hospital in North Battleford. The planning and design will 

continue in 2012 to replace the Moose Jaw Union Hospital, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I spoke earlier of the quality of life, and this 

budget is rife with examples. Improving quality of life is part of 

the Saskatchewan advantage. While other provinces are cutting 

services in order to deal with their budgetary issues, this 

government is working to improve that quality of life. There is 

three and a half million dollars for seniors’ personal care home 

benefit, estimated to be $278 per month, rising to $369 per 

month by the fourth year. There is a $3.3 million increase to 

provide seniors’ income plan benefit increases for up to $50 a 

month, starting in July, with increases of $10 per month in each 

of the next three years. There is more money for the 

Saskatchewan assured income for disabilities program and for 

the Saskatchewan children and youth agenda, including $1 

million for enhancements for autism spectrum disorder 

therapies, $600,000 for the fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, and 

$450,000 for community mobilization project pioneered in 

Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s a 5 per cent increase in total school operating 

funding and $38.6 million to begin the construction of six new 

overdue school projects. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s $237.4 

million in municipal revenue sharing, which is an increase of 

$20.6 million over last year’s funding. This increase in funding 

is critical so municipalities can continue to address their needs 

in their communities. Mr. Speaker, municipalities know best 

with regard to their needs and this increase in funding will help 

them meet those needs. The funding to municipalities since 

2007 has increased by 87 per cent. That is part of the 

Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. Speaker. While the other 

provinces are cutting municipal support, this government will 

continue to support municipalities to meet their challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one point of the PST ensures stable and 

predictable funding for municipalities. No longer do 

municipalities have to go to the provincial government with cap 

in hand. Mr. Speaker, I can speak from experience. When I was 

on Saskatoon City Council, every year it seemed we were 

before the provincial government with our cap in hand asking 

for more money so that we could alleviate the mill rate to the 

residents of Saskatoon. So this stable and predictable funding is 

welcome and municipalities enjoy that stability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget makes life more affordable for people 

in Saskatchewan. In keeping with our campaign platform, there 

will be $4.6 million to establish the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship program. There is a rental housing construction 

initiative that provides a 10-year rebate of corporate income tax 

equal to 10 per cent of the expected rental income per new 

multi-unit residential rental programs or projects. We know that 

affordable housing is a significant issue. It’s an issue which is 

driven by the growth in our economy. That growth in turn 

allows us as a government to address the issues which arise 

from that growth. Working with industry to ensure affordable 

housing is available is key to that strategy. This is the new 

Saskatchewan first-time homebuyer’s credit. And a program to 

forgive up to $120,000 in student loans for new doctors and up 

to $20,000 for nurse practitioners and nurses that practise and 

qualify in rural and remote communities for five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our commitment to rural Saskatchewan is clear 

from this budget. We will continue to be fiscally responsible on 

both sides of the ledger. We will continue to move 

Saskatchewan forward. Mr. Speaker, in the provincial 

campaign there was a clear choice, and that choice was whether 

to move Saskatchewan forward or move Saskatchewan 

backwards. 

 

One would have thought that the members opposite would have 

heeded the results last November, and yet as late as last 

Wednesday, members opposite would have stripped money 

from agriculture. They would have stripped money from 

municipalities. Mr. Speaker, our commitment to agriculture and 

the municipalities in this province is unwavering, as is our 

commitment to the rest of the economy and the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our commitment to the people of this province, as 

demonstrated by this budget, is self-evident. We will not blink 

nor will we ignore our responsibilities to ensure that this 

province keeps moving forward. Mr. Speaker, that is the 

Saskatchewan advantage, and it is our pledge and solemn 

promise to the people of this province to maintain that 

advantage. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget and 

voting against the amendment. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

colleagues. I would like to start by thanking my friends, my 

family, and especially my wife, Danielle. I would not be here 

today if my wife wasn’t by my side. 

 

As you know, I along with 15 other Sask Party MLAs were 

elected for the first time in November. We are so thankful for 

our spouses and families. I’d like to take this opportunity to 

recognize the sacrifices they make, allowing us to serve in 

public office. All MLA families make that commitment, and 

without their support we could not continue in our roles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have two of the best CAs in all of Saskatchewan: 

Conni Larson and Helen Harvey. These two ladies are the most 

organized and professional people I have ever worked with. 

They tell me countless stories of supportive Eastview residents 

who come into the office, people that are proud of the new 

Saskatchewan that we are building, keeping Saskatchewan 

strong, keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank our Finance minister, his staff, 

and everyone that put in the long hours that they worked that 

you saw in the commitment in tabling such a balanced, 

sustainable budget that will keep our economy growing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we witnessed governments in Saskatchewan, in 

Canada, and across the world. We have seen what happened 

when governments don’t live within their means. This year, Mr. 

Speaker, there were difficult decisions to be made, but I’m 

proud of this budget. Mr. Speaker, this government will live 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

within our means and keep our election promises. 

 

[21:45] 

 

During its first term, this government showed that it does what 

it says it will do — fulfilling its election promises. Judging by 

the election results on November 7th, the people of this great 

province had the confidence to again elect us to continue to 

build the new Saskatchewan. In the old Saskatchewan we saw 

growing debt and deficits. In the old Saskatchewan we had the 

longest surgical wait times in Canada. In the old Saskatchewan 

we had a declining population and a shrinking tax base. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has listened to the voters and we 

will continue to invest in their priorities. We have record 

investment in health care, education, infrastructure, seniors, and 

people with disabilities. There’s new money for affordable 

housing, children, and youth. Mr. Speaker, there is record 

money for towns, cities, and rural Saskatchewan. This was all 

done on a budget that is balanced and forward thinking. 

 

Keeping the Saskatchewan advantage is important to everyone 

in our province. Here in Saskatchewan we are in much better 

shape because we are keeping our budget balanced, keeping our 

spending sustainable, keeping our economy strong and 

growing, keeping the promises we made in election campaigns. 

To get an understanding of how good a budget it is, let’s hear 

from the public on education: 

 

STF welcomes the priorities placed on education in the 

provincial budget. The Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation welcomes the provincial government’s pledge 

that pre-K to 12 education is a priority in this year’s 

provincial budget. 

 

That was the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 

 

On keeping our taxes low and the budget balanced, we’ve got 

another quote here: “Saskatchewan taxpayers will benefit from 

one of the best budgets in Canada this year.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Hear, hear. You know what, Mr. Speaker? It’s 

almost worth repeating: Saskatchewan taxpayers will benefit 

from one of the best budgets in Canada . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And the only one balanced, that’s correct. And 

that’s from the Canadian Taxpayers Federation. 

 

And on health care: 

 

The safety of our patients and their families is of 

paramount importance to the registered nurses in 

Saskatchewan. SUN supports the government’s attention 

to this issue. 

 

That’s the president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 

 

And on employment and training: 

 

The provincial government has demonstrated a 

commitment to increasing our skilled workforce through 

incentives which encourage youth to participate in 

education and training and remain in Saskatchewan, such 

as the graduate retention program or the recently 

implemented tuition tax credits. 

 

And that’s from Alan Thomarat, president and CEO [chief 

executive officer] of the Canadian Home Builders’ Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just about improving the safety of our 

patients. This budget will continue the important work of 

reducing wait times. By the end of 2013, no one will be waiting 

over six months for surgery, and by 2014 our goal is to have no 

one wait longer than three months. That’s the Saskatchewan 

advantage. That’s a health care system that everyone can be 

proud of. 

 

This past weekend I had the opportunity to talk with a family in 

my riding of Saskatoon Eastview. They’re a working family. 

There’s the family of four. There’s Ron, Donna, and their two 

children. We talked about the budget and what it meant to their 

family. First area we talked about was at how much they would 

be saving in income taxes. This family is saving over $2,500 

every year compared to what they were paying in 2007. Ron 

and Donna appreciate the extra money the family had to spend 

because, as we all know, raising a family can get expensive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another important campaign promise that we kept 

is increasing the PST exemption on children’s clothing aged up 

to 17. Ron and Donna appreciate the extra help and having a 

little bit of a break on the PST clothing for their two children. 

Another campaign promise kept was the introduction of the 

active family tax benefit. And Ron and Donna see the 

importance of these programs. 

 

As with many people in Saskatchewan, health care is a top 

priority. The people of Eastview are proud of what this 

government is investing in health care in record levels. Mr. 

Speaker, not that long ago, Saskatchewan had the longest wait 

times in the country. Because of the investments in this budget 

and previous Saskatchewan Party budgets, wait times are 

getting better. We’re committed to over $60 million for the 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative — a $50 million increase — to 

help keep us on track towards the goal of reducing surgical wait 

times. With this new investment this year, we’ll see over 8,000 

more surgeries completed. 

 

Donna has a mother in the city and she’s a senior citizen. And 

one of the things that we’ve introduced in this budget that will 

help her out is the seniors’ income plan. And what you’re 

seeing is an increase in this plan, that this will help ensure that 

the seniors in all income levels are helped. Low-income seniors 

also have the new personal care home benefit to help with costs 

of accommodations. 

 

In our first term in government, we doubled the seniors’ income 

plan, and we’ll triple it by the end of this term. Mr. Speaker, to 

get real understanding of the improvements in this program, 

one needs to look at the per-month seniors’ income plan benefit 

before the Saskatchewan Party took over. 

 

History is sometimes a harsh critic, Mr. Speaker, but the facts 

are the facts. The former NDP government never increased the 

plan for 16 years. It’s an embarrassment, but . . . In 2007 the 

seniors’ income plan benefit was a ridiculously low $90 a 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

month. Today under the budget, under this budget, the benefit 

pays out $240 a month, an increase of $1,800 a year. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that there is more work to be done to help 

seniors, but we finally have a government that makes it a 

priority. 

 

The last area that our family, Ron and Donna, brought up when 

I was talking to them this past weekend was the investment that 

the Saskatchewan government is making to our highways. If 

you remember, in the last provincial election we campaigned on 

investing $2.2 billion in highways over the next four years. 

With this budget we are on track to fulfill the promise. We’ll 

see an additional 1200 kilometres of improved road this year. 

 

But don’t take my word on how important highway investment 

is. I would like to share another quote. 

 

During the last five years this government has used 

highways and infrastructure as a road to economic 

prosperity. Today’s budget expenditure of 581 million 

clearly indicates the Wall’s government’s steadfast 

commitment to building, improving, and maintaining 

Saskatchewan’s roadways. This vision will benefit 

generations to come. 

 

And that’s Al. Rosseker, the Saskatchewan Trucking 

Association. 

 

Ron and Donna’s children are not entering university just yet, 

but many students in Eastview will benefit with the new 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship. This scholarship will 

provide up to $2,000 to help cover the cost of tuition in any 

Saskatchewan post-secondary program. Now that’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most important features of this budget 

is its sustainability. We only need to look to our neighbours to 

the south or to Ontario to realize the importance of living within 

our means and the financial devastation that is caused when a 

government does not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday we had the NDP Finance critic enter 

into debate and had a few comments on what this budget meant, 

and he had feelings on the past election that just took place. 

And the Finance critic for the NDP was making light that, you 

know, people didn’t vote for this budget; that people didn’t vote 

for these initiatives, and what not. And I’ve just got a quick 

little list of things here such as the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship; the work that we’re doing in seniors’ affordability 

plan, with the seniors’ income plan; or with the personal care 

home benefits. Also the NDP Finance critic missed out on the 

children’s and youth affordability plan that we have, or the 

first-time homebuyers tax credits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of great programs that we’re 

introducing in this government, especially in health care. If you 

look at some of the improvements that we have in the surgical 

wait times, accessing doctors, the creation of the 20-person 

locum, these programs are going to help countless 

Saskatchewan residents. And unfortunately the Finance critic 

for the NDP has missed out on that. He’s also missed out on the 

improvements for persons with disabilities. He’s also missed 

out with improving the Saskatchewan parks. And, Mr. Speaker, 

these things that I’ve spoke of shouldn’t be new to the Finance 

critic for the NDP because they were all contained in our 

platform that we just ran on in the last election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you would look back on how this province was 

a mere five years ago, we had the highest education property 

taxes in all of Canada. We had higher income taxes under the 

NDP. We had a seniors’ income plan that wasn’t touched for 16 

years. So, Mr. Speaker, if you look at today and what this 

budget does for the province and for its people, one has to 

understand that this is what we promised to do in our campaign, 

that campaign which resulted in 49 Saskatchewan Party MLAs 

getting elected versus nine. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province understand that 

you need to live within one’s means and keep the budget 

balanced so that we can keep Saskatchewan growing. On 

November 7, this province rejected the big tax-and-spend 

platform, rejected a $5.5 billion increase in pipe dreams from 

the opposition. They voted for a growing Saskatchewan that 

lives within its means and manages its finances. This is the 

budget that Saskatchewan residents voted for last fall. 

 

What Saskatchewan people didn’t vote for was a $5.5 billion in 

new spending. They didn’t vote for the NDP debt, and they 

didn’t vote for the NDP. Mr. Speaker, if this province wanted to 

follow the path of Greece or Ontario, they would have voted for 

them. In the past election, voters soundly voted for a party that 

delivers balanced budgets that are sustainable and that keeps the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the amendment and for a 

balanced, sustainable budget that grows the economy and keeps 

the Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m very pleased to be able to join in the debate of the budget 

this evening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get to my comments, I do want to, if I 

could, just in the last few minutes, recognize the great Weyburn 

Red Wings, Mr. Speaker. The Weyburn Red Wings just won 

game seven over the Melville Millionaires about 10 minutes 

ago. It was 2-0 I believe was the final score. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the Red Wings bring great pride to our city, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ll go on to face Humboldt in the league finals, and I know 

the member of Humboldt is not looking forward to that, Mr. 

Speaker. But so just congratulations to them, most especially to 

the head coach, Dwight McMillan, who is in fact the uncle of 

the member from Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker. Dwight 

McMillan has been the coach of the Weyburn Red Wings I 

believe since 1972, Mr. Speaker. He was a player before that, 

so his involvement with the Red Wings has been quite long. So, 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the Minister of 

Finance, Mr. Speaker, the member from Canora-Pelly, in 

bringing down this budget. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, all 

members, not only those that work with the Minister of Finance 

on the Treasury Board that spent a great deal of time, Mr. 

Speaker, in going over proposals and budget submissions and 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

all the debates that I’m sure take place among that group, Mr. 

Speaker, but also the members of the government and the 

caucus members that have great input into this process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to, as saying my thank yous, I do want to 

thank my staff here in the building: Drew who is probably still 

working this evening, Krista, Kelly, and Trent, Mr. Speaker, 

who do a great job in my office here in the building, Mr. 

Speaker. As well I want to express my appreciation to Marcie, 

my constituency assistant, who is celebrating her 12th year as a 

constituency assistant, Mr. Speaker, working on behalf of the 

people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, and she does a great job. As 

well Sheila who works in our office on a part-time basis and 

helps out a great deal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well I want to, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t believe I spoke 

on the Throne Speech debate last fall, Mr. Speaker, so I don’t 

think I’ve had an opportunity publicly in this forum to thank the 

people of Weyburn-Big Muddy who have given me the great 

honour of returning to this place, Mr. Speaker, for a third time 

since 2006, Mr. Speaker. So I’m very appreciative to the people 

of Weyburn-Big Muddy and to the team that we all rely on to 

get re-elected or to get elected for the first time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a great deal of dedicated volunteers on my campaign 

team, Mr. Speaker. I can’t name them all, but certainly Danette, 

Phil, Dale, Karen, Ross, just to name a few who worked so 

hard, Mr. Speaker, on this campaign. 

 

[22:00] 

 

You know, we always seek to, I guess, beat the best, Mr. 

Speaker. And in our constituency certainly, with one exception, 

going back about 100 years or about 90 years ago, without 

exception . . . Tommy Douglas, when you think of the Weyburn 

constituency, Premier Douglas, who served for a number of 

years in this House from a Weyburn constituency, received 

about sixty-two and a half per cent of the vote in his first 

election. That was about the high-water mark for him — 1944. 

 

And we were very pleased. We set the bar at 63 per cent to 

obtain in this last election, and we were very pleased to receive 

76 per cent of the vote, Mr. Speaker. And obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, none of us can do it on our own, and so I thank my 

constituents and my campaign team. And we’re going to, I 

guess, have a bit of a celebration at our spring banquet, our 

annual spring banquet on Thursday, Mr. Speaker. And so thank 

you to all those people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to just recognize, before I speak on the 

budget, just in the last few days, the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal recipients had been announced, Mr. Speaker. And from 

the city of Weyburn, one of the recipients this year, Mr. 

Speaker, from the city of Weyburn was Marlene Nedelcov, Mr. 

Speaker. Ms. Nedelcov was a long-time city councillor, a 

founding member and president of the urban parks association, 

one of the founding members behind the creation of the 

Tatagwa Parkway, a beautiful spot in Weyburn — a whole list, 

Mr. Speaker, of things that she dedicated her life to, Mr. 

Speaker. Sadly Marlene lost her battle to cancer in February, so 

she was actually awarded this posthumously just in the last 

couple of days, or her family was, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

just join with the people of Weyburn and area in thanking her 

for her service and honouring her life and her service, Mr. 

Speaker, on this award that is very well deserved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very, very pleased to support this budget that 

was tabled by the Minister of Finance, the member from 

Canora-Pelly, Mr. Speaker. And I want to just touch on 

something that the Minister for CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan], the member from Lloydminster, 

talked about just earlier this evening when he talked about the 

issue of, well, is this a budget of prosperity or austerity, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think he touched, and I think he did a very good 

job of explaining in his remarks that it doesn’t have to be an 

either/or proposition. 

 

And when I think of this budget, Mr. Speaker, I think of people 

like my grandfather, Bob Tracey, who was a small-business 

man, Mr. Speaker, for many years worked for a number of 

different companies doing service work on whether it was 

building highways or doing work in the oil industry, Mr. 

Speaker, and then decided — after a lot of debate and I’m sure 

a lot of discussion around the kitchen table with my 

grandmother because they had a family, a young family at that 

time, Mr. Speaker — they decided that they were going to go 

into business on their own and essentially buy a piece of, one 

piece of equipment and try to make a go of it. 

 

And I know in talking with my grandpa who lives in Weyburn 

today, Mr. Speaker, you know, Grandma served as the 

bookkeeper for the company, aside from her duties with Canada 

Post as the postmaster in the town of Halbrite, Mr. Speaker. 

And I know that, hearing stories from my grandpa, that he was 

essentially given a year by the bank. He could make a go of it. 

He was given a year, and either he was going to succeed or he 

was going to fail, Mr. Speaker, without any help from 

government, Mr. Speaker, basically by his own 

entrepreneurship and his own ingenuity, Mr. Speaker, and his 

own hard work. He basically was told by the bank he had a year 

to make a go of it or else, essentially like many stories that you 

hear in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that it was either going to 

be a working proposition or it wasn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know, from talking and hearing stories from my 

grandfather, that issue of prosperity or austerity. I know as a 

small-business person that at the height of his business wasn’t a 

big business. He employed for a number of years his youngest 

son, my uncle, Mr. Speaker, for a time when the oil patch was 

slow. Even his son-in-law, my dad, went to work for him for a 

few months just in order for my parents to be able to help make 

ends meet in a very difficult time during the lows of the oil 

cycle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in that issue of austerity or prosperity, in a year that I’m 

sure was a good year for business in starting out, and after 

making a go of it, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that they thought not 

to go . . . And my grandparents didn’t travel, and they didn’t 

buy, you know, expensive vehicles when they had money, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m sure their thought was, we’ve had a good year. 

Let’s make another payment on that piece of equipment. Let’s 

make another payment on that welder that they had to purchase, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I think that this issue of whether it’s prosperity or 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

austerity, Mr. Speaker, is just a false premise put out by some 

people, members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that you have 

to make decisions to ensure stability going forward into the 

future. And I think that this budget, Mr. Speaker, does that. Mr. 

Speaker, I think this is a budget that keeps the Saskatchewan 

advantage because it keeps our budgets balanced, Mr. Speaker. 

It keeps spending sustainable. It keeps our economy growing 

strong and growing, Mr. Speaker, and it keeps our promises that 

we made as a political party in the last campaign, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my time speaking tonight I’m going to talk, I 

just want to briefly touch a little bit about the constituency of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy and how this budget, I think, positively 

impacts the people that I have the pleasure of representing, Mr. 

Speaker. And then I’ll talk a little bit about the areas of 

responsibility that I have a responsibility for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in the Weyburn-Big Muddy 

constituency, these are really exciting times, Mr. Speaker. We 

are seeing growth of the constituency and as a community that 

we haven’t seen in a great, great many years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I remember, and I probably have told this story before, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity . . . In 2006 running in my 

first election — it was a by-election — and, Mr. Speaker, this 

was after a couple of years of being away from home, going to 

university here in Regina, and moving here, Mr. Speaker. And I 

remember in that first campaign going out and afterwards 

buying our home on 6th Street and being a part of the 

community again. And I remember, you know, going out for 

supper, Mr. Speaker, or going to the grocery store. And you 

would go, you know, we would go out, and you’d kind of 

recognize most people around town. You either knew who they 

were or you went to school with them or they were maybe a 

former teacher, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker. You go around the city of 

Weyburn or any part of my constituency, Mr. Speaker, and 

there are so many new people around. And I know that’s the 

same for the member for Estevan and the member from 

Humboldt and the member from Cannington, Mr. Speaker — 

yourself, Mr. Speaker. There are so many new people in our 

communities, young families moving in, you know, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have a challenge, and I’ll talk a little bit of challenge about 

housing, Mr. Speaker. But you know the one thing that we are 

doing in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency to deal with the 

challenge of housing is we’re building houses, Mr. Speaker. 

And we’re building apartment buildings, Mr. Speaker, and 

there’s condominiums that are being developed, Mr. Speaker. 

And we know that there is more work to do, but we are seeing 

investment into the community of Weyburn and the 

constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy that we haven’t seen in a 

great long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to, in terms of the community, Mr. 

Speaker, there is a number of fundraising activities that are 

going on that relate not only to projects of the community but 

projects that the government is involved in. I know that there’s 

a great fundraising effort on right now for what we call the 

Triple C Centre, Mr. Speaker. This is going to be a cultural 

centre for putting on different productions. And it’s going to be 

built within the high school, Mr. Speaker, where we’re having a 

massive major renovation taking place at the high school that 

involves not only the high school, not only this community 

organization, which the community on this facility alone is 

going to raise approximately $4 million towards the project, 

Mr. Speaker, and they’re well on their way towards getting to 

their goal. As well as the community college, the part of it 

that’s located in Weyburn, is going to be remaining a part of 

that facility, Mr. Speaker. So we have a great group of people 

that are involved in that fundraising organization. 

 

The hospital foundation is up and running, Mr. Speaker, great 

dedicated people that are raising considerable dollars not only 

from the corporate community around Weyburn — there’s been 

some significant donations, and I’ll touch on those hopefully 

later in the spring session, Mr. Speaker, just to highlight some 

of those, Mr. Speaker — but the city of Weyburn is now going 

to put a levy on to raise money, as well as the local RMs in the 

area. I believe the RM of Weyburn has announced, I believe it’s 

a $1.25 million donation over a number of years towards that 

project. And so great work that’s being done by that group. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have an organization called the Wor-Kin 

Shop that is affiliated with the SARC [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rehabilitation Centres] organizations. They’re 

doing great work, Mr. Speaker, raising money. Our government 

has announced $1 million towards the project of removing the 

people that are on a wait-list for day activity programming, Mr. 

Speaker. And they are doing a great job in raising money. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to see that work being done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget, in terms of education for the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, part of my constituency, we 

deal with three different school divisions. On the public side, 

it’s South East Cornerstone, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to see an 

increase in their budget this year. Prairie South, which is the 

public school division on the far west side including the 

community of Coronach, is going to see an increase. And Holy 

Family, which is the separate school division, will also see an 

increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And all of those school divisions are doing great work, 

especially in terms of capital, Mr. Speaker. When you look at 

the capital dollars that this government is investing in not only 

the high school project in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, but also some 

changes that are being made to the configuration of grades at 

the separate school, Mr. Speaker, turning what we now have on 

the separate side, an elementary and a junior high system, 

they’re going to merge those two together and bring them all 

into one building, Mr. Speaker. So this budget certainly invests 

considerable capital, considerable operating funds into those 

organizations as they work towards their future goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t touch on my constituency or this budget 

without speaking of agriculture. And I want to join with 

members in not only thanking the Agriculture minister but also 

. . . well just thanking the Agriculture minister, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re very fortunate in this government. The member from 

Melville, despite his team losing tonight to Weyburn, Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Melville has served this government 

so very well on behalf of rural residents, on behalf of producers, 

Mr. Speaker. And this is something that doesn’t go unnoticed in 

my constituency where people certainly appreciate the work of 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

the Agriculture minister and seeing continued investment into 

agriculture by this government, the second largest agriculture 

budget in provincial history, Mr. Speaker, a record high $174 

per acre coverage in crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. That’s up, 

that’s more than doubled since 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we look at what we’re hearing from the other side when 

they talk about their priorities, Mr. Speaker. And where would 

they take money from, Mr. Speaker, to fund some of their 

priorities? Municipalities and agriculture, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

something we’ve heard about before in this province’s history 

and, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province don’t have an 

interest in going back to those days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I also would just mention that as well the 

option, Mr. Speaker, to purchase up to a $100 per acre of 

coverage for unseeded acres. Mr. Speaker, this is certainly 

something that has affected my constituency and parts of this 

province, particularly the Southeast with the considerable 

amount of precipitation that we had in the last couple of years, 

the amount of snow that we had a couple years ago, Mr. 

Speaker. And so I would join the member from Moosomin that 

urged his constituents that maybe had been listening tonight to 

certainly consider their options when they look to their farm 

plan for this year in light of the decisions that have been made 

to increase the available coverage for unseeded acres, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at . . . So I touched on agriculture. 

In light of the Leader of the Opposition’s comments as well, as 

municipalities was another area that he was talking about where 

he would take additional money. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 

just from the . . . And not to go through all the communities in 

my constituency, but the one that I live in, the city of Weyburn, 

Mr. Speaker, in the last budget year of the NDP government, 

$830,000 in revenue sharing for the city of Weyburn. This year, 

Mr. Speaker, $1.99 million, a 140 per cent increase, Mr. 

Speaker, to revenue sharing in terms of what the community of 

Weyburn is going to see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that goes, that’s going to go a long way towards addressing 

not just their operating budget, Mr. Speaker. But the city of 

Weyburn, like many communities, need to look at their capital 

plan, Mr. Speaker, obviously as a growing community not only 

taking care of the infrastructure deficit that existed, Mr. 

Speaker, but also the work that needs to take place in the future. 

And so considerable more dollars are available for that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[22:15] 

 

As well I mentioned housing, Mr. Speaker. I think that one of 

the things that has resonated very well in my constituency, I 

know it has in many, Mr. Speaker, is the program that is going 

to go towards a corporate income tax rebate for rental housing 

construction, Mr. Speaker. We are seeing, even before this 

announcement, Mr. Speaker, we have seen some movement in 

this area in terms of the city of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, some 

new units that are being built, not only the single-family 

dwellings, Mr. Speaker, but as well as some rental 

accommodations. And I’ve touched on a little bit of that. And 

this is one that both through the city and the chamber has 

received considerable attention and some positive responses, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the Ministry of Environment, just to 

briefly, briefly touch on a couple of areas, that I’m very pleased 

that we are seeing additional dollars. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve received, Ministry of Environment has received dollars, 

$1 million this year for year 2 of what I hope is a five-year 

boreal water strategy, Mr. Speaker, something that the Finance 

minister was able to include in his budget speech. 

 

Essentially, Mr. Speaker, what we want to do is, in light of 

concerns of what may or may not be happening to our pristine 

lakes in northern Saskatchewan because of developments in 

northern, particularly northern Alberta, Mr. Speaker, where an 

area that was largely abandoned by the former government in 

terms of proper environmental monitoring, Mr. Speaker, so we 

are going to continue year 2 of this program, Mr. Speaker. And 

some of the benefits of this in the last year, 227 northern lakes 

were sampled, Mr. Speaker, to identify acidification. Mr. 

Speaker, air quality was taken at 11 different locations in 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So we’re going to 

continue this work. And I think, I hope the public and members 

will see the benefit of the work that the Ministry of 

Environment will be doing in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do also want to mention very briefly, you know, 

in every budget I think there are, you know, obviously the areas 

that get a lot of attention, and there’s some that really don’t get 

any attention. One of those in the Ministry of Environment 

would be $4 million, Mr. Speaker, towards the IM [information 

management] transformation. And I know members or people 

that are listening to this speech may be wondering what that is, 

Mr. Speaker. This is changing our information management 

system within the Ministry of Environment to coincide with the 

changes that we’re making in terms of moving towards a 

results-based regulatory framework. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all that to say that this is nation-leading work that 

we’re doing when it comes to regulating our environment, 

regulating development, Mr. Speaker, in this province. Moving 

towards a results-based system, Mr. Speaker, where we focus, 

put more focus, Mr. Speaker, on the high-risk activities, Mr. 

Speaker. We simplify and streamline the process for not only 

industry, municipalities, or individuals, Mr. Speaker. And so 

this infrastructure investment will go a long ways towards the 

permitting process, Mr. Speaker, moving that to an online 

permitting process and not only for our clients as a ministry, 

Mr. Speaker, but our ability as a ministry to track the progress 

of work that’s being done in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and just finally I would just close, Mr. Speaker 

. . . I believe that’s probably close to the end of my time, Mr. 

Speaker. I just not only want to . . . Because I didn’t get an 

opportunity during the Throne Speech. I didn’t get an 

opportunity to respond to that. But I want to publicly thank 

some people, Mr. Speaker, who I haven’t already thanked. 

 

First of all, I want to not only thank but congratulate all 

members of the House on their election last November. I 

haven’t had a chance to do that in this forum, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve been very fortunate through not only being 

elected but also being employed previous to my election by this 

group, Mr. Speaker. And although some of the faces and some 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2012 

of the people have changed, Mr. Speaker, I just feel very 

fortunate to be associated with my colleagues and look forward 

to working with all the new members. We have great discussion 

and great debate. And we come from different perspectives and 

different backgrounds, and we have a little fun from time to 

time, Mr. Speaker, and so I’m very, very pleased to be with all 

of my colleagues. And so I want to extend my congratulations 

to all the members that were elected, re-elected, and elected for 

the first time, including members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my unending love 

and appreciation to my wife Amanda, Mr. Speaker, who is just 

the most wonderful person that I know, Mr. Speaker. This year 

will be our 13th wedding anniversary. And no, we didn’t get 

married during recess, during the recess break, but almost, Mr. 

Speaker. But I just want to express my appreciation as all 

members do. We certainly couldn’t do this without our family 

and the support of our families, Mr. Speaker. She is, as 

members on this side will know, clearly the more talented 

person in our household, Mr. Speaker. And I am just so very 

fortunate that she gives me the support and the patience and the 

understanding to do the work that I am so very honoured to do 

on behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, on behalf of 

the province. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, my thanks to 

Amanda. 

 

And I will be supporting the budget as it was presented by the 

Minister of Finance, and I will not be supporting the 

amendment put forward by my friend from Regina Rosemont. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

reminded very much of delivering probably the most important 

lecture of the semester to a group of grade 12 students at 3:25 

on a Friday night before the May long weekend. Anyway I 

shall, I shall commence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to rise in the House today 

and enter debate on the 2012-2013 provincial budget. A fiscally 

responsible budget, a balanced budget, a balanced budget on the 

general revenue side, and a balanced budget on the summary 

financial side. A budget that reflects promises made, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, a budget that reflects our guiding 

principles, principles that provide the foundation for the new 

Saskatchewan and a budget that maintains the Saskatchewan 

advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a minute to thank a few people. 

First of all I want to say thank you to my wife, Karen, who has 

supported me unequivocally along this journey. I’m sure the 

rules of the House don’t permit me to say what she really said 

to me when I announced to her that I was going to embark on 

this journey. Nonetheless, nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, she has 

supported me throughout the campaign, throughout some 

difficulties in my life physically, and she’s just been by my side 

the whole time. And it’s been quite a journey and we’ve had 

quite a lot of fun. We’ve met an absolutely tremendous number 

of great people, great constituents. We’ve reacquainted 

ourselves with the long history of Regina Douglas Park and I 

couldn’t be more proud to have been elected to represent the 

people with whom I grew up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to recognize my sons 

Chris and Cam — my eldest son Chris is a welder on the 

pipeline working up in northern BC at the present time; my son 

Cam, a steam engineer working in the oil patch just outside of 

Saskatoon in Kerrobert — and my two daughters Michelle and 

Mel, and my grandson Benjamin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you well know, the budget process is 

complicated, a process that engages many, many people, and 

I’d like to recognize a number of those people for the role they 

played in the development of this budget. 

 

First, I’d like to recognize the constituents of Regina Douglas 

Park, constituents for whom this budget is all about, 

constituents who on the doorstep made it abundantly clear with 

a substantial majority that they were not in favour of the old 

Saskatchewan and that they were not in favour of the wild 

spending promises of the opposition. The constituents of 

Douglas Park made it abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that they 

were looking for responsibility. They told us, Mr. Speaker, that 

they were looking for vision. They were looking for leadership, 

and, Mr. Speaker, they wanted realism — realistic promises, 

realistic spending, realistic ideas, realistic outcomes, and I 

could go on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget corresponds directly with what I was 

told on the doorstep and, Mr. Speaker, this is the way it should 

be. And, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to stand before you and 

be able to speak with every confidence about the direction we 

are headed and the role the budget will play in getting us there. 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud that the architects of this budget 

recognized my constituents’ direction and used the confidence 

that our constituents showed in us to craft a budget that respects 

that input, that respects what has been provided them by the 

people. So to my constituents in Regina Douglas Park, I thank 

you. 

 

Next, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my constituency 

assistant, Becky Mason, for all that she has done to get the 

constituency office of Regina Douglas Park up and running. 

Thank you, Becky. And so, Becky, on behalf of our 

constituents, myself, and my family, again I want to thank you. 

 

To the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, an individual who has 

worked tirelessly and unselfishly on behalf of the people of this 

province for many years, and to his team, and on behalf of the 

constituency of Regina Douglas Park, I thank you, Mr. 

Minister. To the dedicated, committed, diligent, and tireless 

work of the Treasury Board and on behalf of all the Regina 

Douglas Park constituents, I thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are confident. We have a vision. We have a 

plan and we have a leader that stands up for Saskatchewan. 

He’s proud of Saskatchewan and he’s not afraid to let the world 

know. Mr. Speaker, this is serious work and all those 

mentioned deserve serious recognition for a job well done. 

 

Eleven billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, $11 billion is not chump 

change and the people in this province expect due diligence and 

trust, that all due respect be given to the task at hand. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this budget and the process to derive it reflects all of 



March 27, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, principles mean everything to me, and I believe 

they mean everything to everyone in this Assembly. And so as I 

look at this budget, the product of a very intensive, 

collaborative, consultative, and democratic process, I looked at 

it in terms of our guiding principles. And I looked at it as to its 

adherence to those principles and to common sense, realistic 

priorities that I heard on the doorstep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, economic growth and job creation through the 

private sector, not government as the engine of the economy, is 

a principle that drives this government. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan’s economy continues to lead the nation. Our debt 

is lower. Our provincial finances are sound. Our debt-to-GDP 

[gross domestic product] ratio is the second lowest in Canada. 

In 2011 the Saskatchewan economy grew by 3.6 per cent real 

GDP. This year, 2012, we are forecasting real economic growth 

of 2.8 per cent. Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate is 5 per 

cent, lowest in the country. There are, as of today, 11,194 jobs 

posted on the Saskatchewan Jobs website. Personal income tax 

revenues are expected to increase, which is another indication 

of growth. And our population is at an all-time high. Mr. 

Speaker, tough to argue our record on economic growth and job 

creation. 

 

A second principle, Mr. Speaker: smaller, less intrusive, and 

more efficient government. Mr. Speaker, our workforce 

adjustment strategy will continue. Lean principles and 

efficiencies, reducing bureaucratic red tape to enhance small 

business is another example of our common sense approach that 

is readily understood and obviously supported by our 

constituents. Steady, gradual reduction in government spending 

and taxation while maintaining a firm commitment to the 

balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the end of the 2012-13 budget will see no increase 

in the provincial debt. We will be able to keep our election 

promises with realistic spending and not increase our debt. Mr. 

Speaker, we are the only province in the Dominion that has 

presented so far a balanced budget to the electorate. And, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to 

stand behind that kind of commitment and that kind of respect. 

It’s another indicator to me of what we say we will do, we do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our guiding principles speak to a high quality 

health care system . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 10:30, this 

Assembly stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 809 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 811 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 817 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 820 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 822 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 824 

  Doke ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 828 

  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 830 

  Tochor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 832 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 834 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 838 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 820 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


