




















































Hansard: November 15, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 13A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1953 

 November 15, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

for that. It’s a great honour for me today to introduce some 

very, very special guests that have joined us here today in the 

legislature, on the floor of the legislature. Mr. Speaker, our 

province was very proud indeed to have 13 athletes taking part 

in the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games, as well as 

10 coaches, officials, and support staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll have a chance a little bit later on this 

morning to honour them in a ceremony in the rotunda to thank 

them for their example and their dedication and their hard work. 

And just in a few moments from now, each MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] representing the constituency of a 

Paralympian or Olympian is going to have a chance to 

introduce them more formally. But I just want in a very general 

way to welcome them here. 

 

We’re also in the company of medalists, a couple of bronze 

medal winners for the women’s soccer team, and a silver 

medalist. We know the bronze medal for the women’s soccer 

team should have probably been a different kind of medal, a 

different colour medal, but much like the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders, they were also playing the officials in that one 

particular game. But nonetheless, we’re so very, very proud of 

all of them. We thank them and we welcome them all to their 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming all of the athletes and coaches and 

officials who have come today to the legislature. We all feel 

part of your victories or your struggle in the Olympics, and we 

very much want to thank you for representing what’s best about 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We also want to say thank you to Sask Sport and all of the 

coaches and others who prepared you to go to the Olympics. 

We often forget how important the coaching in various places 

across the province that happens, how that is a contributor to 

the best. So welcome, and we look forward to hearing about all 

of you. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it’s my honour to introduce to the members of this 

legislature, Kaylyn Kyle. 

 

Saskatoon’s Kaylyn Kyle was in the midfield position for the 

Canadian women’s soccer team when they won bronze at the 

2012 London Games. Kaylyn has previously earned a gold 

medal at the 2011 Pan American Games in Guadalajara, 

Mexico. Kaylyn was born and raised in Saskatoon and has been 

playing for Canada since 2008. She is a midfielder for the 

Vancouver Whitecaps football club. Please welcome Kaylyn to 

her legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour to introduce, on behalf of MLA 

Rob Norris to the members of this Legislative Assembly, Kelly 

Parker. 

 

Kelly played the midfield position for Canadian women’s 

soccer when they won their bronze at the 2012 London Games. 

Kelly also played in the 2011 FIFA [Fédération Internationale 

de Football Association] Women’s World Cup against 

Germany and then went on to win a gold medal in the 2011 Pan 

American Games in Guadalajara, Mexico. 

 

Kelly considers the great city of Saskatoon to be her home 

town. Kelly, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour to introduce Reuben Ross. Reuben 

returned in 2012 for a second Olympic Games, and he placed 

sixth in the 3-metre synchronized diving with his diving 

partner, Alexandre Despatie, at the 2012 London Games. 

 

He was named the Saskatchewan Athlete of the Year in 2008. 

Reuben was born in Pilot Butte and currently resides in 

Edmonton. Reuben, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it’s my honour to introduce Rachelle Viinberg. The 2012 

London Summer Games was Rachelle’s third Olympic Games. 

This summer she won her first Olympic medal, silver, as part of 

the women’s eight rowing team. 

 

Rachelle was born and raised in Regina and now resides in 

Toronto where she is looking forward to focusing on her career 

as a naturopathic doctor. Her proud mother, June Mayhew de 

Jong, is here in the east gallery. And I know that her father, the 

late Hielkede Jong, would also be very proud of her, as well as 

another relative, Honey Deglau, who is here. So I welcome you, 

Rachelle, to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I am honoured to introduce Arnold Boldt. He’s a 

Paralympic high jump legend. Arnold made his cycling debut 

on the Canadian paracycling team for the 2012 London Games. 

London was Arnold’s sixth Paralympic Games, throughout 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

which he has won seven gold and one silver medal. 

 

Arnold, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour to introduce, on behalf of the 

MLA from Greystone, Logan Campbell. 

 

The 2012 Summer Games was Logan’s first competition at the 

Paralympic Games. Along with his fellow teammates Bruce 

Millar and Scott Lutes, Logan sailed in the Sonar class. The 

team finished 10th in their class. Congratulations to Logan and 

his team. Logan, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour to introduce to you today 

Keira-Lyn Frie. Keira-Lyn competed in four events: the 100-, 

800–, 1500–, and 5000-metre wheelchair races. The 2012 

London Summer Games was Keira-Lyn’s first Paralympic 

Games. Keira-Lyn, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it’s my honour to introduce to you today 

Parlaympian archer Bob Hudson. Bob started competing in 

2005. He has been to the World Championships in Italy, Korea, 

and the Czech Republic. Bob captured the silver medal in the 

2011 Parapan American Games in Guadalajara, Mexico. He 

competed in his first Paralympics in wheelchair archery at the 

2012 London Summer Games. Bob, welcome to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it’s my honour to introduce to you today, Lisa Thomaidis. 

Lisa went to London with Team Canada’s 2012 women’s 

basketball team as an assistant coach. It was her first Olympics. 

The team earned its Olympic spot with a victory over Japan on 

Canada Day during the last qualifying event. She’s taking a 

sabbatical from her head coach position at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] and is proud to call Saskatoon her 

home. Lisa, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour to introduce to you today Natalie 

Scott. This was Natalie’s first Paralympic Games experience as 

a coach at the highest level. Natalie became involved with 

goalball at age 13 through her mother, Launel, a provincial and 

national team coach. She stepped in to coach at the 2005 

International Blind Sports Association Pan Am Games and was 

an assistant coach at the World Youth Games last July, earning 

her a spot in Canada’s coaching staff at the 2011 Parapan 

American Games. Natalie, welcome to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour to introduce to you today Marj 

Walton. Marj attended the 2012 London Paralympic Games as 

team manager for the Canadian swim team. A former 

competitive swimmer herself and overall sports enthusiast, 

Marj was team manager for Canada’s national Paralympics 

swim team at the 2010 international Paralympics committee 

swimming world championship in Eindhoven, Netherlands. She 

was also the swim team manager at the 2011 Parapan American 

Games in Mexico and at the inaugural 2011 Pan Pacific 

swimming world champions in Edmonton. Marj, welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it’s my honour to introduce to you Launel Scott. Launel 

has been involved with Saskatchewan Blind Sports Association 

since 1986 as a coach and in 2000 decided to focus on 

officiating. Since then she has officiated at three junior world 

championships, two Parapan Am Games and her first 

Paralympics Games in London where she was one of two 

Canadian referees selected. Launel, we welcome you to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it is my honour today to introduce Al Bodnarchuk. Al 

Bodnarchuk attended his fifth Olympic Games as a massage 

therapist when he went to 2012 London Summer Games. One 

of the best massage therapists in the country, Al has travelled as 

a member of Canada’s medical staff to three Commonwealth 

Games, eight World Athletic Championships, and he was a 

recipient of the Queen’s Jubilee Medal in 2003 for dedication to 

athletes in Canada. Al, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it is my honour to introduce to you today Mr. 

Dave Robertson. Dave attended the 2012 Olympic Games as 

technical analyst for Team Canada’s canoe-kayak team. Now 

that the Olympics are over, Dave will turn his attention to the 

2016 games in Rio de Janeiro as CanoeKayak Canada’s 

under-23 men’s kayak development coach. I’m glad I’m not 

kayaking. Dave, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would also like to thank the 

athletes, coaches, officials and support staff who could not 

make it here today. Cory Niefer, Olympics, shooting, air rifle; 

Krista Phillips, Olympics, women’s basketball; Brianne 

Theisen, Olympics, athletics, heptathlon; Carla Nicholls, 

Olympic coach, shooting, air rifle; Cindy Hamulas, Olympic 

coach, rifle; Pat Fiacco, Olympic official, deputy technical 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

delegate boxing; Alexandre Dupont, Paralympic athletics; Earle 

Connor, Paralympics athletics, Nancy Brawley, Paralympics, 

diving official; and Rick Reelie, Paralympic coach, wheelchair 

athletics. Congratulations to all these members. 

 

As Speaker, I actually have a guest today to introduce. Seated 

in the Speaker’s gallery today, we have Speaker Andrew Scheer 

of the House of Commons. As everyone knows, Mr. Scheer 

represents one of the four federal ridings in Regina, and I would 

ask the Assembly to welcome him here today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present a petition on behalf of residents from across 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about education in our 

province. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes, that 

is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Hudson Bay and Regina. I so submit. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring a petition in 

support of bringing cellular service to unserved areas in the 

northern part of province. And in the prayer that reads as 

follows: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan undertake 

as soon as possible to ensure that SaskTel delivers cellular 

service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along with the 

adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; Buffalo 

River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation, and the community of Turnor Lake, 

including the neighbouring communities in each of these 

areas. 

 

And this petition is brought to you from the citizens of Dillon, 

Saskatchewan. I so pray.  

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

International Co-operative Alliance Youth Arts Contest 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 

International Co-operative Alliance held a youth arts contest 

entitled Co-op Art in honour of the United Nation’s 

International Year of the Co-operatives. The ICA [International 

Co-operative Alliance] is an independent, non-governmental 

organization that unites, represents, and serves co-operatives 

worldwide. 

 

The contest was open to people aged 16 to 35 which aim to 

raise awareness of young people through photography, video, 

and music. Out of 35 countries that participated, 174 

submissions were sent in, and Canada had four finalists. 

Among the four finalists was Emily Erhardt who is the 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Youth Program alumnus, coming 

in second place for her rap song, “Join a Co-op.” 

 

Winners of each category won a trip to the Co-operatives 

United Conference in Manchester, United Kingdom as well as 

$3,500. Second place winners won $1,500 and third place 

entrants received a tablet computer. Charles Gould, the director 

general of the ICA, praised the high quality of work that he saw 

in all the submissions. He felt they reflected a true depiction of 

global representation of the positivity that co-operatives can 

bring to the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today in thanking the 

ICA for organizing such a great event to bring out such a 

diverse array of talent, especially Emily on her competition. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

2012 Olympic and Paralympics Games 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today at 11:45 

there’ll be a recognition ceremony in the rotunda to celebrate 

the Saskatchewan athletes, coaches, officials, and support staff 

who participated in the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games. 

 

This event is dedicated to the individuals who served as 

ambassadors for our province and are world-class role models 

for our youth. We not only honour these athletes for their 

achievements in their sports but also their contributions to our 

communities and to our province. Mr. Speaker, today is an 

opportunity to relive some of those most memorable moments 

in the games — moments that kept us on the edge of our seats, 

moments of defeat, moments of great pleasure, and moments of 

triumph like the women’s Canada-US [United States] soccer 

match. This game combined all the highs and lows of a great 

Olympic event. 

 

We host this event not only to recognize the accomplishments 

of those who participated in the games, but also to recognize 

the dedication and support of their families and friends whose 

sacrifices are instrumental in making their dreams become a 

reality. 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating our 

Saskatchewan Olympians, Paralympians, coaches, officials, and 

support staff, and to wish them the best in their future 

endeavours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatchewan Authors Win Literary Awards  

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this week has been a wonderful 

one for two Saskatchewan authors. Both Candace Savage and 

Ross King recently won two of the most prestigious literary 

awards in Canada for their outstanding non-fiction literature. 

 

Candace Savage won the Hilary Weston Writers’ Trust Prize 

for Nonfiction valued at $60,000 for her book A Geography of 

Blood: Unearthing Memory from a Prairie Landscape. She 

currently divides her time between my constituency of 

Saskatoon Nutana and Eastend, which was also home to writer 

Wallace Stegner, one of the giants of American literature in the 

late 20th century. His presence is throughout her book, which 

she spent a decade researching, about the tortured relationships 

between Aboriginal residents and white settlers in the 

southwest part of Saskatchewan. 

 

Candace is an accomplished accordionist and, along with me, is 

part of the backup section of the Saskatoon Fiddle Orchestra. 

She’s also a strong advocate for the precious remaining native 

prairie in our community pastures. 

 

Ross King won his second Governor General’s Award for 

Non-fiction for his book, Leonardo and The Last Supper, which 

introduces readers to the complex history behind the famous 

painting. Although he currently lives in the United Kingdom, 

he originally hails from North Portal, Saskatchewan and credits 

authors like Robert Kroetsch and W.O. Mitchell for his success. 

He said he was inspired by these authors because: 

 

It then makes you see that it isn’t beyond someone from 

Saskatchewan. To be a writer, you don’t have to be from 

Toronto or Montreal, or London or Paris, that it can be 

someone from a small town in Saskatchewan. 

 

My congratulations to Candace and Ross. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

University of Saskatchewan Awarded 

Canadian Excellence Research Chair 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

want to congratulate the University of Saskatchewan on an 

outstanding recent achievement. The U of S is one of eight 

universities in the country awarded the $10 million Canadian 

Excellence Research Chair aimed at attracting the world’s best 

researchers to help build successful research teams in areas of 

importance to Canada. 

 

This prestigious position is expected to be filled by early 2014. 

The U of S will recruit a chair who will work on an integrated 

approach to infectious diseases. This will help to ensure that the 

new knowledge is translated rapidly and effectively into 

practice and that new technology, policy, and programs are 

relevant to communities, policy-makers, and health 

practitioners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government views collaboration and 

partnership between sectors as essential for success in building 

and strengthening our provincial economy. Our province is 

growing, and we want to ensure better health and better care for 

our population. This prestigious award will help address 

preventable diseases and improve prevention, diagnosis, and 

control of these diseases in a more effective way based on the 

latest advances of science. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite everyone in this Assembly today 

to join me in congratulating the U of S in this achievement. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Anti-Bullying Week 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to know 

you think I’m as handsome as the member from Cumberland. 

Mr. Speaker, November 13th to the 16th has been proclaimed 

as Anti-Bullying Week in the city of Yorkton. 

 

Members of St. Mary’s School community school council will 

be taking part in a Canada-wide initiative to stop bullying. A 

number of events were planned throughout the week including 

a flag raising at city hall. Anti-bullying T-shirts were 

distributed, and children were educated on the dangers of 

bullying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, discrimination is a social disease that affects the 

people in the way they live, work, play, and treat one another. It 

creates barriers to success by fostering prejudice and hate. In 

September an exclusive Ipsos Reid poll conducted for Global 

News found that a staggering 88 per cent of Canadians say 

they’re worried about youth bullying. Mr. Speaker, bullying is 

no longer relegated to the playground or soccer field. With the 

increased participation and popularity of social media, 

cyberbullying is quickly becoming a prevalent issue. 

 

The goal of Bullying Awareness Week is to raise awareness of 

the simple yet powerful actions that parents, kids, educators, 

and everyone can take to prevent bullying. Mr. Speaker, 

bullying can be stopped. All it takes is one bystander to stand 

up to bullying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking St. 

Mary’s School community school council and the city of 

Yorkton for their efforts to stop bullying. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Pay it Forward Splash Park 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to inform members about a special project currently 

underway in our province. This project is the Chase Kraynick 

Pay it Forward Splash Park. This park is being built in Canora 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

in memory of Chase, a little boy who lost his life in a farming 

accident last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pay it forward is the idea of participating in 

random acts of kindness without expecting anything in return. 

Chase was taught this idea in his kindergarten class, and he 

took the idea to heart. For Chase, pay it forward meant doing 

chores on the farm, washing the dishes, or helping neighbours 

shovel their driveways. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Canora community is looking to pay it 

forward by building a splash park in memory of Chase. In a 

recent fundraising project the community raised almost $7,000 

by recycling old car, truck, and tractor tires. The splash park is 

also in the semi-finals for an Aviva Community Fund grant 

worth $100,000. Starting next month, Mr. Speaker, the public 

can vote for the splash park on the Aviva website to help the 

project advance to the final round of competition. 

 

Chase Kraynick was a remarkable young boy, Mr. Speaker, and 

even though he was only six years old, he made a difference in 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, starting on December 3rd I ask all members of the 

House to help continue Chase’s legacy by voting on the Aviva 

website for the Chase Kraynick Pay it Forward Splash Park. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Royalty Rates and Dutch Disease 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] have made it quite clear that they’re going to barrel down 

the same path set by Dwain Lingenfelter only a few short years 

ago by advocating that we begin jacking up royalty rates and 

sending jobs and economic activity out of the province. For 

example, leadership candidate Erin Weir seems to believe that 

by raising royalties on potash and oil, Saskatchewan can do its 

part to help fight the fabled “Dutch disease” that federal NDP 

leader Thomas Mulcair has blamed Western Canada for 

creating. 

 

In referencing Mr. Mulcair’s Dutch disease theory, Weir stated, 

“Saskatchewan is well positioned to help implement and benefit 

from this approach by raising provincial resource royalties.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Weir’s opinion, Saskatchewan should put the 

brakes on its own potash and oil industries just to fall in line 

with the wrong-headed approach of the federal NDP leader. 

Never mind the fact that Mark Carney, the governor of the 

board of Canada, has stated that “most fundamentally, higher 

commodity prices are ambiguously good for Canada,” or that 

former Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said that the NDP’s 

Dutch disease implication that “one part of the country is not 

prospering because another is, is wrong.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the NDP finally renounce their fictitious 

theory of Dutch disease and relinquish their pursuit to raise 

royalty rates? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Potential Changes to Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s now 

been several months since the government introduced an 

alarming discussion paper on a topic nobody voted for in the 

last election. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve now sat through three 

full weeks of session. Several pieces of legislation have been 

introduced but funny enough we haven’t seen, they haven’t 

tabled the labour legislation. 

 

People in Saskatchewan want to know what the Sask Party has 

in mind because they certainly didn’t vote for massive overhaul 

of labour laws in the last election. Mr. Speaker, people are very 

concerned when the minister says he’s bringing in the most 

changes to labour laws in the country. To the minister: where’s 

the legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members 

opposite and would like to advise the citizens of the province 

that the officials at the Ministry of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety have been working on this project since the 

consultation finished during the summer. It is moving along 

quite well. And our original timeline was to have the bill 

introduced sometime in the fall session and, Mr. Speaker, that is 

still the plan and the process is coming along as it should. And 

to the member opposite I’d just say, a few more sleeps and 

we’ll have something for him. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s an interesting answer 

but not very helpful because the minister seems to have a lot to 

say about his labour law to groups, for example the North 

Saskatoon Business Association. And this wouldn’t be the first 

time the Sask Party introduces what they bill as a big idea in 

front of a paying crowd. The last time this happened it was a 

$100 a plate dinner to hear about the Premier’s little booklet. 

And I’m not sure what’s being charged tomorrow for the 

minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister talking about his labour laws 

at yet another private function instead of here at the legislature? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, I 

think both he and I attended the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labour] convention not that long ago. I didn’t pay to attend 

there. I don’t know whether he paid or not. But we spoke about 

things there, including labour legislation, changes to 

occupational health and safety. And, Mr. Speaker, we had I 

think a good, open, and frank discussion. 

 

So when I speak to the NSBA [North Saskatoon Business 

Association], I don’t know what their charge is tomorrow, but I 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

don’t intend to ask them . . . or don’t intend to be asked 

tomorrow how much that I paid for SFL or one way or the 

other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are quite prepared to provide the information 

as we go forward, to a variety of groups through the province 

and intend to continue doing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to add that, you know, we have a 

good record with labour relations in our province. Mr. Speaker, 

I have a quote I’d like to read, and it is, “Our economy has been 

moving along quite well with relative labour peace for many, 

many years.” Mr. Speaker, that is a quote from the Leader of 

the Opposition during a scrum that he had on October 23rd. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, even the Leader of the Opposition 

acknowledges the labour . . . 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Next question, please. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the key part of our 

argument when they talk about this massive overhaul. Things 

have been working, so to get it right you don’t need to do the 

massive overhaul. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, they put out this massive 

discussion, or this discussion paper on May 2nd, and they 

didn’t hold a single public, open public meeting to get their 

feedback by July 31st. Clearly they had a pretty good idea that 

people in Saskatchewan want to see this new labour law 

introduced as quickly as possible. But a lot of people, quite 

frankly, think it’s been sitting already written in a drawer 

somewhere since the Sask Party first started talking about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been several pieces of legislation tabled 

this session but not one of them is the new labour law that this 

Premier touted in his Throne Speech or mused about in his little 

booklet. Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister table his 

legislation and we can start the debate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

made comments before that the legislation was pre-written. I 

think perhaps you’d like to tell that to some of the officials over 

at the ministry that have been working long hours and often 

some 16- and 18-hour days, on weekends and well into the 

evenings, Mr. Speaker. There was not pre-written bills or 

anything else and they are still working and we are getting very 

close to finalizing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the consultation process, we 

received over 3,800 responses that went into the new 

legislation. I would like to use this opportunity to thank 

everyone that made a submission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to consultation, in 1999 the members 

opposite introduced and passed The Special Payment 

(Dependent Spouses) Act ex gratia payment to widows — no 

consultation; 2001, amended The Labour Standards Act to 

extend parental leave benefits, no consultation; 2004, trade 

union Act, no consultation; 2006, labour standards Act for 

family, no consultation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association met this week. They represent the publicly funded 

boards from across our province. I was pleased to join trustees 

as they discussed education in classrooms in our province as 

did the Minister of Education. 

 

In my consultations, I’ve heard about many challenges and 

opportunities in our education system. One thing those in the 

education sector have not been calling for is for dollars to be 

diverted to fund new private, independent schools. Did the 

minister hear something different? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

and I recognize the member opposite for the question. You 

know, education in our province is a priority. It was articulated 

in the Throne Speech, articulated in the growth plan. It’s a 

priority for all the students in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to providing a high 

quality of education system that supports Saskatchewan 

families and attracts new families to our communities. The 

funding of qualified independent schools provides parents with 

that choice. 

 

And as the Minister of Education I am concerned about the 

quality of education, and that quality of education will be 

maintained through adherence to the Saskatchewan curriculum 

and reports through the continuous improvement and 

accountability framework at the end of the year that all school 

divisions and qualified independent schools will be required to 

participate. So all of our students receive the same quality of 

education and are guaranteed that quality. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, almost one year ago that 

government forged ahead, diverting dollars from our publicly 

funded education system into funding new private schools. This 

came as a shock to many. It wasn’t mentioned in the election 

campaign and there was no consultation with the education 

sector. Beyond the risk of fragmenting education, it takes 

dollars away at a time that we need to properly fund and 

support education in this province. 

 

We do have a new Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker, who has 

a long history in publicly funded education. To the minister: 

does he support the changes that were introduced a year ago to 

divert dollars from our publicly funded education system and 

into new private, independent schools? 

 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, funding 

parents’ choices for schools in Saskatchewan’s not new. We 

fund the Catholic school system to 100 per cent of funding. We 

fund stand-alone Protestant school at 100 per cent, including 

capital. Historical high schools have been funded. Alternative 

schools are funded. Associate schools that are faith or culturally 

based have been funded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned about educating all of our 

students in this province and allowing parents the choice to 

send their children to the schools of their choice. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The government introduced this plan, as 

I say, about a year ago, to start funding these new private, 

independent schools. It’s not about the traditional relationship 

that’s been had with many deliverers of education. These 

schools can have as few, Mr. Speaker, as just a handful of 

students in some of them. 

 

When concerns were raised, the government made the claim 

that somehow these schools were being funded with new 

dollars. Of course that’s just not so. In fact, since the 

government announced its plan to divert dollars to new private 

schools, the publicly funded education system has faced more 

and more constraints and cutbacks. Students and staff have 

suffered as a result and school boards have become frustrated. I 

guess my question to the Minister of Education: why is he more 

committed to fragmenting education instead of strengthening it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I 

recognize the member opposite. Mr. Speaker, I am concerned 

about the education of children. Children are the most 

important resource that we have in our province and it’s critical 

to our growth plan going forward. And I want to make sure that 

every single student in this province has a high quality of 

education that adheres to that, that adheres to the Saskatchewan 

curriculum, and that we can monitor that as we go forward. And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to provide funding to 

allow parents to make that choice for their children. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, interesting comment from 

the minister because the environment’s something different. 

School boards have been forced to make cuts because of that 

government’s actions. We’ve seen province-wide cuts and 

reductions of educational assistants all across this province. 

Full-day kindergarten has been cut. Classrooms and schools are 

overcrowded. Vibrant neighbourhoods are without schools. 

Others with health and safety issues haven’t been fixed or 

addressed by that government. 

 

The reality is that classrooms and the people in them — 

students and teachers and professionals — are strained and 

pressured. Will the minister do the right thing? Will he stop 

diverting dollars from a publicly funded education system? Will 

he put forward a plan that supports all students in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

and again I recognize the member opposite for the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had unprecedented contributions to 

education funding in this province: a 21 per cent increase in 

funding over the course of our government; $500 million in 

capital expenditures since coming to office, Mr. Speaker. And 

on top of that we’ve had an historic tax reduction, property tax 

reduction, which has allowed our province to continue to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to make investments in 

education. We will continue to make education a priority. And 

we will continue to do that so that our children have the best 

opportunities going forward and will lead this country in 

student outcomes as we move forward, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Planning for Closure of Valley View Centre 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government decided earlier this year to close Valley View 

Centre in Moose Jaw. When governments make decisions like 

this, decisions that impact so many people, there needs to be a 

proper plan in place for residents, their families, and the 

caregivers who have provided hands-on care for many years. 

 

It has now been nine months since the government first 

announced this decision. That’s a good chunk of time that’s 

already disappeared from the tight timeline the government put 

in place before the final resident is moved out of their home at 

Valley View. 

 

Without the rhetoric we’ve all heard before about there being 

more work that needs to be done, can the minister explain 

specifically what work the government has done so far to 

ensure that there’s a proper plan in place for the closure of 

Valley View Centre? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciate the opportunity to talk about the work we have done 

when it comes to Valley View and the residents. There is 

planning and consultation that has been going on with 

individual residents and with their families since we made the 

announcement last February. It’s very important that we have a 

person-centred plan as we go forward so that each individual, 

we can customize the work that should be done and the places 

that they should be living in. There’s residential care services 

that’s going to be needed for them as an individual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to develop a made-in-Saskatchewan 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

plan. We have a committee that’s made up with the members of 

the Valley View families. We’re working with SACL 

[Saskatchewan Association for Community Living]. We’re 

working with other involved individuals as well as the staff that 

are working out at Valley View to ensure that as we move 

forward, Valley View residents have the very best place to live 

that they can, and be part of our community. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are more than 

200 residents who will need another safe, caring, and 

supportive home when Valley View closes its doors because of 

the Sask Party government’s decision. This is something all 

Saskatchewan people deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s the minister’s responsibility to ensure that 

every resident has clear options from which to choose, and 

those options should be developed with input by those who 

know best: the residents, their families, their caregivers, experts 

in the field, and others. Without a clear plan, confusion, 

frustration, and fear loom large from residents and their 

families. And that, despite the minister’s comments about 

consultations, is exactly what I’m hearing is happening to far 

too many residents and their families. 

 

What are the clear and explicit options being provided to 

residents and their families as they face this move? That’s what 

they would like to know. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the member 

opposite is aware that in 2002 the NDP government decided to 

not take any more admissions into Valley View. And at that 

time they didn’t really make an announcement about it; they 

just sort of let it happen. 

 

So what we really need to do is make sure that we have an 

involvement with the families and with the community. We 

have met with them individually. By the end of November, 

every family member will have been met with and the 

discussion on what they would like to have done with their 

loved one, in conjunction with the government, is going to go 

forward. 

 

The group has also made trips to three other provinces and went 

to other residences and looked at other organizations and 

structures to help them determine what should be happening 

into the future. We also have looked at residences within the 

province and we’ve had a chance to meet as a group on many 

occasions to see what the plan is going to be. 

 

I’m hoping that in beginning of January, they will be presenting 

to me and to our government the options that the families and 

the residents lay out in front of us. This is not the opposition’s 

decision. This is not government’s decision. This is for the 

people of Valley View and their families. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since many of the 

Valley View residents have spent their lifetime in Moose Jaw, 

they will likely want to remain in Moose Jaw, but some will 

want to locate to other communities. 

 

Unfortunately, we are hearing concerns from health 

professionals, especially those who work in acute care. They 

are worried Valley View residents will end up in emergency 

wards or places like the Dubé Centre in Saskatoon because 

inadequate supports currently exist in the community. They 

worry because the government has not yet articulated a plan or 

a clear timeline to create the necessary residential spaces or 

what these spaces will look like. A Saskatoon Health Region 

employee said to me, “The closure of Valley View keeps those 

working in acute care awake at night.” 

 

How does the minister plan to create the much needed capacity 

for residential options in Moose Jaw or other communities 

across the province to ensure the best outcomes of community 

living are realized for the residents of Valley View? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in 2002 the then minister, 

Joanne Crofford, said that the decision is a gradual phase-out, 

would be the best way to describe it. So over the last number of 

years, there’s been a phase-out. We are down to 203 residents 

in Valley View, and we have to ensure that we have the spaces 

in place where they need to be geographically and with the very 

best trained staff, Mr. Speaker. 

 

June Avivi who is the Co-Chair of the Valley View group home 

said, “The Valley View group home family applauds the 

decision of government, and we are pleased to move from 

talking the talk to walking the walk.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what we are doing. We’re ensuring that as 

we move forward . . . And the closure isn’t going to happen till 

2015, and there’ll be a transition. We have to ensure that the 

right spaces are there. We have to ensure that we’ve had input 

from the families and from the communities and that the 

people, the 2,003 residents we have now . . . And as we develop 

the model into the future, will be the very best model there is in 

Canada. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The closure of Valley 

View is a very significant decision. It’s significant for the 

families and for the residents who are affected, but it’s also 

very significant for the community of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, 

and from an economic perspective. Valley View Centre in 

Moose Jaw has been a large employer in the community for 

many decades, currently employing over 500 people. Mr. 

Speaker, these 500 people who are working at Valley View 

Centre support local businesses. Mr. Speaker, they pay 

mortgages in the community, and they pay taxes to the city. 

 

My question to the Minister Responsible for Employment: has 

the ministry done an analysis of what the economic impact will 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

be with the loss of potential jobs related to Valley View Centre? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when our government talks 

about Valley View, we’re talking about the residents in Valley 

View. We’re talking about the people who need special care 

and help because they have a disability, many of them very 

complex disabilities. I acknowledge, and so do all my 

colleagues, that the support they’re getting from the staff there 

is very, very important. But what we’re really doing is 

designing a home — not a place to put your head; a home — 

for individuals as they move forward. 

 

The institution that’s in Moose Jaw right now is the only one of 

two that are left in Canada where we actually institutionalize 

people that have a disability. Mr. Speaker, we have to move 

forward, and we will move forward to ensure that we are giving 

these individuals the very best care as we move forward. And 

that’ll take into consideration the plans of the family. And I’m 

sure some of the places will be in Moose Jaw, but I’m waiting 

to hear from the families of the residents of Valley View. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do thank the 

minister for that answer. And I would agree, Mr. Speaker: when 

we’re talking about the closure of Valley View, the interests of 

the residents, Mr. Speaker, have to be the top concern. 

 

But what I’m asking about also are the implications for the 

community because that’s an important part of the decision too, 

Mr. Speaker, which can’t be overlooked. And I think now 

realizing that, it’s important to ask, Mr. Speaker, what’s next 

for the community of Moose Jaw? And what’s next for the 

employees who have been working at Valley View Centre for 

many, many years in some cases? 

 

The monthly payroll, Mr. Speaker, at Valley View Centre in 

Moose Jaw is $1.8 million. That’s $1.8 million that goes into 

local businesses, purchases cars at dealerships, Mr. Speaker, 

and pays mortgages for the homes in the community. These are 

also the same workers, Mr. Speaker, who make Moose Jaw 

such a great place to live, who volunteer in the community and 

give themselves to so many causes. And I’m worried, Mr. 

Speaker, that with no cabinet minister at the table from Moose 

Jaw, that the interests of the community are not receiving the 

attention they deserve. 

 

My question to the Minister for Employment: what is the plan 

to ensure that the individuals working at Valley View Centre 

have a bright future in Moose Jaw? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — It doesn’t matter how low the member 

opposite speaks. He’s still talking about money, and I’m still 

talking about the residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP eliminated 112 FTEs [full-time 

equivalent] from Valley View during the time that they were 

there. And over the NDP’s time, 16 years, the population went 

down by 25 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a 

different world now. We’re talking about a world where there is 

a growing economy, where we have a potash mine, where 

there’s a new hospital coming into Moose Jaw, where there is a 

booming agricultural economy. But at the same time, we know 

that there are a lot of skilled people in Moose Jaw that have 

been working with our Valley View residents, and their input is 

important to us. But I am not going to make the decision on this 

until we have consulted families. 

 

Today we’ve heard a number of the members opposite talking 

about consultation. That is exactly what we are doing, Mr. 

Speaker. I will ensure that the residents from Valley View have 

their voice heard as we go forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, most certainly consultation needs 

to occur with the families. The interests of the residents have to 

be first and foremost. There are also, Mr. Speaker, significant 

implications with the closure of Valley View Centre when it 

comes to employment in the community of Moose Jaw. There 

needs to be a proper and clear plan required for how current 

employees at Valley View Centre can transition to other areas 

of employment. 

 

Many have been working there for many years, Mr. Speaker, 

and some may be able to find work easily in other fields and 

other careers, but others, Mr. Speaker, will require the 

appropriate transitions and supports in transitioning into other 

careers. It’s not realistic, Mr. Speaker, to think that the 500 

employees at Valley View will end work one day at Valley 

View Centre and the next day have a job in a completely 

different industry or field. 

 

My question to the Minister of Employment: what is the plan 

with respect to employment in Moose Jaw to ensure that the 

people that are working at Valley View Centre, and have served 

faithfully for many years, have a bright future in Moose Jaw? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about 

Valley View, we’re talking about the people that live at Valley 

View when you’re talking to me. We’re talking about the 

opportunity to ensure that the 203 people, with some of them 

very complex disabilities, have the opportunity to be included 

into the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m well aware that we have very dedicated staff. 

I’m well aware that some of the residents consider those staff 

family, and that’s why we’re working with, to ensure that 

families have options when it comes to where buildings will be 

built, where there’ll be other opportunities for these residents to 

be part of. 

 

What I don’t understand is why the members opposite left the 

list of 440 people with complex disabilities on a list and didn’t 

really think about them at all. They didn’t care about who was 

going to be looking after them, and they weren’t fighting for a 

job for those either. Mr. Speaker, the record of the members 

opposite when it comes to people with disabilities is dismal. 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when we’re discussing the 

closure of Valley View Centre, indeed there are many factors to 

consider. And as we covered in question period, a very 

important factor to consider, the most important factor, is the 

care for the residents. There are other concerns, Mr. Speaker, 

with respect to the local economy and employment in Moose 

Jaw, and if the Minister for Social Services doesn’t want to 

answer those questions, it’s open to any minister who would 

like to speak about that real aspect of the closure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard in question period how many 

families have concerns about the plan or the lack of plan or the 

progress of plan. It’s necessary for the Sask Party government 

to be much more clear on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard also that there’s no real plan, 

according to the answers that have been provided, with respect 

to transitioning employees to other options, to new careers or 

new places. Based on this, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe the 

local MLAs are going to bat for their community for those Sask 

Party members that are sitting around the caucus table. 

 

My question to the minister: at a time when the people in 

Moose Jaw need a clear plan on employment, on the future of 

Valley View, all they’re getting, Mr. Speaker, from members 

opposite is the request to just trust us. Why is that so? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my colleagues from Moose 

Jaw care very much. They care about the residents of Valley 

View. They care about the people that are working in Moose 

Jaw. They care about the future of their city. That’s why they’re 

delighted about the hospital. That’s why they’re delighted about 

the potash mines that are going up. That’s why they’re 

delighted about the increase in the number of people living in 

the province. And that’s why they’re happy that we’re going to 

take till 2015 or thereabouts to ensure that there are residents 

and the places for these residents is right. We have to ensure 

that we are doing the best for the people with disabilities That is 

our concern, along with the people that look after them. But I 

am concerned about the 203 people that call Valley View home. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 67, The 

Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 67, The Community Planning 

Profession Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 68, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by . . . The Minister of 

Justice and Attorney General moved first reading of Bill No. 

68, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Performance of Government 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with mixed feelings, mixed 

emotions that I rise to move this motion today, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly it’s interesting, you know, just this time last year 

we’d wrapped up a time out on the campaign trail, and certainly 

the parties had put forward their platforms, the people had made 

their judgment. And of course the people in their wisdom saw 

fit to return, you know, 49 on the one side and 9 on the other. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? Fair enough. That’s 

democracy. That’s people putting forward their platforms, 

having them weighed and assayed, putting forward their 

candidates, their leaders, and then the people make their 

decision. And one of the things that is important in that is that 

you’re being upfront with the people as to what your plans are. 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been around here long enough 

to have seen the members say, oh, there’s no hidden agenda 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

here, Mr. Speaker. There’s no sort of secret plans. There’s no 

sort of off-the-balance sheet arrangements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think what we’ve seen over the past five years, and over 

the past year in particular, Mr. Speaker, is a record from this 

government that didn’t match up with the bill of goods that was 

being promoted in the campaign. And I can tell you this, Mr. 

Speaker, out there on the hustings in terms of places like say, 

Trianon, or Davis Mews, I think of the seniors that looked at 

the record of that government in terms of what was being 

promoted around the seniors’ income plan. And certainly there 

was some very fine-sounding things that they came forward in 

that. 

 

And come the budget, Mr. Speaker, there was again another 

fine bit of rhetoric in terms of the attention that was being paid 

to the seniors and to the seniors’ income plan, and the kind of 

benefits that that government was putting forward for the 

pioneers in this province, the people who have done the most to 

build this province. But what we didn’t hear about on the 

hustings, of course, Mr. Speaker, but what we heard about in 

the budget was the fact that for every dollar that was being put 

forward in the seniors’ income plan, there were $3 being 

clawed back in terms of the prescription drug plan for seniors. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not, it’s not hardly surprising that 

in politics, you know, I guess this is the thing that engenders a 

bit of cynicism on the part of the electorate that makes people 

look at the politicians that seek to speak to their needs, their 

hopes and aspirations. It makes people cynical in terms of what 

comes forward at election time and then what gets practised 

thereafter. 

 

And I think about the different sort of seniors’ polls, and 

certainly they had a very compelling platform and what 

happened in the campaign. And there were a lot of seniors that 

bought that bill of goods from that party opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

many of them for the first time. But I often think about, you 

know, it’s too darn bad they didn’t campaign on the idea that, 

you know, for every dollar that we’re going to talk about in 

terms of the seniors’ income plan, putting forward for your 

benefit, we’re going to take three of them back in terms of the 

prescription drug plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if they’d had that kind of forthrightness on 

the hustings, if they’d been straight up with the seniors in that 

particular case, I think we would have had a different result in 

terms of some of those polls. I know that for a fact, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m very interested to see how this plays out in 

the next election because, of course, elections are when you 

make your covenant with the people. It’s when you say, here’s 

what we’re going to do. Here’s what our plans are. And it was 

nowhere in terms of the Sask Party platform in this last 

campaign. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I raise that because for me it’s a 

particularly egregious example of the surprises that the Sask 

Party played once getting elected. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, 

they didn’t campaign on three more MLAs in terms of what 

their plans were for the people. And I would’ve like to see how 

that worked out on the doorstep, Mr. Speaker, that you’re high 

on your friendly neighbourhood Sask Party candidate and, you 

know, above all else in terms of the things that we want to do 

for the people of Saskatchewan, we don’t think you have 

enough MLAs. I don’t think that that would have gone very far 

on the doorstep, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, that they saved it as a surprise to sort of whack the 

people with after they’d gotten elected is not a surprise in and 

of itself, Mr. Speaker. But what it does do is feed into the 

cynicism, feed into the kind of disrepute that what should be an 

honourable profession sometimes falls into. Because if you’re 

not straight with the people at election time — which they had 

full opportunity to do so, Mr. Speaker — then they would’ve 

said, well you know, a growth agenda, that would include 

growth in our number of politicians. But were they there for 

that, Mr. Speaker? They were not. They were not. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And I guess, you know, I think about all the doorsteps I’ve had 

the pleasure of being on and the opportunity to be on and the 

kind of tough questions you get from people out there when 

you’re talking about what issues are important to them and 

what it takes for them to express support for you. And that is no 

small thing in this pursuit of ours in terms of politics, in terms 

of trying to do good on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But one thing I know for sure about the people of Saskatchewan 

and the people that I’ve had the opportunity to meet in election 

campaigns and between election campaigns, Mr. Speaker, is 

that they appreciate honesty. They appreciate being forthright 

and they appreciate people levelling with them. And in too 

many circumstances, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this government 

not be straight with the people at election time, but 

post-election, Mr. Speaker, the surprises keep rolling out. 

 

And further in that train, Mr. Speaker, we see what’s happened 

with the film industry. And that one is particularly interesting, 

Mr. Speaker, because I represent a very diverse riding. But I 

represent a riding that, one of the great things about it is the 

impact that the cultural industries have in the riding of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. And we have a lot of people that are 

directly affected by the film and television industry in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

And there were people, I can distinctly recall a conversation I 

had on a doorstep just off Victoria, Mr. Speaker, in the 

campaign where I talked to one of those cultural workers, and 

their interest in the Sask Party’s platform because their leader 

had come out to a Saskatchewan Arts Alliance thing before the 

2007 election. You know, it didn’t sound too bad. They were 

interested in what might be said after the election, despite the 

things that had been said earlier in the decade around the sound 

stage and the kind of attacks that the members opposite had 

levelled against the cultural industry. 

 

After that, Mr. Speaker, you know, the 2007 election, it was 

time to make nice. The Sask Party came forward and were all 

smiles and chuckles about, you know you do a great job. And 

the Premier went on Corner Gas and, you know, there’s a great 

shining up of the industry that went on. 

 

And in 2009, we had the cultural industry’s report where again 

the film industry and the approach to that sector by the 

government was again confirmed and affirmed. And people in 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

the film and television industry had every reason to believe that, 

you know — despite some obvious departures such as the sale 

of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network] and the way 

that that was botched through, Mr. Speaker — they had every 

reason to expect that this government was as good as its word 

when it said, well you know, we think you’re doing a great job. 

Keep up the good work. What can we do to help? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we find out that again campaign time, for 

one thing with this party, is something very different when it 

comes to actual governance. Because there was no forewarning, 

in fact there was, you know, indications all in the opposite 

direction: that this government opposite supported the film and 

television industry, that they thought there was good work 

being done, that there was a sound economic return to the 

province, that it was a good investment on the part of the people 

of Saskatchewan. Only come budget day, Mr. Speaker, do we 

find out that there’s some kind of vendetta that they’ve got to 

see through in terms of what they . . . And I have no other way 

to . . . You know, the kind of ignorance or misunderstanding is 

one way to put it, Mr. Speaker, straight and malevolent in terms 

of the way that they’ve approached the industry on the other. 

And the kind of disingenuous approaches that they’ve made and 

the way that the then minister botched the file and the way that 

that has been played through by the current minister, all the 

while backed up by the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, this is a Premier that was quite happy to make nice 

and try to, you know, build that big tent before elections, and 

after the 2007 election was quite happy to jump on the Corner 

Gas bandwagon and come along for a shine. But, Mr. Speaker, 

if you’re there for the good times, you’re there for the work as 

well. And I think that’s something else that Saskatchewan 

people appreciate, is that you just don’t sort of show up to jump 

on the float at the parade, but you’re there to roll up your 

sleeves and do the work. 

 

Government had been a partner in the very successful work of 

the film and television industry in this province, and it had been 

a point of pride that was so compelling, Mr. Speaker, that we 

saw the kind of charm offensive that the members opposite felt 

that they had to engage in before the 2007 election and the kind 

of assuaging and sort of hold-the-line work that was done 

before the 2011 election. 

 

And I think back to that conversation I had on Victoria Avenue, 

Mr. Speaker, where that cultural worker was very interested in 

what the Premier had to say, what the Sask Party was 

campaigning on. And there was a general sense on the part of 

that individual of, well you know, how bad could it be under 

the Sask Party? So far it’s been pretty good. And in that 

particular profession, you know, there have been some bumps. 

But this is a government that’s not hostile to our interest. This 

is a government that, you know, claims some kind of interest 

and is interested in coming around to shine us up at the good 

times, you know. Fair enough, as long as they keep working in 

partnership on the other sort of tools that have built the industry 

in this province. 

 

But there was no indication on the part of those members in 

terms of the hustings, and there’s certainly no indication — be 

it on the public record or leading up to the election in 2011, and 

certainly not after — up until the budget when of course they 

dropped the hammer on the industry, Mr. Speaker. And then the 

Premier got religion on the whole question of what happens, 

how you support a film industry in this province. 

 

And it’s been interesting to see them carry forth since then, Mr. 

Speaker, and the kind of lessons that I think they’re teaching 

the people of Saskatchewan, wherein if you don’t agree with 

this government, here are the kind of boots that they’re going to 

put to you. And if your facts don’t agree with their view of 

reality, then they’ll just go and order up some other facts. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, there’s evidence-based decision making, 

and in this case I think we’ve got opinion-based evidence 

making in terms of the way that these individuals have 

approached what has been a valuable sector for this economy 

and the kind of political games that they’ve played with an 

industry and with people’s lives. 

 

And I think of no finer example of how that has played out in 

the fair riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, Mr. Speaker, 

where this week we’ve had word of Partners in Motion being 

included in the work around Argo and the kind of positive 

attention that draws to the industry in this province. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, Partners in Motion, before this government had 

rolled out the wrecking ball to the industry, Partners in Motion 

was headquartered in the riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, 

just down from Taylor Field, Mr. Speaker. And of course, the 

Partners in Motion headquarters today has a for lease sign in the 

window because they’ve moved out to British Columbia where 

there’s a province that, when they say that they’re going to 

work in partnership with the industry, then they’re going to take 

care of their promises. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on the case of, in the case of the seniors’ drug 

plan, in the case of what has happened around three more 

MLAs, in the case of the film industry, and now one thing I’d 

like to add too, Mr. Speaker, is the case with the Information 

Services Corporation. And again this is a government that in the 

aftermath of 2003, they took a good, hard look at their record 

and despite decades of lip service to the notion of, well if it’s a 

public corporation then we should sell it off, they figured out in 

the 2003 election that that wasn’t where the people of 

Saskatchewan were at. So what have they got to do, Mr. 

Speaker? Well they got rid of their leader faster than you could 

say Jack Robinson. 

 

Then after that, Mr. Speaker, they figured well we’d better take 

the pledge and say that we’re for public ownership of our 

Crown corporations, full stop, period, four-square. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, there are some of us, you know — call me cynical 

— that doubted the conversion experience on the road to 

electoral Damascus that went on over there. But they took the 

pledge. They didn’t talk about, you know, how it was a pinky 

swear or that you should see the asterisk and the footnotes and 

the sort of exceptions that have been made to the deal or that, 

you know, there’s some fine print that we’ve got our fingers 

crossed behind our back upon, Mr. Speaker. That was the order 

of the day from the leadership on down in that party. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, now we find out about the plans 

they’ve got for ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]. And this is no surprise, I guess this is no 

surprise for those that have some passing familiarity with the 

record of the members opposite and what happened in this 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

province in the 1980s, what happened in this province in the 

1990s, and the fact that the 2003 election saw privatization as a 

pivotal issue on which they felt like they needed to do some 

innoculation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they took the pledge, and since then, Mr. Speaker, I think 

what they’ve been pursuing is for the most part a path of 

incrementalism. You know they’re not going to get the right 

wing revolution completed all at once, Mr. Speaker. They want 

to do it brick by brick and build that wall so it’s nice and tall 

and do it like that, Mr. Speaker, not all in one go. And I think 

the Premier, you know, is a gifted communicator and has been 

very persuasive to his troops in making that happen and saying, 

you know, that it’s a long game that we’re looking to play. We 

can’t do it all at once like the Mike Harris revolution. We can’t 

do it like the post-’86 Devine operation which, you know, that 

Premier had a front-row seat in the operations of, Mr. Speaker, 

and the way that they pursued privatization. So what they were 

going to do was go after privatization incrementally. 

 

And we see that in spades in this recent passage, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of what’s happening with ISC. We see it with the 

interference that has been bandied around with the operations of 

SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority]. And we 

see it in terms of normal functions of other Crown corporations 

being privatized out, contracted out to third party operators 

when that work had been performed and performed well and 

cost effectively for the people of Saskatchewan by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite happy to be in this debate today to 

move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for a 

legislative agenda for surprises that people didn’t vote for, 

including spending millions of dollars to add three more 

MLAs, decimating the film industry and privatizing our 

information Crown, ISC (Information Services 

Corporation). 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 

Leader: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for a 

legislative agenda of surprises that people didn’t vote for, 

including spending millions of dollars to add three more 

MLAs, decimating the film industry and privatizing our 

information Crown, ISC (Information Services 

Corporation). 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Surprisingly, well 

surprisingly I don’t support this motion. It is my pleasure to 

join in this debate and inform this Legislative Assembly of 

what the people of Saskatchewan did not vote for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan people didn’t vote for were 

the surprises of the former NDP government. Saskatchewan 

people did not vote for the closure of 52 rural hospitals, 

surprisingly — two of them in Carrot River Valley 

constituency, both Arborfield and Carrot River. Surprisingly 

that was never mentioned in their platform. They didn’t vote for 

the longest surgical wait times in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t 

that a surprise. Mr. Speaker? They didn’t vote for the alarming 

shortage of nurses and the worst doctor retention in all of 

Canada. Surprise again. 

 

They didn’t vote for the expansion of the $1 billion pothole in 

our highways or an ad hoc plan to infrastructure divestment. 

And they definitely didn’t vote for a government that told them 

to fix their own potholes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people did not vote to keep on 

going into risky ventures, risky, money-losing ventures, 

surprisingly. Now here’s a surprise. We have tappedinto.com 

which cost a surprising $6.7 million; Persona, the cost a 

surprising 9.4 million; Navigata, 43.4 million; Retx.com, 26 

million, another surprise; Craig Wireless, 10 million; NST 

[NST Network Services of Chicago], 16 million. These are 

surprises, Mr. Speaker. They are not myths. They are surprises. 

 

We can continue on. And let’s get down to SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], what 

was surprisingly supposed to be, supposed to be a government 

and private partnership. Unfortunately, surprisingly, there were 

no private partners. Isn’t that a real surprise, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Channel Lake, a surprising 15 million; Guyana, a surprising 2 

million; Coachman Insurance, 16.1 million. Then, oh yes, let’s 

get into the bingo. Bingo, yes, we wanted to a have a surprise in 

the bingo end of it. These are not myths. These are surprises 

that the NDP . . . The people in Saskatchewan did not want to 

continue on going with that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan didn’t vote for a party 

that raised taxes 17 times while in government including the 

PST [provincial sales tax] three times, income tax twice, 

business taxes four times, and fuel taxes twice. They definitely 

didn’t vote for surprising tax increase in PST right after the 

election in 2003 when they said that they weren’t going to raise 

taxes. That was surprisingly not on their platform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they did not vote for a party that wouldn’t 

increase a seniors’ income plan for 16 years or a party that 

eliminated nearly 1,200 long-term care beds and closed 16 

long-term care facilities. Mr. Speaker, this government 

surprisingly decided to open up 13 new ones. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, they did not vote for child welfare caseloads to 

grow by 53 per cent from 2000 to 2007. And they did not vote 

for a former government that allowed 440 people with 

disabilities to go without the care they needed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, surprisingly they forgot about rural 

Saskatchewan, the oft-neglected area of the NDP policy. Not 

only did they close the hospitals, they decided to just to stay on 

the status quo when it came to education property taxes 

although they said they were going to change it. Surprisingly 

they didn’t. They did not vote, the rural people of rural 

Saskatchewan did not vote for the NDP who surprisingly tore 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

up the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] contract that 

they signed with the province in good faith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan did not vote for a government that 

closed 31 rural offices over 16 years. The people of 

Saskatchewan did not vote for a government that clawed back 

600 million from municipalities and off-loaded costs onto RMs 

[rural municipality] and cities. The RMs and the cities are quite 

happy now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan did not vote for the 

22,000 people leaving the provinces in the decade, in the past 

decade that that government was in power. I’m proud to say 

that my children are both working in this province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s a surprise for the NDP that they’re 

actually staying here. 

 

You know, but according to the NDP, the out-migration wasn’t 

such a bad thing because, and I quote, we ought not to worry 

because when people leave there is “more left for the rest of 

us.” The former NDP Economic Development minister, Eldon 

Lautermilch, said that, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan definitely did not vote for that 

economic development plan — what a surprise. 

 

And that’s just their record, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t even 

talked about their campaign platform. Let’s talk about the 

financial aspect of their platform which I assume was put 

together by their Finance critic from Regina Rosemont. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that the member from Regina 

Rosemont has leadership aspirations. And as Finance critic you 

would think that he would be a financial guru, financially 

prudent. But, Mr. Speaker, this want-to-be leader can’t even 

manage his own leadership campaign funds. He acts . . . 

Surprisingly he’s spending close to twice as much as what he’s 

bringing in. And he wants to manage this province, Mr. 

Speaker? Yikes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the NDP 2000 election platform, the members 

opposite put forward a reckless and unaffordable plan that 

would have drowned our province in debt. The people did not 

vote for a platform that cost $3.1 billion which would create a 

2.4 billion deficit. The people of Saskatchewan did not vote for 

a revenue sharing plan with First Nations that wasn’t costed. 

Revenue resources in this province belong to all Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan people did not vote for an antiquated reliance on 

failed policies like rent control. They did not vote for a reckless 

hike in our province’s royalty rates. They did not vote for a 

platform or a party that would take Saskatchewan back, back to 

a period of economic stagnation, to where our province’s youth 

were heading west in droves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to admit there were some surprises. When 

this government was elected in 2007, we had a platform, a 

platform that contained many promises, promises of what we 

would do as government if we had the privilege and confidence 

of the Saskatchewan people. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

We kept those promises. This was a surprise to the NDP 

because they just didn’t believe that a political party was 

supposed to keep the promises that were made in the heat of an 

election battle — surprise. The good people of Saskatchewan 

took notes. They remembered that in the 16 years that the NDP 

were in government, every time there was an election, they 

would say one thing, and when the dust settled and they were 

back in power, they’d renege on everything they said. 

 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, in the election of 2011, the people of 

this province said, we believe in the Saskatchewan Party. They 

said what they were going to do, and they did it. To that end, 

Mr. Speaker, this is why there are so many on this side of the 

House and so few on that side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it should come as no surprise. It’s just a simple 

matter of doing what you say you’ll do and keeping your 

commitments. Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan didn’t vote for 

is that former NDP government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government has 

come forward at a time when the economy has done very well. 

And we know that in the election of 2007, there was a concern 

that the Sask Party government would be able to manage the 

economy. And the economy’s done well. But it’s built on a base 

and, frankly, a lot of cash that was available when they were 

elected at that time. 

 

In the 2011 budget, the Sask Party ran on a platform that didn’t 

have a lot of promises in it. And so what we’ve seen in the last 

year is continual surprises. 

 

Now last week I got to go through a whole list of those 

surprises when we were talking in the 75-minute debate. This 

week I want to talk about a couple of things which I think are 

troubling all of the people of Saskatchewan. The first one is the 

seeming move by the Premier and executive government to 

diminish the role of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

What we have is a Premier who seems to be mimicking or 

copying the kind of thing that’s happening at the national level 

as parliament is being pushed to the side. This is a trend that we 

know various political scientists have been looking at as it 

relates to our parliamentary democracy in Canada. But this 

session we have been seeing executive government — and I 

have to believe it’s the Premier that’s behind this — where they 

are diminishing the role of this place. 

 

And I raise this at this particular time because we have various 

attempts by ministers, I think at the direction of Executive 

Council and the Premier, who will schedule events right at the 

time when question period is on or when people are in the 

legislature or just after so that what happens is the traditional 

method of dealing with question period . . . And going on, there 

are other things. To have a full event at a time when many 

things are happening . . .  

 

Also what we have is a Premier who ends up announcing his 

plan for the province at $1,000-a-table luncheon in Saskatoon. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what happened . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’m having some difficulty hearing 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

the member, the Leader of the Opposition. Other members will 

have their opportunity to enter into the debate. I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — And, Mr. Speaker, when the Throne Speech is 

presented in this House, traditionally there has been a very 

vigorous and extended debate in the Throne Speech where the 

ministers present a statement on behalf of their ministry about 

what their plans are for the year. We didn’t hear a single one of 

those this year, and in actual fact we ended up then shortening 

the number of days available. This is a concentrated effort by 

the Premier and the Executive Council to diminish the role of 

this legislature. And I think all members, that side of the House 

and this side of the House, should start thinking about what this 

means for our role as legislators. 

 

This is a surprise. This is a surprise that has come more so since 

this last election. It fits with all of the other surprises that are 

here. And, Mr. Speaker, when the minister . . . the member 

from . . . The Minister of Highways, the member from Indian 

Head, is yelling about all of these things in here. He also has a 

responsibility as the Minister of Highways to get up in this 

legislature and tell us what the Highways department is going 

to be doing. The Minister of Health has that responsibility, all 

of those ministers do. But we ended up not hearing that kind of 

information at all. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that diminishes the role of us in this 

legislature. It diminishes the ability of the people to understand 

what this government is doing. We’re not quite certain whether 

this is an attempt by the Premier to control the message. He 

doesn’t want too many voices out there. That’s what we see in 

Ottawa. But are we seeing the same thing here? I hope not 

because practically what we want in any legislature is the 

ability to get the information out to the public but also get it out 

to us who are here in this legislature. Over the years there is a 

concerted effort by the Premier to diminish what is happening 

in this place. And I ask him, I ask all of those members to think 

about things that they are doing that cause some difficulties. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the legislature and the role of the 

legislators is diminished, it diminishes the ability of the people 

of the province to have a say in what happens. And that’s why 

this motion is here today because there are too many things that 

are surprises. I mean, nobody voted for more MLAs. Nobody 

voted for eliminating counting people under 18 in calculating 

the boundaries. Nobody voted for damaging the film industry 

without any other plan in place. Nobody voted for increasing 

costs in municipalities. 

 

I mean practically one of the things that was the centrepiece of 

this Premier’s election campaign in 2007 was enterprise and 

enterprise regions, and there wasn’t any mention in the last 

election that they were going to wipe these out. And in fact 

people in various parts of the province were quite disappointed 

when that happened because effectively what it did is it 

off-loaded the costs of that regional economic development on 

to municipalities, whether they’re RMs or urban municipalities, 

in a way that nobody anticipated in last year’s election. 

 

And frankly it affects many of the rural ridings of the members 

opposite, and we don’t hear very much, if anything, about that. 

And what we’re hearing as opposition is there’s a surprise that 

goes right to the heart of developing the economy of this 

province, and our MLAs don’t say anything about it. So what’s 

. . . you know, there’s a surprise that’s hurting all of us. 

 

What we know, we have the surprise in this Throne Speech of 

them bringing back the old P3 [public-private partnership] 

secretariat. We know that that didn’t work, so they changed the 

name of it, tried to reorganize it, and they’re coming forward 

with this SaskBuilds operation. What we know about that is 

that if you don’t have the money to do things, you try to figure 

out ways to spread the costs out down into the future on to 

future generations. 

 

Frankly we’ve had enough of that in Saskatchewan with what 

happened in the 1980s. And, Mr. Speaker, they love to go back 

and talk about history, but they always forget that decade 

because that’s where many of these people learned their skills 

in running the province. And that’s the biggest surprise that 

people in Saskatchewan are afraid of, is that the Premier will 

return to some of the failed policies of the ’80s and put us in 

financial difficulty. 

 

[11:30] 

 

What we know over the last few years is that the government 

says that they’re going to have a balanced budget, but by the 

end of the year, we’re into a negative situation. We’re looking 

forward to seeing the six-month statement of the province, but 

we know that it’s going to be some very, very big challenges 

there as we move forward. So we probably will end up with a 

fourth year in a row of negative number at the end of the year. 

 

You can’t manage this province by spending more money than 

you’ve got. And unfortunately we saw that in the ’80s. We 

don’t want to see that big surprise showing up in the next 

number of years. And so when people talk about government 

running . . . organized by delivering surprises, that’s the biggest 

one that everyone is worried about. So I’m going to be speaking 

in favour of this motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

my pleasure to enter the debate today. 

 

Again it’s my pleasure to speak on the government’s behalf on 

the motion from the member from Elphinstone-Centre. I’m a 

little surprised by the motion actually. That’s one of the 

surprises. I mean it paints a pretty bad picture from their record 

for 16 years. He must’ve forgot about that. I think the rest of the 

province wants to forget about it too. 

 

But certainly there are a lot of surprises, but I think there’s a lot 

of pleasant surprises that this government has brought to the 

people of the province the last few years, certainly the most 

vulnerable. I think just recently it was announced 430 people 

with disabilities are no longer on a waiting list backlog, Mr. 

Speaker. They get to live with dignity and respect, and they get 

to create a home as the minister mentioned. They’re not 

institutionalized, waiting in a hospital, Mr. Speaker. Along with 

the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 

program, Mr. Speaker, these people, these folks, our fellow 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

citizens have a home. And the members opposite, they create 

lists. They didn’t do anything about it. We got rid of the list. 

Ten people are still to go, Mr. Speaker. They’re expected to be 

placed in homes by March of this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We just recently, in this country, celebrated or remembered on 

Remembrance Day, Mr. Speaker. We had veterans here last 

week. And what our government has done, we’ve given $5,000 

scholarships to people, members of our armed service, who we 

are so proud of, and we’re so happy, the work they do for us 

overseas and in previous wars, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

has given those veterans $5,000 or if, heaven forbid — it has 

happened a few times — if somebody is lost overseas, their 

kids, their children are able to go to a post-secondary 

institution. Five thousand dollars goes to those people, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that’s a surprise that they’re pretty happy with. 

It’s the only place in Canada where that happens at all. 

 

The high-performance athletes that we saw, were introduced in 

the House earlier today, I believe they’re out in the rotunda 

right now, Mr. Speaker. But they make our province very 

proud, Mr. Speaker. I think they would be surprised that our 

government brought the Saskatchewan program for athletic 

excellence . . . provides funding of up to $6,000 per year for a 

national senior team athlete. That never happened before, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re certainly proud of those athletes, and we want 

to support them. I don’t want to put words in their mouths, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think they would be pleasantly surprised by that 

announcement. 

 

I think folks in rural Saskatchewan or people who work in 

mines in sort of remote areas, not in Regina or Saskatoon, 

they’re surprised when a helicopter if, God forbid, they’re hurt, 

a helicopter, a new helicopter comes to pick them up, Mr. 

Speaker. The STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 

program, it’s helped I’m sure many people massively cut down 

the time to get to a major tertiary centre, and that’s something 

we’re certainly proud of. I think those people might be 

surprised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, personally in my family, I know when I do my 

taxes, I’m pleasantly surprised as well. I know we have here in 

Saskatchewan the highest income threshold before paying taxes 

anywhere in Canada. That helps families. That helps people all 

across our province. Lower property taxes on the education side 

— historic reductions in that, Mr. Speaker — $250 active 

families benefit. One hundred and fourteen thousand people, 

when they do their taxes, Mr. Speaker, on the Saskatchewan 

taxes owed, there’s a zero, Mr. Speaker. That helps those 

people, certainly families all across the province. 

 

Now the NDP raised taxes 17 times, Mr. Speaker, 17 times. 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The former minister, 

actually, in the NDP government, when it came to taxes, what 

he said — and it sort of speaks to this idea of surprises sprung 

on Saskatchewan people — the former Finance minister, Harry 

Van Mulligen, said, “I suspect that anyone who talks about tax 

hikes is not likely to be very popular during the course of an 

election campaign,” Mr. Speaker. He didn’t say, boy, you 

know, times are tough, things change; we had to make some 

tough decisions. He said, we knew we were going to do it and 

we did it. We didn’t tell the people beforehand. So it’s a little 

rich when they brought this motion ahead, as I mentioned 

before. That’s the covenant they had as the member mentioned 

about earlier. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, my family was recently surprised, 

pleasantly surprised again. We’re very lucky. We haven’t had 

to have surgeries or a lot of hospital stays, Mr. Speaker, in my 

family, and we thank God for that every day. Recently though 

in our family, in our immediate family, we knew, we had heard, 

or we lived through and heard about the old Saskatchewan 

where we had the longest wait-lists in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But my family, we were very surprised. We were very fortunate 

to have great care, first of all. But with the new surgical care 

initiative, we got our family member into surgery. It was on the 

urgent list. And, Mr. Speaker, it was within the benchmark set 

out by the ministry. And he, well he got in on time, and 

everything seems to be okay right now, Mr. Speaker. And the 

thing is he doesn’t need follow-up care because he was able to 

get in. 

 

Now I don’t know if it’s fair to say that that never would have 

happened in the past, but I think the odds are much better on 

this with the surgical care initiative . . . excuse me, the surgery 

initiative. And you know, I like our odds much better when this 

government’s in power. 

 

So what we saw from the members opposite on this file, and so 

very close to my family, Mr. Speaker, is . . . What we got from 

them is rhetoric and excuses, frankly, for many years. And this 

government, we set aggressive targets, Mr. Speaker. We set 

aggressive targets. From the members opposite, we heard 

ideology. We heard spin, and the result was the longest wait 

times in Canada, Mr. Speaker. With this government now, 

people can get back to their lives quicker. They can get back to 

work. They can be grandfathers again, Mr. Speaker, and not 

have to worry about their health. Not in every case, Mr. 

Speaker, but a much better chance to get that care they need on 

this side of the House with our policies as compared to them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

When it comes to surprise, Mr. Speaker, I think people outside 

our province might be surprised as to what’s happening with 

Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, 

setting those aggressive goals that we’ve seen in the growth 

plan 2020. A lot of governments, and I certainly I’m not an 

expert on what happens around the world, but I know a lot of 

governments, they won’t touch it. You don’t have to look 

farther than 10 yards across the aisle to see a government that 

wouldn’t set goals. But they . . . Our government is sort of 

putting our neck out there, and we’re going to be judged by the 

electorate on the goals we set, and we’re happy to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. And we see the results of that in my own family and 

families right across this province, Mr. Speaker, and we’re very 

proud of that. 

 

I think when people look at our province, they are surprised that 

we have a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. We tabled a balanced 

budget. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Only one in the country. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — That’s right, the only one in the country 

and in a world really that’s awash in red ink, austerity 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

programs. They talk about, our neighbours to the south, about a 

fiscal cliff, Mr. Speaker. And they’ve got a lot of problems 

right around the world, Mr. Speaker. And we’re very lucky in 

Saskatchewan that this Minister of Finance tabled the 

Saskatchewan advantage budget, the only balanced budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people look and are surprised. How do we 

get a credit upgrade, Mr. Speaker? I haven’t heard of anywhere 

else in the country, certainly in North America, that’s actually 

. . . In these tough times of high debt and deficit budgets, Mr. 

Speaker, how do you increase your credit rating? S&P 

[Standard & Poor’s Corporation] upgraded us to a AAA rating, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, 10 billion, another surprising number since 

’07; 20 billion in capital investments. Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot 

of that private sector, Mr. Speaker. Economies around the 

world would love a stimulus plan like that. They talk about 

quantitative easing in the States, Mr. Speaker. Any place would 

love to have a doubling of capital investments in the last 10 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another thing I’m quite surprised about, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

come up recently and certainly during the NDP leadership 

campaign, Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the two members in 

the House here have not stood up for Saskatchewan against 

their NDP federal leader, Mr. Speaker, who wants to tax the oil 

and gas sector and our natural resources to apparently 

artificially lower the dollar, Mr. Speaker, and help get votes in 

Quebec and Ontario, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those two members aren’t standing up for Saskatchewan, and 

that’s something I’m very surprised at. Maybe surprised isn’t a 

strong enough word. Maybe shocked; maybe thunderstruck. I 

don’t know. So I’m quite surprised by that, Mr. Speaker. The 

only leadership candidate that has stood up is, from what we 

understand from political pundits around, is certainly the 

front-runner because he has at least said where he stands. He 

agrees with the federal leader. Of course we don’t, on this side 

of the House, agree at all, Mr. Speaker. But you know a lot of 

people think he is a front-runner. And large reason for that is he 

has at least taken a stand . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to speak in support of the motion around this 

government’s many unwelcome surprises since the last 

election, including rewriting 100 years of labour legislation, 

adding three more MLAs, privatizing our Information Services 

Corporation, the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, 

ensuring that families who had committed to Saskatchewan no 

longer have the opportunity to bring their loved ones here and 

have the support network here so they can stay and have a good 

quality of life here. So there is a long list of those unwanted 

surprises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I’m going to narrow my focus, and I’m going to focus on 

the film employment tax credit, which was an incredibly 

unwelcome surprise. And why, Mr. Speaker, and why, Mr. 

Speaker, am I choosing to talk about this? Well I am an eternal 

optimist, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that there are members on 

the opposite benches who do not understand the ramifications 

of the cut to the film employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t think they understood the benefits. I don’t think they 

understood the ramifications. So I live in hope — I am an 

eternal optimist — that this government will do something very 

quickly about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In terms of the unwanted surprise around the film employment 

tax credit, I’m looking at page 35 of the Sask Party’s 2011 

election platform where it says, “Promoting Saskatchewan’s 

arts community,” and this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “Providing a 

10 per cent increase in funding to SaskFilm in the last budget 

and increasing funding for the Film Employment Tax Credit.” 

There’s nothing in this platform, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

would have led anybody to believe that this government, just a 

few short months later, had the plan to cut an industry off at the 

knees, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can tell you that there’s many 

people who signed the online petition in the spring who voted 

for this government because there was no indication that this 

government planned to decimate an industry that is very 

important to our province. 

 

From that petition . . . So you have the opportunity to sign the 

petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but you also have the opportunity 

to leave comments. And Greg Wensel had this to say, Sask 

Party supporter and business teacher: “. . . this decision does 

not hold water . . .” 

 

Ian Rogers, which was signature no. 2,446 on the petition: 

 

Remember me Premier Wall? The guy that shot your 

Christmas message. Thanks to the SFETC, I’ve had a 

successful 25 yr. career in the province of my birth, the 

province I love. Raised a family here. Hoped to retire 

here. Now I will be forced to follow the producers that 

leave if I want to continue working on the world-class 

documentaries I’ve been so lucky to be part of. Merry 

Christmas to you too. 

 

I don’t think Greg or Ian saw in this government’s last election 

platform or its Throne Speech any indication of this cut. Shane 

Chapman, Sask Party supporter, also signed the petition: “. . . 

very disappointing. Please reconsider.” Meet Doug Russell: 

“Dad, volunteer, editor, TV spots for Riders, Rawlco, and you. 

Now what?” 

 

So I don’t think any of these people or the thousands of people 

who signed the petition in the spring had any indication in this 

last Sask Party platform or in last year’s Throne Speech that 

their industry would be decimated because of an ill-informed 

decision by this government. 

 

I had an opportunity a week ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to read 

into the record just a short list of — I only had 90 seconds, so 

you can only squeeze so many names into 90 seconds, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker; it’s quite unfortunate that I didn’t have all 

seven members’ statements to speak to because my list 

could’ve filled up that time — some of the amazing people, 

award-winning, talented, skilled people here in Saskatchewan 

who because of this government’s short-sightedness cutting the 

film employment tax credit, that they have already had to leave. 

Within the last nine months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have 

already had to leave to pursue their career elsewhere. 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

I don’t know how the members on that side of the House felt 

about that list, but I can tell you it sure didn’t feel very good to 

me, and it sure doesn’t feel very good. It’s downright 

depressing actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the mail that I’ve 

been cc’d [carbon copy] on that this government has received 

from people whose lives, their roots have been ripped from this 

province. And some of them, some of them are 

Saskatchewanians by birth. They’ve been here their whole 

lives. Other people have been transplants who’ve chosen to call 

this province home. And they no longer have that opportunity, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this government does not 

understand the film employment tax credit. 

 

They clearly, in comments that both their minister and their 

Premier have made, do not get the tax credit, which if any two 

people on that side of the House should get it, those two should. 

But I think there’s many members on the government benches 

who don’t understand it, who need to have a little lesson. 

There’s many people in the film industry who would be very 

happy to sit down with government members to explain fully 

and clearly how the tax credit works, who gets it, and the 

benefits that it brings. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Seventy per cent of money spent in Saskatchewan in the film 

industry came from outside of our borders, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: new money to our province; money that wouldn’t 

have been here had there not been a tax credit, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Just thinking about people who have already left, there’s one 

individual. He helped build the industry. He’s been in 

Saskatchewan for 27 years, recently sold his home, actually last 

week. Possession date was October 31st. He’s packed his bags 

and he’s on his way to BC [British Columbia], Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Another person, she’s leaving in three days to begin a new job 

as the head of the Film and Sound Commission with the 

Department of Economic Development for the Yukon 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Department of 

Economic Development is hiring a film . . . the Film and Sound 

Commission is under the Department of Economic 

Development because the Yukon recognizes that the film 

industry is a driver of the economic engine in any jurisdiction, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So again, this decision, why am I talking about this? Why am I 

focused on this? Because this is one of the surprises. This is one 

of the surprises in this government’s last year that has had huge 

ramifications. These aren’t numbers. These are people, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, whose lives have been altered in a way that 

one would say is not positive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say the 

least. 

 

So why am I continuing to talk about this? Because I hope the 

people on those side of the benches see the error and recognize 

that sometimes in government it’s okay to say you’re sorry, and 

that you’ve made a mistake, and fix it. That is what good 

leadership is about. Everybody makes mistakes. We are not 

infallible as human beings, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

sometimes it is okay to acknowledge that we are not infallible 

and that we can fix our errors. 

 

And why continue to talk about it? Because time is of the 

essence. Every day people continue to leave. Just reading from 

SMPIA [Saskatchewan Media Production Industry 

Association], the Saskatchewan Motion Picture Industry 

Association — Media Production Industry Association’s 

“Submission for: Moving Saskatchewan’s Creative Industries 

Forward,” this is in their conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

why is time of the essence? 

 

If funding and programming decisions are left until spring, 

it will be a monumental task to rebuild our industry. We 

need a model that works with Canada’s media production 

system now while there’s still a chance to get back on our 

feet. 

 

So it’s not exaggeration or hyperbole to say, when I’ve gotten 

up and asked questions, saying why can the minister or the 

Premier not fix this now? Now is the time to do this. It is 

absolutely imperative that we get a system in place before 

everybody has had to leave or change professions, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I think I have some huge concerns with this surprise as well in 

terms of this government not knowing . . . actually just thinking 

about what the minister said in the House yesterday. He made a 

comment where he had commented that, “We think refundable 

tax credits are not good public policy.” He said this yesterday in 

the House, Mr. Speaker. But the irony — if you turn to page 

134 of the 2012-2013 Estimates, Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport — so we have actually on the same page, the same page 

we have the film employment tax credit being reduced from 8.2 

million to 5.2 million, and right below that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the active families benefit, also a refundable tax 

credit, being increased from 9 million to 12 million. 

 

And I think the active families credit is a great benefit, Mr. 

Speaker, as a parent of young children who are involved in 

activities. But I would think that this minister has some 

problems with some of the things that he says in the House that 

are just contradictory and not true. So with that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I will be supporting the motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

join in the debate today, and it centres around the premise of a 

surprise or change. And we all know, Mr. Speaker, that the 

NDP fear change and change that brings opportunity. It’s been 

in their DNA that change is a bad thing, that anything that is 

different than what is in the past is bad, and we’ve seen that 

during their time in government. 

 

And what we saw in the ’90s when the NDP was in government 

is a decline in population, a decline in the economy, and the 

surprises that went with it. It was a lost generation. So with that 

the people of Saskatchewan voted for a government that was a 

little different, a little bit. They didn’t fear the change in 

opportunity and, Mr. Speaker, they voted for the Saskatchewan 

Party. And they voted for us because we kept over 140 

campaign promises from our 2007 platform, Mr. Speaker. 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

And that was the surprise that, as a candidate for the first time 

— was running in 2011 — that I heard at the doorsteps was that 

they in the past governments didn’t keep their promises. And 

that’s one of the reasons why I believe that we elected 49 

members on this side of the House is that the population looked 

at what we promised in the 2007 election and what we 

delivered on. And that’s an impressive resumé of completed 

promises. And it’s these surprises that a government would 

keep its word is why I’m lucky enough to represent Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

One of the campaign promises in 2007 that was fulfilled the 

following day after getting elected is the set election dates. And 

that was just the start of a flood of promises that we kept in our 

first term. The people of Saskatchewan voted for a government 

that has passed four consecutive balanced budgets and reduced 

debt by 44 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That was a surprise I think to 

everyone in this province, that a government could decrease our 

debt by 44 per cent. And that is something I am very proud of, 

to represent the government that was able to reduce the debt by 

44 per cent. 

 

Meanwhile our government has invested 2.2 billion in 

highways over the four years. This is a 64 per cent increase 

over the four years of the previous government. That is a 

surprise the people of the government voted for. This increase 

in highways resulted in 6000 kilometres of highway being 

improved. That is what this government has completed in 

highways. 

 

The people also voted for a government that dramatically 

reduced surgical wait times. This was a surprise I think to 

many, is that a right-of-centre party can fix health care. They 

can turn around the decline that was on . . . The decline of 

health care and the quality of care that we received from our 

health care system under the former NDP had the longest 

surgical wait times in the country. It was the government that 

claimed that, we can’t set a goal in how many nurses to hire 

because what if we miss it? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the record of this government is that we set 

goals and we fulfill them. And that is why you’re seeing the 

surgical wait times in this province reduced significantly. 

We’ve also hired 120 new police officers. Mr. Speaker, law and 

order is important to, I believe, most in the province. And what 

we saw with the former government was not keeping pace to 

the need of police officers. And what we’ve done is hire 120 

new police officers. 

 

We’ve also increased funding by 35 per cent for transition 

homes and sexual assault centres. We also eliminated the PST 

on used cars and trucks. That was a surprise that I think the 

people of Saskatchewan read about in our campaign promise in 

2007, and our newly formed government removed the PST on 

them. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan voted for a government that 

created the most aggressive graduate retention program in the 

nation — a rebate of up to $20,000 in post-secondary tuition for 

those who stay and work in Saskatchewan. That’s a surprise, I 

think, outside the borders of Saskatchewan that a lot of 

graduates would love to have in other jurisdictions, but they 

have to move to this province. And that’s what we’ve seen, is a 

record in-migration which drives growth. It drives our 

economy. It drives our tax base which, Mr. Speaker, enables us 

to fix some of the issues that we have here. 

 

One of the things that this growing economy was able to do, 

allows us to do, is that we take the dividends of that growth and 

we have the largest educational property tax reduction in 

Saskatchewan’s history. That is what growth does, and that’s 

what change does. And what the opposition calls surprises is 

really opportunity. That’s what is so important about this 

economy right now, continuing to grow. 

 

We’ve also, with the dividends of growth, fulfilled the promise 

to provide municipality revenue sharing to 20 per cent of the 

PST. Around the country there’s other municipalities would 

love the opportunity that we provide of having 20 per cent of 

the PST go directly into the municipalities. That affords them to 

operate and to improve the cities and towns in the province. 

And that is a surprise I think that many in the municipalities are 

pleased with. 

 

On health, it’s dear to me, and it’s one of the reasons why I got 

involved in politics, is that I was fearful of the health care 

system in decline, a declining tax base that was not going to be 

able to afford proper care for my parents and family and loved 

ones. And that is something I hold dear that this government 

has been able to improve on. And since November 2007, the 

number of patients waiting more than a year for surgery has 

reduced by 81 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That reduction is 

enormous in fixing some of the issues that we have in health 

care. Also the number of patients waiting more than six months 

has been reduced by 56, 56 per cent, Mr. Speaker. These 

numbers represent families and represents loved ones that are 

no longer in discomfort and pain. They’re actually getting their 

surgeries done. It’s a quality of health issue, Mr. Speaker, that 

we’re able to fix on this side of the Chamber. 

 

Another important announcement and a surprise to many, I 

believe, is for MS [multiple sclerosis] patients — the surprise 

that they’ve received that we were committed to funding 

research in the liberation therapy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are surprises that I think that are very 

positive for the province and ones that are welcomed by 

Saskatchewan. In health care we also promised to introduce the 

STARS. And it is currently operating down in Regina, in 

Saskatoon now. It’s just expanded. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I think people would be surprised that under 

the former government of the NDP, they only had a select few 

countries where we could recruit trained physicians from. We 

looked at this and said, this is ridiculous. There’s other 

countries that we could recruit physicians, and we made that 

change. Now we’re welcoming right now in 2011, 37 

foreign-trained family physicians. This is the surprises that are 

beneficial to our province and to our economy and to the 

families that call Saskatchewan home. 

 

Just briefly on education, which is important because that 

drives the economy, in the last five years we invested 3.5 

billion in post-secondary education system. That has been . . . 

 

[12:00] 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 

Question. I recognize the member from Regina Qu’Appelle. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

2004 when the NDP were in power, the Leader of the 

Opposition was a government minister and head of the 

committee that drafted The Crown Corporations Public 

Ownership Act. In a cabinet meeting note from 2004 from Tom 

Waller, the lawyer who drafted the legislation, shows the NDP 

deliberately took ISC out of The Crown Corporations Public 

Ownership Act. When asked about this, the Leader of the 

Opposition stated that, and I quote, he had no recollection of 

this discussion. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: are you surprised 

that the ISC was left out of The Crown Corporations Public 

Ownership Act? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 

surprises me is that I can’t, I have flipped through the Sask 

Party platform and there’s not one single page that outlines any 

of these surprises — three more MLAs, the changes to the 

immigrant nominee program, gutting the film employment tax 

credit. That is what I find surprising, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone, sorry. 

 

Mr. McCall: — There we are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Saskatoon Eastview. There is a 

significant number of seniors in the riding of Saskatoon 

Eastview. How many doorsteps did that member talk about the 

increases to the costs that seniors are going to be asked to pay 

under the prescription drug plan with the Sask Party 

government? Did he know about that before the election, or did 

he get surprised about it by his political bosses along with the 

rest of the folks? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to thank 

the member for the question. 

 

What I heard on the doorsteps in Eastview, when I was talking 

to seniors and I was talking to people throughout the 

community, is the need for better seniors personal care home 

benefits. We talked about how the former government never 

increased the program. What we talked about was subsidizing 

the difference between a senior’s monthly income and threshold 

of $1,800, increasing it to $2,000 by 2015. Those are the kind 

of conversations that we had on the doorsteps in Eastview. 

 

We talked about how do we get the surgical wait times down. 

And we talked about what we accomplished in our first term 

and the fact that we’re going to get it down a three-month wait 

for any surgical care in the province. That is what we talked 

about on the doorsteps in Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When the 

NDP were in power, they surprised Saskatchewan people with 

17 different tax increases, including raising income taxes twice, 

raising business taxes four times, raising fuel taxes twice, and 

raising the PST three times, including a PST hike in 2004 after 

saying they would not. 

 

Now NDP leadership candidate Erin Weir has proposed a $200 

million tax grab from Saskatchewan’s small businesses. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: what other surprise 

tax hikes is your party proposing? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

from Meewasin, I thank him for the question. And I would just 

like to add that I’m wondering if he heard on the doorstep if 

people wanted to kill the film industry; add three more MLAs; 

charge seniors more money for drug prescriptions, more for 

ambulance rides, more for hygiene supplies living in care 

facilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I’m just wondering which 

doorstep the member from Meewasin heard that discussion? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Yes, for the member for Saskatoon Eastview. 

He talked about what happened when he was on the doorstep 

during the election. The bigger question for me is, what kind of 

response is he giving to the people now who are seniors in his 

riding about these surprises that we’ve outlined today and over 

the last number of months — increased costs for drugs, 

increased costs for supplies, and increased costs right across the 

board, and less money available for the city of Saskatoon. So I 

ask that member, what’s he saying now? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to thank 

the member for the question. And he asked about what am I 

hearing since the election. And I’m proud to tell the member 

opposite that I’ve been busy in the community. I’ve been out 

having coffee parties and meeting with seniors. 

 

And you know, what I’m hearing from them is that they’re very 

grateful that we’ve, with the SIP [seniors’ income plan] 

program, that we tripled it from the NDP by the end of the 

second term. That was 16 years without any increase from the 

opposition. That is what the seniors are remembering — for the 

16 years that they were in government, was no increases, the 

surgical wait times longest in the country, and problems in 

nurse shortages. And that’s what I’m hearing, is that we’re 

actually fixing health care. That’s what’s important to the 

seniors, and that is what we’re hearing in Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

Ms. Wilson: — March 22nd in an interview with CTV 

[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] news, the Leader of the 

Opposition stated that an NDP government would have found 

money for a non-refundable tax credit for the film industry by 

clawing back government initiatives for municipalities and 

agriculture. When the NDP was in government, they surprised 

rural Saskatchewan. They tore up GRIP contracts, increased 

crop insurance premiums without increasing coverage, and cut 

spot loss hail from crop insurance, not once but twice. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: given these cuts 

that unfairly targeted Saskatchewan producers, are you 

surprised that the NDP can’t find any support in rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 

surprises me again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government 

has no justification for adding three more MLAs. Surprise — 

we’ve got three more politicians. This government has no 

justification for killing an entire sector. Surprise — we don’t 

need a film industry here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Surprise — let’s charge seniors more for hygiene 

supplies living in care facilities. I’m sure that’s what the 

member from Eastview has been hearing at his coffee parties as 

he visits with folks. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

With all respect, the member from Saskatoon Eastview didn’t 

answer the question. It’s been put to him twice now. So we’ll 

try it three times, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the third time will be the 

charm. 

 

And the question is this: did that member level with seniors 

when he was on their doorsteps in the election saying that, 

come budget time we’re going to increase the amount that we 

ask of you to pay for prescription drugs? You know, it’s going 

to be coming as a surprise then, but just trust the Sask Party. So 

did the member level with seniors on the doorstep? Yes or no? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I would like to thank 

the member for the question. And he talked about levelling and 

levelling with each other. What I heard from the people from 

Saskatoon Eastview is they like what we’re doing. They like the 

direction this province is going. They love the fact that what we 

say is what we will do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The seniors of Saskatoon Eastview have expressed interest in 

why don’t we have long-term care units built in this province. 

And it’s pretty apparent that the opposition closed long-term 

care units. They failed to plan for what’s going on with the 

seniors right now. We have limited . . . What we’re hearing 

from seniors is that we need more facilities, and that is exactly 

what we’re doing in this province. That is what the people of 

Saskatoon has been levelling with me, and they want this to 

continue on. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

November 13th, the member from Saskatoon Centre stated, 

“. . . I think that in a province that at this point in time when we 

see economic indicators that, you know, the average weekly 

salary is going up and . . . that generally this province is doing 

well.” And on November 14th, the member from Athabasca 

stated that there is “a growing economy in Prince Albert.” 

 

Yet in a Globe and Mail article from October 16th, the Leader 

of the Opposition stated that Saskatchewan’s economy is “a 

myth.” To the member from Riversdale: are you surprised that 

your leader thinks that Saskatchewan’s economy is “a myth”? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Thank you to the member for the question. What is surprising 

to me is I’m wondering if any of those members from rural 

Saskatchewan, I’m wondering if any of those members from 

rural Saskatchewan had heard or explained to anybody that they 

were abandoning rural Internet users by taking . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 

has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and 

Resource Boom on Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Hickie.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

yet again, two weeks though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since I last 

stood in the House to talk about this Dutch disease, this Dutch 

disease statement by the federal NDP leader that apparently we 

were led to believe that the NDP supports fully, on the other 

side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It’s been two weeks and all we’ve heard from the NDP 

leadership candidates is nothing. Except for one: Mr. Erin Weir 

did say that he actually in fact enjoys that his name is attached 

to some of the ads currently on television that links him to the 

NDP leader, Mr. Mulcair, and the Dutch disease, links him to 

Mr. Mulcair. 

 

So here we have again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a situation where 

we have the front-runner . . . 

 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 

Carlton has adjourned debate on this motion and therefore . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh he moved, he moved the 

motion? And I understand that the member’s opportunity for 

discussing the motion has . . . He’s no longer eligible to discuss 

it because he has moved the motion and other members are 

eligible to enter into the debate. 

 

I recognize the member from Arm River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — [Inaudible] . . . join this debate. We’re doing a 

debate that’s very vitally important to the province of 

Saskatchewan. You know, natural resources have been the 

backbone of this province, part of our economy. And it’s 

always been we’ve always tried to foster a good relationship 

with the East, and we’ve had that with the government we have. 

And yet we have a leader now from the NDP that is trying to do 

an east-west split. I thought we were over that. I thought we 

were over that for many, many years. You know, that was taken 

away a long time ago, I thought — that debate. 

 

But now a new leader from the NDP is trying to re-foster that 

again just to get some votes in down east because they know 

that they are getting nothing going in the West, you know. And 

that’s not a debate that we need in this country. That is a debate 

. . . This country should be pulling together, especially in the 

economic times that we’re dealing with, that the world situation 

is dealing with. The economic times are troubling throughout 

the world as we watch what’s happening in the US, divisions 

between the parties there and the fiscal problems that they’re 

having, you know, and not working together for the betterment 

of the people. 

 

And when parties from the east and west should be working 

together, should be the view for the betterment of the country, 

not to try to divide the countries, or not to divide the East, 

West. Not to go back to the way it was maybe in the 1930s, 

1940s when there was always an east-west split. You know, we 

can’t afford that now. We can’t afford our industry and we 

can’t afford what’s happening if that happens with the tax. 

 

If that party ever, ever, God forbid, ever forms government and 

tries to basically shut down the West . . . Not just 

Saskatchewan’s economy. We’re talking BC. We’re talking 

Alberta — the tar sands, the oil industry, the uranium industry 

which they’ve also talked not favourable about on the federal 

side. You know and our concern is, with the party here, the 

provincial party here, that they should be standing up for the 

people. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Because, tell you what, you know, when we formed this party, 

Saskatchewan Party, that was one of the first things is why I 

became involved in it. You know, and the constituents I talked 

to and the people said, you know what? We need a party that 

stands up for the West, stands up for Saskatchewan, stands up 

for the interest of Saskatchewan and the West. You know, and 

that’s what . . . And the leaders that formed the Saskatchewan 

Party, many of them are still here today. Many of them are still 

involved in this party, and that was their biggest contribution. 

 

That’s why they formed this party, was for the betterment of 

this province, Mr. Speaker, for the betterment of the people 

here. They didn’t do it for any personal gain, not for anything 

like that. It was that they wanted Saskatchewan to grow, 

Saskatchewan to be a leader, which we’re working toward, to 

be an equal partner with each and every province in this 

Confederation. And that’s what this great country was founded 

on — to be equal partner with each province. 

 

Now with the motion we brought forward and why we’re 

pushing the provincial NDP on this is because that’s looking to 

split that up. That’s looking to say putting their interests ahead 

of the whole of Canada. You know, and that’s . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Political interests. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Political interests, like the member beside me 

from Saltcoats. And he’s so right. He was one of the founding 

members of this great party and that’s, you know, it’s one of the 

reasons that he told me why he was forming this party — for 

the betterment of Saskatchewan. He’s seen the potential of the 

growth in this great province. And the other members, that was 

their goal in that, you know. 

 

And as I’ve listened to, and I guess listened to the lack of 

responses, either through the media or even in speeches here, 

you know, nothing saying ever saying, you know what? This 

isn’t that right for the province of Saskatchewan — that, you 

know, we need to work together with Canada. Our party, their 

party, the NDP, need to work provincially with the federal for 

the betterment of the whole country which includes treating 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, BC equal. 

 

You know, I’ve gone through, you know, the speeches. I’ve 

been here a number of years. And I know there’s a quote that 

I’d like to put on. I would . . . The quote is the Leader of the 

Opposition: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I as the leader of Saskatchewan New 

Democrats and all my colleagues stand for common sense 

perspectives on the issues of the day. We know, we know 

that this Premier shares the ideological values of the 

President of the United States’ opponents. But that is not a 

reason for his attacks on the current sitting President when 

so much of the province’s economic activity relies on 

strong relationship with the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding the Keystone XL pipeline, we’ve 

been on record many times in support of the National 

Energy Board regulated project. 

 

But you know, he made that quote and I’m hoping he would 

stand behind it because I’ve heard a lot of their members never 

talk much about the Keystone XL pipeline, which is a vital part 

of our economy, and also the United States’. I mean they need 

energy; we need energy. I mean that’s a common fact. 

Everybody knows that we need energy to . . . Agriculture needs 

it, industry. It’s just part of what we need up to survive here in 

the western world. 

 

So when people start, you know, basically attacking an industry 

just on ideological reasons, not for the betterment of the people, 

you know, that hundreds of thousands of people that rely on 

that jobs are also relying on the power that’s generated, on the 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

oil that will flow to the United States that will come back in 

manufactured products to us, and also products that we trade to 

them. I know that, you know, it’s a joint project where many 

companies will benefit from the XL pipeline, many companies 

— both in United States and Canada — where thousands and 

thousands of jobs are going be generated with that. And you 

would think as a party that they would be, you know, in favour 

of that. You know, as they talk about, you want economic 

growth in this province. You want job security. You want to 

generate revenue because let’s face it, revenue is what keeps 

our health care going, is what keeps our education going, what 

keeps this province going, which gives us money back to 

operate them programs. You know, Mr. Speaker, that’s vital to 

Western Canada. 

 

So when you have a national leader on the NDP that, you know, 

that talks about the Dutch disease, you know, just trying to 

generate some votes in eastern Canada at the benefit of another 

region and the party that’s attached to them does not say, you 

know what? You know this isn’t right. This isn’t something that 

we provincially is good for Western Canada and Saskatchewan. 

You know, we’ll distance himself from it. 

 

And we’ve yet to hear any of the remarks from any of the 

members, and also the four leadership. You know, you have 

four members from the NDP that are vying for the membership 

of their party over there. That you know, that they, in their 

mind, would plan to lead the party. I mean you know, they 

would hope that they would form government. I mean that’s, 

you know, that’s their goal. It may unrealistic, especially to my 

constituents, but still that is their goal. 

 

You know, so their forefront main thrust should be, what is 

good for Saskatchewan? You know, that’s the first thing you 

should ask and that’s the first thing that our leader asks. When 

anything, you know, comes across on the national screen that 

we’ve discussed and, you know, it’ll be discussed at caucus, our 

leader will ask, well how is this going to affect the 

Saskatchewan? How is it going to affect the residents of this 

great province? How is it going to affect the day-to-day lives of 

the constituents? How is it going to affect the business? And 

that is how we form basis on our policy, on our economic and 

our social issues. 

 

Yet the party opposite, and what I’ve seen of it, that doesn’t 

seem to be their main motive. It doesn’t seem to be the main 

motive of their leaderships. You know, there’s a quote by the 

member from Rosemont. And I quote: 

 

And I’ll highlight Mr. Erin Weir, an economist, a senior 

economist with the United Nations, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would quote, “Saskatchewan is collecting far too little 

revenue from potash.” 

 

. . . We need to make sure that we do a review and get the 

dollar right and make sure we collect a fair share from our 

dollar. Because quite simply, Mr. Speaker, from our 

potash [revenues] . . . 

 

We need to make sure that we do a review and we get the 

dollar right and make sure we collect a fair share from our 

dollar. Because quite simply, Mr. Speaker, from our 

potash [revenues] . . . our most prosperous resource, 5 

cents on the dollar doesn’t cut it . . . 

 

We’re calling for a review and an increase to potash 

royalties . . . 

 

. . . and to leave it right now where we get pennies on the 

dollar — 5 cents on the dollar, Mr. Speaker, for our potash 

— and to leave the burden on Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, is unfair. 

 

But when you have quotes like that, which is wrong, you know 

— we’re the second, I believe the highest, we tax our industry 

probably the second highest. We have a tax break on new mines 

to get the companies here because they’re investing not $1 

billion — 20, 30, as high as, you know, as quoted as high as 3, 

4, to $5 billion, you know, to build their mine, to provide job 

and resources for us. But once that mine is up in production, the 

people of Saskatchewan are getting a fair return on the potash 

royalties because to get the businesses here that is how you 

work with business. 

 

Where the NDP’s role was in the ’70s and I was . . . I can still 

remember it when they took over the potash industry, when 

they started up Saskoil, when they actually nationalized the 

industry, chased away the one German firm. And right now just 

on the edge of my constituency — and I forget the name of it 

— is building a new mine and one of the first . . . K+S as my 

members around me have reminded me of it. It just happened to 

slip my mind. You know, but I can still remember one of the 

CEOs [chief executive officer] there had said that he still 

remembered when their company was taken over in the ’70s by 

the government. Taken over, taken away. He said, I didn’t think 

that could happen. Maybe in Cuba. Maybe in Russia. You 

know, he says, but not here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And you know what? They left. They left with that investment 

money. They left with them jobs. 

 

I can remember through the ’80s, you know, I had friends that 

worked in the potash mines. Shutdowns were as much as six 

months of the year with production. You know, they would 

always have to be either on unemployment or always kind of 

looking for a job and still wanting to hold the potash job 

because when you did work in the potash industry, it’s a 

well-paying, very well-paying unionized job. They are nice 

paying jobs, good benefits. 

 

And now with the mines, what we did, the mines are working 

almost year round. So these people have increased employment 

by some of the mines by 50, 60 per cent, never mind the 

expansions that have gone on at Allan which is on the edge of 

my constituency. I know when I was door knocking in Young, I 

know as we did the 75-minute debate, it was mentioned, you 

know, what did you hear on the doorsteps? As the debate went 

back and forth between the two members, you know, and I was 

thinking, I know what I was hearing at the doorstep in places 

like Young and Watrous and Simpson and Imperial and 

Davidson and Kenaston and Hanley and Dundurn and Thode 

and Shields was. You know what? With the mine expansion 

that’s happening in the PotashCorp and Allan and also 

Colonsay, we’re seeing benefits. We’re seeing huge benefits 

with that expansion. 

 

We’re seeing towns that I visited that in ’99 had empty houses. 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

I used to visit with the mayor and the reeves of the RMs and the 

councillors, and their biggest concern was empty houses, 

people leaving. Now when I meet with them, it is houses are 

full. You know, how can we work on subdivisions? A town like 

Young is working with a developer building houses, expanding 

because of what’s happening in the potash industry. 

 

And the spinoff that comes from that generates that much more 

taxes and that much more revenue for the province. You know, 

the growth of a mine just isn’t just the royalties you get — 

which we do; the people of Saskatchewan are getting a very fair 

share of their potash revenue — but it also benefits everything 

else. How much more tax money is coming to the rolls with, 

you know, we’ve grown probably . . . You know, we’re well 

over the million mark of people and growing every year. Our 

population is growing, adding to the tax rolls, adding to the 

money that also helps health care, helps all the other social 

programs that comes with that industry. 

 

You know, that’s only one industry. I mean agriculture benefits 

hugely, you know, from potash. You know, that’s an economic 

driver of this province too, is agriculture and the potash that’s 

derived too, that the farmers use to fertilize their crops, to grow 

the crops. But also that’s just one industry. 

 

But you can apply that to the oil industry, same thing. In my 

constituency, there’s not huge development yet. But my cousin, 

who is a geologist, he’s working in Calgary now because when 

he left in the ’70s — and he’s the same age as myself — there 

was no jobs here for geologists under the NDP government. 

You know they were trying to privatize Saskoil. He just said 

there was nothing here in Saskatchewan. He just says, it’s just 

automatic. He says, we come out of the university, we’re going. 

I say, I’ve got to work in Alberta, you know. 

 

But I can remember him telling me, he says, you know, under 

where we farm, he says, there’s more than likely oil there. 

There will be potash, he said, for sure. And he says, there’s 

more than likely oil. I mean this province was a sea at one time. 

And he said, you know, the oil may be in our constituency. It 

may be a little harder to get, a little deeper, but he says it’s 

there. But he says, you know, he says, and it’s sad. And he was 

only 19, 20 at the time or 21 when he graduated. He said, you 

know, it’s sad. He says, I’ll probably never see any 

development of our resources in this province under the NDP 

government. 

 

You know, so he went to Alberta. And he did very well for 

himself in the industry, you know, worked there many years in 

fact. He’s retired now. And now with the remarks that’s coming 

from the NDP leadership federally, that’s looking at possibly 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, it is. If he had his way, 

they would drive that back. They would drive the economy 

back, would drive that industry that not only is helping many 

families, just not that work directly in the oil industry. There’s a 

spinoff off it — tire companies, the hotels, the motels, the 

restaurants, people that service vehicles, all the servicing that 

goes with the oil industry, all the technicians, and all the 

environmental work that goes with it. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Because, you know, we have some of the strongest 

environmental regulations in Canada and I know in the world. 

And the oil companies, they welcome that. They want to have a 

good reputation. They don’t want to be known for having a bad 

reputation when it comes to the environment. They are very 

conscious. I know very many people that work in the industry, 

and they are very, very conscious of . . . I think every rig now 

has to have an environmentalist engineer. I don’t know the 

exact term that they use for it. But his role is to make sure that 

there’s no spills, that any oil that’s even changed in the vehicles 

is accounted for. And used oil all goes back to recycle centres, 

oil filters. Anything that is done on the site where the oil rigs 

are is very monitored, very regulated by the province but also 

by the oil companies. I mean they welcome that. They know 

that to drill here in Saskatchewan and to sell their product, you 

have to have a good reputation. You know, they’ve certainly 

worked very well with the government, and they’ve policed 

themselves very well. 

 

And with that, yet, you have a leader from the NDP that is 

basically telling them that they’re running a disease, a Dutch 

disease, that they’re detrimental to the rest of the world, to the 

rest of Canada, you know, basically sending out what I would 

call falsehoods of information that is basically trying to hurt the 

West for the betterment of some eastern votes. 

 

You know, and this motion discusses basically what the 

provincial NDP here is saying, which is nothing, and that 

troubles me. They should be standing up for Saskatchewan 

residents. And I would know that in the city . . . I’m not sure. 

Maybe some of the NDP MLAs but I know the one that ran 

against myself, that ran against myself in Arm River-Watrous 

constituency, would have heard exactly what I heard on the 

doorstep because I mean in a constituency in a small election 

time frame such as we have . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Ask leave to introduce some guests, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you 

and through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce two individuals in the Speaker’s gallery, actually 

people I’ve known for a little while but new employees to the 

building. 

 

One is Mr. Jarret Coels. He has worked in ministry offices 

before and ministers’ offices before but is currently in 

communications in our caucus office. He’s proven to be very 

effective in some of his drafting skills and very rarely do we 

have to correct any of his spelling or grammar. He’s quite good. 

 

Beside him is Ms. Kim Gillies. She’s with us, another one of 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

the newest employees to our office — members of our team, I 

would say, not employees of ours. But they both definitely 

work with us not for us. Kim is again very, very good at her job 

with communications and organizing interviews and, you know, 

making sure we have all the information we need when we’re 

doing our communications duties with our specific newspapers 

and radio and TV throughout our constituencies. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just ask all members on this House 

and the other side of the House to welcome these two very 

important members of our caucus team to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and 

Resource Boom on Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I . . . [inaudible] . . . to join back 

into the debate. You know, we talked about the member that ran 

against me. I know he would have heard that same stuff on the 

doorstep. And I’m thinking, you know, when they have their 

wrap-up, you know, when after the election is over and they 

have their wrap-up — you know, why we lost, why we 

basically got defeated that soundly — you think he would say, 

you know what? You know, maybe we should start looking at 

our policy on natural resources. You know, you’d think he . . . 

And I don’t know if he did or not. I wasn’t privy to what 

happened in the backrooms of their wrap-up session after their 

election. But I was hoping he would take that message to them. 

And he very well may have because I haven’t heard from him 

since then in any retrospect from the NDP. So he may have 

taken that message and then been told to maybe just to see you 

and have a good day. 

 

Even though, I liked him as he ran against me. You know, he 

went out — and he did. He door knocked every door — I’ll say 

that — in every town where he could. He didn’t have much 

help, but he was out there. And so he had heard what I heard on 

every doorstep. He’d have heard the same thing, you know. 

 

But also as we go back to some of the other quotes, I’ll look 

back on the member from Athabasca, you know, his quotes on 

the oil sands. You know, he says: 

 

There’s no question we’d welcome investments, Belanger 

said in reference to the possibility of an oil company 

harvesting the major areas filled with the heaviest, thickest 

form of petroleum discovered at Wallace Creek, Axe 

Lake, Raven Ridge in 2006. 

 

That was a quote from the Northern Pride newspaper. 

 

I also have another quote from the same newspaper, Northern 

Pride newspaper, on March 13th, 2012. He said: 

 

It’s a great opportunity. There’s lots of optimism [at that 

time, 2006]. There was a significant amount of money 

spent which leads one to believe there’s indeed significant 

findings there. 

 

Also with the same paper on March 13th, 2012, he goes on to 

say: 

 

I absolutely hope that someone takes advantage of it. I 

think the region needs it. People were optimistic then, and 

I think they’re optimistic now. 

 

You know, and those are good quotes. You know what that tells 

me? That when he’s back in his constituency, that’s what 

people are telling him — we need the natural resources. We 

need, for the jobs . . . especially northern Saskatchewan. 

They’ve always faced a challenge there for jobs, you know, just 

because it is limited. A lot of the jobs in northern Saskatchewan 

deal with natural resources. And I think the member there 

understands it. Yet when he comes back here to Regina, he 

seems to get a little bit of maybe dome-itis — it’s the kind of 

term we use — and he just gets falling back in the policy of 

what the NDP say. 

 

You know, and I’m glad back home that he’s speaking up for 

his region and for his people because the North will benefit lots 

from the tar sands, from uranium. The companies are . . . That 

is the region that of all Saskatchewan will benefit. And I think 

he understands that we need the resources here, that we need to 

develop the resources, that we need to work with the 

companies. 

 

And yet I find it, that when he’s down here, he won’t say that 

— you know, what Mr. Mulcair had said, his NDP federal 

leader has said — you know what? It’s detrimental to my 

constituency. I don’t know and I can’t say personally that he 

would have actually said that to him. But I would hope that 

even in a private conversation he would say, you know what, 

Mr. Mulcair? This is detrimental to my constituency, to the 

people that need jobs in my area. You should be supporting this 

industry. And how can we foster it to keep growing because it 

will provide jobs for years and years and years, decades and 

decades to come, which a lot of communities in northern 

Saskatchewan need. Yet I’ve never heard him state publicly any 

of that, you know.  

 

And this is what this motion deals with is, I know . . . And the 

other member from Cumberland would have heard the same 

things, would have heard the same things on his doorstep about 

that: how we need to stand up for Saskatchewan, how we need 

to keep developing our natural resources, how this is going to 

help us with our job growth, how it’s going to actually help the 

North develop, how to help the North grow. 

 

And same thing, the member from Cumberland, I’ve never 

heard him publicly state that, you know, what our national 

leader has said is wrong. They’ve never said that. Yet I think 

when they go back home, I think they tell that. I think when 

they’re sitting at coffee rows and sitting with their people in the 

different towns and villages that they visit, that they actually are 

saying that. So I wish they would publicly say that here in 

Regina. 

 

Now some of the other NDP members here, the rest of them, 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

are from what you’d call strictly the cities, you know. There the 

oil industry maybe isn’t quite as understood. They may not hear 

that quite as much on the doorstep.  

 

But I’m pretty sure that . . . I also door knocked for some 

members up there. One of them was for the member from 

Eastview. I remember spending the day up there. And the 

economy was always huge on the doorstep. It was, you know, 

it’s how can we keep Saskatchewan, start to keep it growing to 

keep that boom? Will my son or my daughter have a job here in 

Saskatchewan? You know, you could always tell if it was 

somebody that had kids that were just in high school. That’s 

almost the first thing they’d ask, say, you know what? I want 

my kids to work here in Saskatchewan, which they didn’t have 

that opportunity as much through the ’70s. But the economy 

was talked lots at the doorstep. 

 

Natural resources, how to develop them and how to use the 

money to further help health care and social issues and all the 

things that you need to govern a province properly. And yet 

I’ve never heard any of them ever say, you know, that we 

should be working with the oil companies. I know that that 

stems still from the old days when they, you know, when they 

nationalized it and they started Saskoil. They nationalized the 

potash. And I think most people understood that the oil industry 

was next, that they would have if they hadn’t got voted out in 

’82. The oil industry in Saskatchewan would have been 

nationalized followed probably by the uranium industry shortly 

after that. 

 

We all know what happened to the potash industry when it was 

nationalized. It just went right in the ground. I mean, it just . . . 

There was very little production. There was absolutely no 

growth. There was absolutely no growth in jobs. There was no 

mine expansion. There was none of that. And if they would 

have got a hold of the oil company and they would have got a 

hold of the uranium companies, that’s exactly what we’d have 

seen — that every one of them industries would have been gone 

or driven very close to the ground, and we would be a have-not 

province forever. And I tell you what, the people of 

Saskatchewan have no desire to go back to when they were a 

have-not province, Mr. Speaker, no desire at all. 

 

And I think that’s what goes back to the thinking of Mr. 

Mulcair is, you know, that they didn’t get a hold of the oil 

companies. They didn’t get a hold. They lost control of the 

potash. Because I think in their party there is still that desire or 

that thinking to nationalize, that they can run an oil company 

better, that they can run, that they can run the companies . . . 

and not even better because I think they know they can’t run 

them better than the companies. But that they should own them, 

that they should own and everything should be government run, 

that they should have that Big Brother attitude. And when I 

hear Mulcair speak — and I don’t listen to him too much — but 

I have listened to some of his speeches because it does affect 

Saskatchewan. And it can affect Western Canada, and it can 

affect what happens out here, so I do listen to it. And I still . . . 

And the way he talks, that he actually believes that, I believe, 

the oil companies, the potash, the natural resources are better 

under government control. 

 

And we can talk about potash. We can talk about oil. We can 

talk about natural gas. But also there’s other natural resources 

industries. I mean this is a huge, rich province. You know, 

there’s been exploration of diamonds. There’s been, you know, 

gold. There’s been, some things are . . . Coal has always been 

huge in this province, you know, huge natural resource market. 

 

I mean this is a . . . And for a national leader to basically try to 

put that in jeopardy and yet have the provincial party here not 

really just . . . They didn’t try to distance themselves from it 

just kind of like, yes, you know, he’s probably right. He thinks 

. . . I think he’s, you know, what he’s saying is pretty good, you 

know. No, that’s not. I mean Erin Weir said basically that yes, 

it’s a good idea. We need to tax some more and get some more 

out of them. Well that’s what they started with the potash 

industry, you know. They just didn’t nationalize it overnight. It 

just wasn’t, you know . . . What they started — and my 

memory’s a little faulty on this — but I think they actually 

started to raise the taxes, the royalties. That’s what they started. 

 

[12:45] 

 

I remember when Blakeney ran against Thatcher. I wasn’t that 

old then, but I was still old enough to remember, you know, 

some of the rhetoric that was going on. And I can remember 

Blakeney, I’m pretty sure, pounding the table and saying, you 

know what? We’re not getting enough for natural resources. 

We need to tax them more. We need to hit them more. He 

didn’t say we were going to nationalize them. He didn’t run on 

that platform when he ran against Thatcher. He didn’t ever 

mention that. I can remember that. That part I can remember. 

He never said, we will take that industry over. We will never 

wrestle it from them. We will never take that from them. But 

we’re not getting enough money. 

 

You know, he didn’t use . . . the term Dutch disease hadn’t been 

invented yet, hadn’t been mentioned because that was after that. 

But if it had, that’s the term he’d have used. That’s the term that 

he would have used, was Dutch disease, when he ran against 

Thatcher. He’d have used that and said, we’re having a bit of a 

Dutch disease here and we need to, you know, adjust the 

royalties. We need to like take a little more control. But he 

never mentioned nationalizing. But what did he do? What did 

he do, Mr. Speaker? He nationalized them. He ran them in the 

ground and basically then started nationalizing them and 

worked towards that until he was defeated. 

 

But the next step was Saskoil, and the same thing. They were 

talking the same rhetoric in, I believe, in the ’78 election. My 

counterpart who I took over from, Gerald Muirhead, won that, 

just won it. In ’78, I remember, I think he just defeated Don 

Faris, and it was very, very close. Faris was running on, you 

know, we . . . I believe, we need more money from the oil 

companies. You know, look at what we did to the potash . . . 

[inaudible] . . . like, you know, this is the way to go, you know. 

 

And it took another election until we finally got rid of them. 

But if we hadn’t won that election in ’82, we wouldn’t have an 

oil industry here now. We wouldn’t have a uranium industry. 

We wouldn’t have a growing population. The only thing we’d 

be getting, the only thing we would have would be equalization 

money coming in. That would be it. That would be what would 

be happening in this province right now. 

 

You know, and that is why that worries me. And that’s why this 



November 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

motion is, that’s why that this party, the party opposite, the 

NDP party, should be talking about what their national leader is 

trying to do to this province, trying to hurt it. They should be 

standing up. They should be proud of this province. They 

should want to, like, want it to grow. They should want the 

industries to grow. If you want a province to grow, you have to 

do it through business. You have to do it through resources. 

You have to work with the businesses here. You can’t tell them 

that we’re going to take them over or we’re going to . . . You’re 

going to overtax you or we’re going to hold you back. 

 

You know, the role of a government when it comes to industry 

is through regulation. That’s our role, to make sure that they’re 

following the rules, that they’re doing the environmental rights, 

that they’re doing environmental standards the right way. 

That’s the role of government, not to manage and own the 

natural resources, not to tell companies how to go. Because you 

know . . . And I know that we talk about natural resources, but I 

can’t remember when they actually, when the NDP came in, but 

you know, when they bought shoe factories and they bought 

businesses and that was their philosophy. 

 

The Regina Manifesto was still on their website, was still front 

and centre up to, you know, a very short time ago. It was still 

there, where it talked about the evils of capitalism, you know. 

And it’s still, I think, below their surface a bit because they still 

just cannot say that maybe in 1930 it was all right rhetoric, but 

maybe now the Regina Manifesto was wrong, you know. It’s 

wrong. You know, we’ve moved. It’s time to maybe move on. 

But you know what? They cannot say that. They cannot move 

on. They cannot forget their past, and that — that is their past. 

Let’s be honest. That’s their past, is a nationalization of their 

businesses, natural resources. 

 

You know, I believe that Mulcair has spoke quite a bit against 

the XL pipeline going south. You know, I think if I remember 

right, that there was some federal MPs [Member of Parliament] 

that actually went to Washington to talk about, to talk against 

the XL pipeline. Why? You know, I mean, the pipelines that are 

going in are as environmentally safe . . . It’s the safest way to 

move oil. A lot safer than moving it by rail — a lot quicker and 

a lot cheaper — but a lot safer and moving it through a pipeline 

underground. You know, and why would you talk against it? 

Why would you say that we don’t believe that a pipeline is 

good? I mean, other than you’re just against, you know, growth, 

progress, jobs, and jobs that will benefit, benefit both sides of 

North America, both the United States and ourselves. 

 

You know, we need the jobs. We need the growth. We need the 

energy, plain and simple. We need the energy to survive. We 

need the energy to heat the long-term care facilities, to heat the 

hospitals. You know, we need them natural resources. So why 

would you be basically trying to shut it down, trying to say, you 

know what, no pipeline? So okay, there’s no pipeline. I don’t 

know then where they think the oil industry is going to go, or 

where the power to power vehicles, to drive agriculture, to 

drive business is going to come from if you’re going to shut 

down every pipeline. You’re basically going to shut it down. 

 

And I believe that fundamentally that they are against the oil 

companies that much that they would actually . . . where it 

would be a deterrent to this province and they wouldn’t care. 

You know, that’s what I’m hearing from them or what, I guess, 

what I’m not hearing from them. You don’t stand up and say 

. . . I’ve never heard them say, you know what? We’ve got to 

work together. This is, you know, this is going to provide jobs. 

This is going to provide, can find growth, long-term growth, for 

this province. Huge long-term growth, that this province will be 

a have province for — well I hope — forever. And I think it 

will be. You know we have the opportunities. The opportunity 

for this province is huge. I mean the growth is huge in this 

province, and what we want to do is, you know, as a party here, 

we want to keep that growth. 

 

And so when a national leader down east talks about how it’s 

going to hurt my province, my constituents, I will speak against 

that. I will speak against that because I think that is 

fundamentally wrong that a leadership, a leader in Eastern 

Canada is speaking out to hurt one area of a region. And yet 

and what probably bothers me most is that their leadership 

candidates aren’t saying anything on it. They’re not saying 

anything for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, like right now, they’re out, they’ll be selling 

memberships over the weekend and that. And I’m hoping that if 

some of the NDP hopefuls or NDP members are watching this 

debate, they will ask them, they will ask them or send them an 

email and say, where do you stand on our natural resources? 

Where do you stand on the XL pipeline? Where do you stand 

on the remarks that were made by Mr. Mulcair? Where do you 

stand on that? 

 

So I would ask any of the membership people that are listening 

today to ask them that, to ask them, where do you stand on that? 

You know, I hope that they would answer it in the way that 

they believe it. They believe that the pipeline, to hurt 

Saskatchewan, it’s better to stay with Mulcair and to hurt the 

positive future of Saskatchewan, to come up and say that. Just 

say, you know what? We support the NDP leader, no matter 

what he says. It doesn’t matter what he says, anything. It 

doesn’t matter. 

 

And I would make the same speech if Mulcair was talking 

about the agriculture industry. And that worries me, too, 

because if he thinks, if he thinks that he could get some votes in 

Eastern Canada by saying something about Western Canada 

agriculture, that would be a deterrent to it. You know, whether 

it be trying to slow our agriculture imports to the United States, 

which are huge, I mean we have huge amounts of cattle and 

grains that are now exported to the United States, but also all 

over the world. 

 

You know, and I’m wondering if he speaks against agriculture 

or there’s something that would hurt Western Canada, I wonder 

if they would even stand up for anything? Or would they just 

follow whatever he says, you know? Whatever that Mr. Mulcair 

says, that they will follow and just say, whatever he says that’s 

fine. It probably won’t hurt Saskatchewan. We don’t know that. 

We’ll just let it slide because, man, he’s the leader. He knows 

what he’s talking about. And man, we can never, ever question 

what our federal leader is saying. You know, and that’s what 

I’m getting from there. 

 

And you know, the member, the Leader of the Opposition in 

75-minute debate, he had talked about the backbenchers saying, 

well you’re on the doorstep. You should be, like, speaking up at 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2012 

your caucus and different things. Well why don’t you? Why 

don’t you follow your own advice? What you said in the 

75-minute debate just earlier was, why don’t you? I know 

exactly why — exactly. The Leader of the Opposition was 

hearing on the doorstep, what Mulcair is saying is detrimental 

to the province of Saskatchewan. I haven’t heard him yet say 

anything on that line yet, you know. So for him to say . . . You 

know, it’s funny, it’s almost like, listen to what I say but I’m 

not going to do it, you know. 

 

Like he made comments along them lines basically in the 

75-minute debate that, oh, you should be listening at the 

doorstep. Well I know what they’re hearing at the doorstep. I 

know exactly what they’re hearing on the doorstep, that what 

Mr. Mulcair said was wrong, that you should be standing up for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because I know when I go door to door . . . And it doesn’t 

matter. When I go back home on the weekend, you know, you 

talk to people. I mean they’re proud of this province. They’re 

proud of the growth that’s growing. They’re proud of what’s 

happening, you know. And I know they’re just saying: just keep 

it going, just keep the growth going. They know that it has to 

grow through natural resources, has to grow through 

agriculture, has to grow through manufacturing. All of them are 

all in conjunction with one another. That’s how you run a 

province. You know, they all support one another. 

 

You know, we have a great natural resource. That economy that 

just benefits our manufacturing, it helps our growth, the growth 

with the population. It also helps the growth with the towns. It’s 

a circle that needs to be like this. If you want a growing 

economy, all sectors have to be basically firing. And they want 

to shut down part of that engine. They want to say, hey, whoa, 

whoa, we’re going to shut down part of the engine. It’s not 

going to matter to the other part. 

 

Well I tell you what: I farm, and you blow two pistons on a 

six-cylinder tractor, you ain’t going anywhere. And that’s what 

they’re looking to shut down. They’re looking to shut down 

part of that engine and saying, well, it’s not going to affect the 

rest of the engine. It’s not going to hurt it. You’re still going to 

be able to run away. You’re still going to be able to fire up that 

tractor. You’re still going to be able to go. Well you’re not 

going. You’re not. 

 

And that is what this motion deals with, is that hurting part of 

our industry, part of that circle that drives this province, that 

keeps this province growing, when he speaks against that, that’s 

what he’s speaking against. He’s speaking against the people in 

Saskatchewan. He’s speaking against the workers in 

Saskatchewan. He’s speaking against the industry. And he’s 

speaking against every constituent in my constituency that has 

been benefiting from the growth of this great province. And he 

speaks against that. 

 

That is why this motion is on board, and it is why I wish the 

members opposite would be standing up to the NDP leader and 

saying, you know what, this is important. This is important for 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Mulcair. You should not be 

trying to shut down a part of our industry. You should be not 

speaking against it. You should be saying, how can we work 

together in a country and stand up for all of Canada, not just 

where you’ve won some seats in Quebec or Ontario because he 

did not win any in Saskatchewan and very little in western 

Canada. They are not speaking . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 

adjournment, this Assembly stands adjourned until Monday at 

1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:01.] 

 

 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1953 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1953 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1953 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1953 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1953 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1953 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1954 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1954 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1954 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1954 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1954 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1954 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1954 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1954 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1976 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1955 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1955 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Co-operative Alliance Youth Arts Contest 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1955 

 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1955 

 Saskatchewan Authors Win Literary Awards  

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1956 

 University of Saskatchewan Awarded Canadian Excellence Research Chair 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1956 

 Anti-Bullying Week 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1956 

 Pay it Forward Splash Park 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1956 

 Royalty Rates and Dutch Disease 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1957 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Potential Changes to Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1957 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1957 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1958 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1958 

 Planning for Closure of Valley View Centre 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1959 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1959 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1960 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 67 — The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1962 

 Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1962 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Performance of Government 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1962, 1972 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1965 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1966, 1972 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1967 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1969, 1972 

  Tochor ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1970, 1972 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1972 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1972 



 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Impact of Western Canadian Energy and Resource Boom on Central Canadian Manufacturing Sector 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1974 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


