




















































Hansard: May 03, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 40A  THURSDAY, MAY 3, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1399 

 May 3, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is my honour on behalf of the minister, the 

member for Kelvington-Wadena, to introduce a school group 

this morning seated in the gallery opposite. These students, Mr. 

Speaker, are from Wadena Elementary. There are 30 grade 4 

students. They are accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Lindsey 

Harvey, Ms. Tracey Scheschuk. And also chaperones that are 

along are Hilary Govan, Dean Elmy, Jackie Peterson, and 

Myrna Hart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

the grade 4 elementary students from Wadena School and all of 

the teachers and chaperones to their legislature this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

introduce a group of 40 high achievers from A.E. Peacock 

Collegiate in Moose Jaw. They‟re seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. A.E. Peacock is synonymous with top performance, 

not only in scholastics but in high school activities of all kinds: 

drama, entertainment, and other extracurricular things, 

including their Junior Achievement which they won national 

honours last year. 

 

This year five of their students are going to the Skills Canada 

national competition in Edmonton later this month. And one of 

those students, Jackson Campbell, is with us today. Jackson just 

gave a little wave. So he‟s going to be competing in the 

autobody repair. Along with them is their teacher, Ms. Carrie 

Kiefer. Ms. Kiefer brings her students here every year in 

emphasis on the importance of the political system and the 

political process in creating legislation. Also welcome the 

educational assistant, Barry Tysdal, along with the drivers, Roy 

Page and Greg Gorski. I ask all members to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

presenting a petition today on the highway problem, and the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Therefore, we in the prayer that reads as follows, 

respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan undertake to upgrade the section of 

Highway 165 between Beauval and the English River 

First Nations by adding proper lighting for pedestrian 

traffic, by adding space for pedestrians on the highways 

and the bridges, and by properly servicing the road with 

the material needed for a busy, heavy haul road. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Beauval, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m presenting a 

petition today to the government asking them to stop increasing 

the number of politicians in Saskatchewan and also to include 

young people under the age of 18 when they draw the new 

boundaries under The Constituency Boundaries Act. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to not increase the number of 

politicians in the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, 

and to continue including those individuals under the age 

of 18 in the determination of constituency boundaries. 

 

And the people who‟ve signed this petition are from Saskatoon, 

Wakaw, Battleford, and Meota. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as 

it relates to education in this province, specifically concern over 

a government that‟s vacant of any vision for publicly funded 

education in this province and that‟s spending millions of 

dollars, if you can imagine, on more politicians at the same 

times that it‟s cutting in the classroom, Mr. Speaker. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan‟s demographic and population changes, 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of seniors who want the Sask Party 

government to support the Saskatchewan seniors‟ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors‟ bill of rights which 

provides Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Spring Festival of New Plays 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure to rise in the 

House today to highlight the 2012 Spring Festival of Plays 

being held right here in Regina this week. Organized by the 

Saskatchewan Playwrights Centre, the festival is celebrating 30 

years of Saskatchewan plays, from April 30th to May 5th, at the 

University of Regina. 

 

The festival features a number of public readings and full-day 

workshops showcasing the works of local playwrights. Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan Playwrights Centre is an unique 

playwright-driven organization that strives to foster the 

development of Saskatchewan plays and promote the 

playwriting community of the province. 

 

Through its activities, the SPC [Saskatchewan Playwrights 

Centre] has supported and developed an impressive list of some 

of Canada‟s foremost playwrights including Ken Mitchell, Rex 

Deveraux, Eugene Stickland, Connie Gault, Dianne Warren, 

Don Kerr, Mansel Robinson, and Dan Macdonald, to name a 

few. 

 

As the only organization in Saskatchewan fully devoted to the 

development of new plays, it serves not only the playwrights of 

Saskatchewan but also the theatres of the province and Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, I applaud the work of the Saskatchewan 

Playwrights Centre and its contributions to the development of 

local artists in Saskatchewan, through events like the Festival of 

Plays. I ask my colleagues to join with me in thanking the 

playwrights, staff, and volunteers for making this wonderful 

event happen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Good News for Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatoon is one of the prairie region‟s most beautiful cities, as 

well as one of Saskatchewan‟s top economic engines. 

 

Strong economic growth has translated into great employment 

numbers. In March 2012, there were 3,488 job posting in 

Saskatoon on saskjobs.ca, a year-over-year increase of 64 per 

cent. As well, population numbers have improved. Over the last 

five years, Saskatoon has seen population increase of 13 per 

cent, with the current estimated population of approximately 

234,300. 

 

Saskatoon is also ranked as one of Canada‟s top entrepreneurial 

cities, demonstrating — among other things — a strong 

entrepreneurial presence of positive business prospects and 

favourable free enterprise policy. Accordingly Saskatoon is 

seeing an increased presence of major business headquarters. 

Hitachi Canada recently announced the centralization of its 

Canadian operations, and BHP relocated the head office of its 

diamond and specialty products division to the bridge city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while Saskatoon is growing economically, the 

spirit and enthusiasm of its people continues to be the city‟s 

strongest asset. The Saskatoon Premier‟s Dinner was held last 

Thursday, and when you can get 1,400 people together for a 

dinner, you know things are going well. I would ask the 

members of this Assembly to join me in applauding the work of 

Saskatoon citizens and their continued dedication on improving 

their great city. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Impressive Performance at a National Debating 

Tournament 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m delighted to share 

with my colleagues in the Assembly today some wonderful 

news. Two Regina students, Nasra Moumin and Areeb Salim, 

who attend Campbell Collegiate, have debated their way to 

becoming one of the top debate teams in the country. As a 

team, Mr. Speaker, Nasra and Areeb placed second at the 2012 

Canadian Senior Debating Tournament held in Montreal last 

weekend. Nasra and Areeb, who have been friends since they 

were five, are an impressive team, Mr. Speaker. I had the 

pleasure of observing both students debate last year at the 

Junior National Championships as they wowed the audience 

and captured the title. 

 

It is truly inspiring to see our youth so engaged, informed, and 

well versed on such complex issues and to be able to articulate 

incredibly compelling arguments. These are young leaders in 

our province today, and I am certain they will continue their 

positive leadership into the future. Both Nasra and Areeb are 

members of the Saskatchewan elocution and debate society, an 

organization which has contributed significantly to the lives of 

thousands of students, helping to shape them into confident 

citizens and critical thinkers that can successfully defend their 

positions in any forum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating Nasra and Areeb on their great success at the 

national level and to extend thanks to everyone involved at 

SEDA [Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association] as 

well as the teachers that support these enriching learning 

opportunities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Corporate Income Tax Rebate on New Rental Housing 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to inform members that applications for the corporate 

income tax rebate on new rental housing is now available. Mr. 

Speaker, this new incentive effectively reduces provincial 

corporate income tax rate on the corporation‟s eligible rental 

income from 12 per cent to the 2 per cent small business tax 

rate. The tax rebate is earned each year for a period of up to 10 

consecutive years after eligible residential units become 

available for rent and the corporation submits the appropriate 

documentation. 

 

We expect, Mr. Speaker, that as many as 10,000 new rental 

units will qualify for the tax rebate. Funding for the new tax 

rebate is estimated at $35 million for the first five years of the 

program. The rebate will be provided to eligible corporations 

whose sole purpose is the development of multi-unit rental 

housing in Saskatchewan. Projects can be located, Mr. Speaker, 

in urban and rural communities across the province. Eligible 

rental housing must be newly constructed, multi-unit rental 

housing units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are keeping our promise, and we‟re proud that 

this measure will help more Saskatchewan people find safe, 

quality rental housing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

A Lifetime Dedication to Community Service 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟d 

like to take this opportunity to commend Mr. Lyle Johnson, a 

constituent of Moose Jaw Wakamow, for receiving two recent 

awards: the Moose Jaw Honours Award presented by Heritage 

Moose Jaw, along with receiving the Lifetime Achievement 

Award citation from the Cadet Instructors Cadre. 

 

Lyle has spent a lifetime promoting local interests, events, and 

citizens of the friendly city in many different capacities, while 

at the same time currently holding the title of lieutenant colonel 

with the Canadian Cadet Organizations, an organization that he 

has been involved with for over 43 years. 

 

He has been a remarkable leader in numerous community 

organizations, including the United Way, Moose Jaw Crime 

Stoppers, the Miss Canada Pageant, a motorcycle safety 

instructor, city of Moose Jaw rec board member, executive 

member of various organizations, and also assisted in many 

local theatre productions. Lyle has been a commitment to 

drama and musical theatre students during his 36 years of 

teaching at Peacock Collegiate, requiring the true passion that 

he exudes. 

 

In November 2002, he was also presented with the Queen‟s 

Golden Jubilee Medal by the Lieutenant Governor of 

Saskatchewan after being twice nominated for his involvement 

with dedication to youth. Mr. Speaker, I believe all members 

would agree that Lyle Johnson‟s lifetime dedication to 

community service is something all Saskatchewan residents can 

be proud of. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

International Day of the Midwife 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saturday May 5th is 

the International Day of the Midwife, and I would like to take a 

moment to acknowledge and celebrate midwifery services in 

the province. Our government has just announced its intention 

to invest $500,000 in additional resources over the next year to 

support expansion of midwifery services in the province. Our 

government will continue to work to recruit Canadian and 

internationally trained midwives to our province through our 

bursary programs and support for assessment programs such the 

multi-jurisdictional midwifery bridging program. 

 

The midwifery model of care is an excellent example of 

patient-centred service. Under this model, midwives work as 

specialists in normal birth and provide women with another 

option for the management of their pregnancy, the delivery, and 

postpartum care of their children. 

 

Saskatoon Health Region first began offering midwifery 

services in January ‟09. Since that time, Cypress and Regina 

Health Regions and All Nations Healing Hospital have also 

added this service. Right now there are 11 midwives practising 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 580 babies have been delivered by midwives since 

‟09. Two additional health regions have indicated an interest in 

developing midwifery services, and we look forward to 

continuing discussions with them to achieve that goal. Mr. 

Speaker, our government will continue working to support 

services that put the needs of patients first. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Special Olympics Bowling Tournament Awards 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, 

April 28th I, along with my daughter Courtney, had the honour 

of attending the Special Olympics Bob Pedde Bowling 

Tournament awards banquet. 

 

This is a very special tournament held every year in Saskatoon 

in memory of long-time volunteer, Mr. Bob Pedde. The 

competition also serves as a qualifier for the provincial special 

games to be held in Saskatoon in June 2013. There were over 

200 athletes and coaches at the provincial 5- and 10-pin 

bowling finals representing eight regions in the province. 

 

At the awards banquet, Courtney and I had the pleasure of 

presenting Saskatoon‟s Dwight Safroniuk the Canadian Tenpin 

Federation Hazel McLeary Leadership Award — the first male 

winner ever. Mr. Speaker, on receiving the award, Dwight said: 

 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

When I joined Special Olympics, I was happy because the 

coaches and other athletes there were loving people that 

don‟t really care about what kind of disability I have. 

They were friendly and encouraging, very understanding, 

supportive, and they became my family. 

 

Even though not everyone won a medal, Mr. Speaker, we need 

to celebrate each and every Special Olympian for following 

their dreams, meeting their goals, and having a great time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

athletes who participated in the championship. We are very 

proud of them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Review of Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the Premier was very 

specific when he said on social media during the election 

campaign on October 31st, 2011, “Could have been clearer: no 

opting out of unions or dues.” Yet now he has opened up this 

issue for discussion in his attack-style consultation paper. 

 

The Premier‟s record with working people is not good. The 

United Nations and the Court of Queen‟s Bench have said that 

he‟s violating their human rights and violating the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms with Bill 5. Why is the Premier breaking 

his election promise by saying that members should be able to 

opt out of paying the dues when he was so clear in October? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank the member 

for the question. Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the consultation 

process that‟s underway, the Minister of Justice was pretty clear 

that whatever comes from this process on the issue that the hon. 

member has raised, we understand the Lavigne case of 1992 in 

terms of individuals, individuals opting out of paying union 

dues, Mr. Speaker. That‟s quite a bit different than saying, and 

opening up for discussion, this notion that if you‟re in high 

school, and you‟re 16 years old, not as an individual but as a 

group, maybe you ought not to pay union dues. That‟s the 

question we‟re asking, and we‟ll see what the people of the 

province have to say. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as the Premier‟s indicated, the 

Lavigne versus the Ontario Public Service Employees Union 

decision from the Supreme Court of Canada upheld that union 

members need to pay their dues in spite of any objections. The 

Rand formula was implemented as the result of a decision by 

Mr. Justice Ivan Rand of the Supreme Court of Canada saying 

that members can opt out of the union but can‟t opt out of the 

dues. Canadian courts have upheld the right of unions to collect 

union dues from workers. My question to the Premier: why is 

he asking Saskatchewan people to consider something which is 

against the law? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I wouldn‟t suggest that 

legislation in this province or any other province that excludes 

an entire group — perhaps the disabled, perhaps high school 

kids, that are working in a union shop — that excludes an entire 

group from paying union dues. I think it‟s a little bit, a little bit 

bold to say that that is against law or against precedent. The 

Lavigne case was about individuals opting out of union dues. 

The Minister of Justice and the Labour minister actually 

referenced the case yesterday and was clear and said the 

intention of the government, should this proceed after the 

consultation, isn‟t that individuals opt out of a particular union. 

That‟s effectively right-to-work. That‟s not what we‟re talking 

about. 

 

We are asking the question of Saskatchewan people, do you 

think it‟s fair that a high school kid who‟s trying to earn a little 

bit of extra money pays union dues? There‟s no other 

deductions on that person‟s cheque, maybe a little bit for EI 

[employment insurance], depending on how they made, but no 

tax, no pension. But for these kids that might have a job like 

that, they‟ll come home and that paycheque stub will show that 

the union took their union dues. Mr. Speaker, we‟re asking, is 

that fair? Or should maybe the union do the right thing and say, 

kids get a break at the theatre. They get a break for admissions 

to all manner of things. Let‟s give them a break on union dues 

as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in Canada we have a constitution 

and a Charter of Rights which protects all people. But we know 

that this Premier is already trying to exclude those under 18 in 

his new election law. Here we have another example of the 

Premier trying to change the rules in the constitution and the 

Charter of Rights and the decisions of our court to exclude 

people under 18. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a modern economy, we need fair and effective 

labour laws. The people of Saskatchewan throughout our 

history have worked hard and struggled to advance workers‟ 

rights. Meanwhile the government‟s introducing a whole series 

of attacks. An obvious example of one of these proposals could 

affect the 40-hour workweek and overtime. The 40-hour 

workweek is actually an ILO [International Labour 

Organization] convention. 

 

My question to the Premier: has it come to this — longer 

workweeks, more overtime at straight-time pay? What‟s next? 

Taking back the weekend? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear. The 

Saskatchewan Party government is in favour of all weekends in 

the province of Saskatchewan, the long ones and the 

regular-length ones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting, the member just referenced the 

electoral map issue that‟s been raised by members opposite. 

The NDP [New Democratic Party] say they‟re so concerned 

about the fact that we‟re going to draw an electoral map around 

people who are actually of the age of majority who can vote in 

an election, 18 years and over. If they really cared about kids 18 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

and under, they should participate in our consultation process. 

And they should, they should put forward the notion that kids 

shouldn‟t have to pay union dues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in estimates, the 

Premier said, “. . . the best indicator of future behaviour is past 

behaviour.” Well the perfect example of that is the Premier‟s 

attack on working people. His previous legislation was tossed 

out by the courts for violating international human rights and 

the Canadian Constitution. Based on past behaviour, why 

would Saskatchewan people think his sweeping review of 

labour legislation is anything more than an attack on working 

people and the rights and protections they have earned over the 

last hundred years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what is wrong with asking the 

question in a consultation process on a needed labour review? 

And that‟s what we‟re at at this point, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Justice, the Labour minister, didn‟t announce 

government policy yesterday. He announced questions that 

we‟re going to ask of stakeholders and to the people for them to 

weigh in on potential labour changes and updates. 

 

What would be wrong, Mr. Speaker, with someone putting 

forward the notion that maybe the disabled or kids who are in 

high school ought not to pay union dues? What‟s wrong with 

having that discussion? It‟s not about individuals opting out. 

It‟s about an entire group. The member raised . . . If you listen 

to the members opposite, specifically that member‟s question, 

they paint this province as if it‟s some terrible place in violation 

of international human rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the best thing we can do for labour in this 

province is make sure this economy‟s growing and leading the 

nation, make sure that there are jobs for people. And you know, 

they say that this province is violating human rights. You 

wouldn‟t be able to tell it from the thousands of people from all 

over the world that are finding hope and opportunity in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, why should anyone believe the 

Premier today? On October 31st he said, “Could have been 

clearer: no opting out of unions or dues.” Was he saying what 

he meant then? Or is he saying it now? Or when will he tell us 

exactly what he‟s up to? But there‟s no question that what he 

said last fall was clear. He said it himself. It could have been 

clearer. So my question to the Premier is, why should we trust 

him when he says things about working people and about 

labour issues? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The member asks a fair question. It‟s the 

same question he started with and perhaps my answer wasn‟t 

clear. The tweet in question was referencing individuals opting 

out of unions. Specifically yesterday, specifically I‟m told the 

Labour minister referenced the case that the honourable 

member presented in the second question, the Lavigne case 

from the early ‟90s that what was pretty clear in the Supreme 

Court about allowing that to happen. Mr. Speaker, it‟s less 

clear, certainly less clear, and there may be an opportunity for 

groups like the disabled, like kids, to be exempted from paying 

union dues. Not to individually opt out, but to be exempted. 

Why? Because that might be the fair thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the union would represent those people, 

absolutely. And the union will do its work on behalf of all 

members whether they‟re under 18 or not. But I think it would 

be reasonable for unions actually to get on board with this and 

say, you know, we think it‟s a good idea. We think kids should 

keep more money. And maybe there are other groups as well. 

But we‟ll listen to all the stakeholders, including the NDP, in 

terms of what we should do going forward. In the meantime, 

Mr. Speaker, the good news is that this province is doing the 

best thing it could possibly do by working families, and that‟s 

creating jobs at a record pace, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Supply of Nurses 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last December I 

asked a lot of questions in this House, Mr. Speaker, about the 

shortage of operating room nurses in the Regina Qu‟Appelle 

Health Region. At that time, the regional medical association 

held an extraordinary meeting in order to deal with the shortage 

of O.R. [operating room] time, but the minister was too busy 

deciding whether there was or wasn‟t a conflict of interest with 

respect to his profit-driven surgical centre approach in order to 

fix this issue, Mr. Speaker, of a shortage of O.R. nurses in the 

health region. Mr. Speaker, we know the situation has not 

improved one bit. 

 

My question to the minister: can you report to this House how 

often operating rooms in the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health Region 

are closed because of a shortage of nurses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can report to you that 

the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health Region has faced some 

challenges regarding the operating room nurse complement. 

They‟ve had some nurses that are off because of pregnancy, 

Mr. Speaker. They‟ve had some nurses that are off because of 

injury. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, the Regina Qu‟Appelle 

Health Region are taking steps. They‟ve got a number of nurses 

taking the operating room course that will certainly be coming 

on stream very, very soon, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we 

have the proper complement of nurses in the Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Health Region to continue to drive down wait 

times. Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s look where we started four and a half years 

ago. Four and a half years ago, under the NDP government, we 

had the longest wait-list in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as of today, Mr. Speaker, there are the fewest amount of people 

on waiting lists, Mr. Speaker, since those waiting lists were 

established back in 2004. 

 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

There is more work to do, Mr. Speaker, but we‟re on the right 

track. We‟re reducing wait times. There is work to do in Regina 

Qu‟Appelle. They‟re facing those challenges, absolutely, Mr. 

Speaker, but we‟re on the right track. We would never want to 

go back to the NDP and the longest wait-list in Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Despite the bluster, 

here‟s what we know about the situation in operating rooms in 

the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health Region. Ideally there are 18 

operating rooms running every day. We know because of a lack 

of O.R. nurses, Mr. Speaker, that that number has been down to 

13 operating rooms. We know that officials in the health region 

have said that “It‟s a growing problem for the past year.” And, 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the lack of O.R. time affects 

surgeries with respect to delays and putting them off. 

 

My question to the minister: will he admit that these four points 

are indeed true? Or will he disagree with officials in the Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Health Region? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve already identified 

that the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health Region has identified some 

issues around the operating room nurse complement. As a 

result, they‟re not able to run at full capacity right now. But we 

feel that they should soon be up and running with full capacity 

once the extra nurses are trained, Mr. Speaker. In fact I was 

talking to the CEO [chief executive officer] Dwight Nelson just 

the other day about this very issue. They‟re on top of it, and 

they‟re taking steps to rectify it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will also say, you know, the wait times have certainly 

gone down in the province. What has gone up in the province is 

the number of nurses working in this province, Mr. Speaker. In 

2007-2008, Mr. Speaker, we had a baseline set of nurses, 

around 9,000. I‟m glad to report, Mr. Speaker, that today over 

10,000 nurses are working in this province, some 950 more 

nurses working in Saskatchewan than under the NDP. There are 

certain areas we need to continue to attract and recruit, Mr. 

Speaker, but it‟s a far cry from where we were under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what we know is that there are 

operating rooms within the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health Region 

that are sitting idle because of a shortage of O.R. nurses. Mr. 

Speaker, we know this is affecting surgeries and the ability of 

physicians to provide surgeries to the patients of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, we also know that there are nurses employed in 

for-profit surgical clinics here in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister was rather aloof in December, as he 

is now, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the role that the nurses 

employed in the private surgical centres play in draining 

resources from the existing operating rooms within the Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Health Region. My question to the minister: is he 

concerned with what has been described as a growing problem 

over the past year, and does he think, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps 

the existence of nurses working in the for-profit clinics is 

having an effect on the ability to have operating room nurses in 

the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health Region? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 

the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health Region is addressing the issue in 

their area, in this one specific area. I am pleased to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that our government has added $2 million to training 

programs. That‟s increasing the number of operating room 

nursing training seats by 18, Mr. Speaker, fast-tracking the 

program. It takes less than 26 weeks, or 23 weeks to finish the 

program. 

 

We‟re taking steps to address that not only provincially but also 

on a regional level, Mr. Speaker. But I will say, it‟s very 

interesting and obviously the NDP have not changed their tact 

or their philosophy, Mr. Speaker. We‟re seeing private clinics 

in both Saskatoon and Regina that are driving down wait times, 

Mr. Speaker. Their ideology would far rather have people wait 

years on wait-lists, which is exactly what happened under the 

NDP, than ever look for other resources that can help out. The 

private clinics are not draining resources from the public 

system, Mr. Speaker. It‟s right in the contract, Mr. Speaker, to 

say that they cannot recruit directly from our public facilities. 

So his assertion is absolutely wrong. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Medical Training Programs 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that there 

are issues with the number of nurses, with respiratory 

therapists, in the province. We also know, Mr. Speaker, that 

here in Saskatchewan we have the lowest number of 

occupational therapists on a per capita basis in the country. And 

we also know there is an urgent need for speech-language 

pathologists in our province. 

 

Back on December 17th, 2008, the Dean of Medicine said, Mr. 

Speaker, that he expected to have a training program at the 

University of Saskatchewan up and running for 

speech-language pathologists and occupational therapists by 

2012 — this year, Mr. Speaker. But we know that is not the 

case. In fact a draft discussion of a document paper that is 

circulated by the College of Medicine, Mr. Speaker, does not 

even list speech-language pathology and occupational therapy 

as planned programs under the College of Medicine. 

 

My question to the minister: Is the Sask Party government 

committed to train occupational therapists and speech-language 

pathologists in Saskatchewan, or have they indicated to the 

College of Medicine that this is no longer a priority? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve worked very hard 

in the past four and a half years to make sure that we have the 

proper complement of all health care professionals. Those 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

health care professionals that we do not have training programs 

for in the province, we buy seats from other jurisdictions across 

Canada such as Alberta to fill some of those roles. We‟re 

looking at an occupational therapy program for Saskatchewan, 

absolutely. But on some of the professions, there isn‟t the base 

or demand in Saskatchewan to start our own programs, so we 

buy seats from other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I find it absolutely amazing that we spent three hours in this 

House yesterday afternoon and through Premier‟s estimates and 

there wasn‟t one question on health care, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, who was a former 

Health minister, obviously didn‟t feel it warranted not even one 

question during Premier‟s estimates, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely 

we have more work to do. But, Mr. Speaker, according to the 

NDP and Premier‟s estimates, we‟re on the right track. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — It‟s a very interesting position the minister put 

forward because he said for some programs there‟s not the 

demand or the need for training our own health professionals so 

we pay for spots out of province. That is true, Mr. Speaker, in 

some situations, but that‟s a very different story than what the 

Minister of Advanced Education and other members of the 

front bench have said over the past years. For some reason, Mr. 

Speaker, the Dean of the College of Medicine thought that it 

was possible and likely to have a program up and running by 

2012. In fact, given in estimates in previous years with the 

Minister of Advanced Education, he has said that he thought it 

may in fact be up and running by 2012, which is this year. 

 

We know OTs [occupational therapist] provide such important 

care to people that have acquired brain injuries, people that 

suffer from strokes. We know that speech-language 

pathologists are so important, especially when we see the huge 

reduction in the number of educational assistants in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: why has he failed so miserably on 

this issue? The dean thought there would be a program running 

by 2012. The minister said there could be a program by 2012, 

yet there‟s no indication. What‟s the deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite knows very well that we 

continue to purchase 15 seats a year at the University of 

Alberta. The deal, as he just asked, Mr. Speaker, is quite simply 

this: Mr. Speaker, where would that be housed? Where would 

such a program be housed? Oh, that would be housed in the 

Academic Health Sciences building that was announced by the 

members opposite in 2003, but construction didn‟t start until 

after the 2007 election when we rolled up our sleeves and said, 

let‟s get down to work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve been very clear, Mr. Speaker, with the College of 

Medicine and with the health sciences at the University of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, let‟s take first things first. Let‟s 

answer that question: first you need the building before you can 

have the program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you would think there would be 

some clear timelines from members opposite with respect to 

when this program would be up and operating. Mr. Speaker, we 

know that in fact, as the minister has said in the past, for the 

program to be functional the College of Medicine needs to be 

off probation. What we have seen under this minister‟s watch is 

notice of probation being given to the College of Medicine 

under this Minister of Advanced Ed.  

 

We have also seen the minister, Mr. Speaker, instead of being 

busy talking about when there would be a training program for 

OTs and SLPs [speech-language pathologist], he‟s been very 

busy, Mr. Speaker, maxing out the debt at the University of 

Saskatchewan, offloading $100 million to the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan]. He‟s been very busy, Mr. 

Speaker, not providing operating funding to the Health Sciences 

building in the years ahead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: when will he be clear on the 

training program for occupational therapists and 

speech-language pathologists in Saskatchewan? When will this 

program be up and running? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll just make reference to 

April 4th of this year, where vice president of the University of 

Saskatchewan, vice president, research, Richard Florizone, has 

said, “There‟s no question about the province‟s commitment to 

medical health education and research,” Mr. Speaker.  

 

What this does is complement Peter MacKinnon‟s letter that 

goes back to August 17th that, Mr. Speaker, speaks specifically 

to the track record of the members opposite regarding the 

Academic Health Sciences building and associated programs 

that can be facilitated through that building.  

 

Mr. Speaker, here it is, a quote from Peter MacKinnon: 

 

A decade ago, our College of Medicine faced existential 

issues regarding resources, faculty, and facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it continues: 

 

Today those challenges have been rectified as confirmed 

by the college‟s accreditation site visit this spring. The 

Government of Saskatchewan [this government, Mr. 

Speaker] has done its part. With the largest and most 

numerous accreditation issues resolved, there remain a 

number of matters for the university to work on, and you 

have my assurance that we will deal with these in a timely 

manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of track record that this 

government has. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Massey 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people do not want 

millions of dollars more spent on more politicians. 

Saskatchewan people do not want millions of more dollars 

spent on posh offices, Mr. Speaker. What Saskatchewan people 

want are programs like occupational therapy and 

speech-language pathology being provided here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced Ed has not taken 

this to heart. Instead what we have seen from him in recent 

weeks, Mr. Speaker, is the off-loading of almost $100 million 

of debt onto the University of Saskatchewan. Instead, Mr. 

Speaker, what we‟ve seen is the minister shortchanging the 

University of Saskatchewan in its operating grant. Instead, Mr. 

Speaker, what we have seen is an absence of funds for ongoing 

operating at the Health Sciences building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister is making the financial situation at 

the University of Saskatchewan tighter and tighter, and that is 

having an effect, it would appear, on the ability to roll out 

programs as promised, as expected by the dean. My question to 

the minister: will he admit that his actions, financially, to the 

University of Saskatchewan are having a negative effect? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment, and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can‟t wait to hear 

from the dean because I think the member opposite has just 

appropriated his voice, and I think probably there‟ll be some 

implications to that. 

 

But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, in about five budgets, Mr. 

Speaker, $1.5 billion to the University of Saskatchewan. In this 

budget alone, more than $304 million. Mr. Speaker, that 

includes making investments in key areas, Mr. Speaker, where 

the members opposite turn their back. 

 

When we came into power, Mr. Speaker, for example, the 

Western College of Veterinary Medicine was tarped. They 

walked away from that project, Mr. Speaker, incomplete. We 

said, lets get that done. Mr. Speaker, they hadn‟t turned a stone 

of attention to the Academic Health Sciences building, Mr. 

Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, both wings are being constructed. 

We see real progress on that campus, Mr. Speaker. And those 

are just a couple of examples.  

 

In addition to focusing on the University of Saskatchewan, 

we‟ve put real dollars in the hands of students for the graduate 

retention program, to the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship 

that‟s forthcoming, for the innovation and opportunity 

scholarship. More to do, Mr. Speaker, but record investments 

for our students and the people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced Ed has 

talked about a few things in this exchange, but he has not 

addressed the primary question, the primary issue with these 

questions, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to a training program 

for speech-language pathology and occupational therapy here in 

Saskatchewan at the University of Saskatchewan, the question 

is what is this government‟s commitment to that program? 

When will it come into place? When can Saskatchewan 

students expect to be able to enrol in a speech-language 

pathology and occupational therapy program here in 

Saskatchewan? When? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we know how important 

occupational therapists are to the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s why we continue to invest, as the members 

opposite did at the University of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the member opposite misses, Mr. Speaker, is that you 

actually need a physical space, Mr. Speaker, to hold such a 

program. It‟s too bad that the members opposite couldn‟t have 

started the construction in 2003 when they made the 

announcements. It‟s too bad in 2005 they couldn‟t have started 

the construction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We rolled up our sleeves. We‟ve started the construction. 

People across the province can see that under way today. That‟s 

one of the critical conditions as we explore options for 

occupational therapists, Mr. Speaker. We‟re getting the 

building done so we can consider the program. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Moe: — I ask for leave to make an introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Rosthern-Shellbrook has 

requested leave to do an introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to all 

members of this Assembly, I would like to introduce to you, 

Mr. David Knight. David is a constituent of the 

Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency and he‟s also general 

manager of Sakâw Askiy Management Inc., which is based out 

of Prince Albert. I would like to ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming Mr. David Knight to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — At this time, I would also like to do an 

introduction. We have seated in the Speaker‟s gallery in the 

front row, the Provincial Ombudsman, Mr. Kevin Fenwick, 

along with two staff from his office, Aaron Orban and Greg 

Sykes. I would ask the Assembly to welcome them here today. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d ask for 

leave to make a motion regarding the appointment of the Public 

Interest Disclosure Commissioner. 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to do a motion regarding the Public Interest Disclosure 

Commissioner. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of the Public Interest Disclosure 

Commissioner 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That pursuant to sections 27(3), (4), and (6) of The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act, the Ombudsman, Kevin Fenwick, 

Q.C., be appointed to the Public Interest Disclosure 

Commissioner. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That pursuant to subsections 27(3), (4), and (6) of The 

Public Interest Disclosure Act, the Ombudsman, Kevin 

Fenwick, Q.C., be appointed the Public Interest Disclosure 

Commissioner. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Does the Assembly agree to adoption of the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Priorities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure today 

to join in on the discussion or to begin the discussion on the 

motion that we will be debating here in the 75-minute debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that we‟re bringing forward today is 

related to issues that are at the heart of what Saskatchewan 

people care about. It is related to issues about the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s related to some of 

the concerning aspects we‟ve seen come out of the positions 

and the decisions made by members opposite with respect to 

some of their policy and budgetary decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, specifically this issue has to do about . . . Mr. 

Speaker, it appears some members opposite are already eager to 

enter into this debate, and I understand their interest in doing 

so, Mr. Speaker, because when it comes to public dollars being 

spent on more politicians, I know this is something that 

Saskatchewan people have some real concerns about. And it‟s 

something that Saskatchewan people, in my experiences with 

them, Mr. Speaker, have not advocated for. It‟s not something 

that Saskatchewan people came to me and said what we really 

need in this province are more politicians; what we really need 

in this province, Mr. Speaker, is to spend more money on 

electing more politicians in order to conduct the business of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And individuals know this in the province, Mr. Speaker, 

because many people have an understanding of the number of 

individuals that Saskatchewan MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] represent compared to other provinces. 

We know that the ratio here in the province is not as great 

compared to other provinces. We know, Mr. Speaker, in other 

provinces, a member of a legislature or a provincial parliament 

actually represents a far greater number of people, Mr. Speaker. 

It appears, Mr. Speaker, today members are very keen to enter 

into this debate, so I look forward to the comments and the 

speeches that will be coming after mine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all politicians here in the Assembly, we do 

take this calling, we do take this job very seriously, and I know 

that is something that applies to both sides of the House. And in 

my comments around the — what I see as — the absence of a 

need for more provincial politicians, Mr. Speaker, the 

comments are not in any way to run down the role of elected 

individuals, the role of people that serve in this House or serve 

in the federal House of Commons or serve on a city council or 

serve as a trustee on a public school board or a Catholic school 

board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it really comes down to an issue of whether or not there are 

enough existing politicians to do the job, to do it well, and to 

represent the needs and interests of Saskatchewan people. And 

we‟ve been discussing this in the House here for a number of 

weeks through different forums. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

arguments that I‟ve heard from members opposite to me have 

not been convincing and have not suggested that we do in fact 

need to increase the size of this provincial legislature. 

 

When we all, Mr. Speaker, take positions and promote causes 

and things that we believe in, Mr. Speaker . . . I think for people 

on both sides of the House, but perhaps I shouldn‟t speak for 

colleagues, but I know for myself what informs that position, 

Mr. Speaker, are the interactions that I have with other people, 

interactions that I have with constituents. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that can occur on an ongoing basis for example in coffee shops 

or at ball diamonds or in the park, at the playground with the 

kids. There‟s all sorts of venues where we receive feedback and 

input, and of course through the office as well, whether it‟s 

through email or phone calls. 

 

But the time when the interaction with constituents and voters 

is perhaps most intense is during door knocking. And whether 

that‟s being done in summers outside of the election cycle or 

whether that‟s being done during an election, Mr. Speaker, 

those are the instances where we get direct feedback. And 

people don‟t always expect a politician to show up on the 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

doorstep and say, hey what are you thinking about. What are 

your concerns? What are your priorities? What should be done 

differently or better? In what ways could something be 

improved? And so often people are caught off guard and don‟t 

necessarily have an answer on the tip on their tongue. But often 

people also have real concerns in the things they want to share. 

 

And door knocking experiences, Mr. Speaker, are memorable. 

And I know members on both sides of the House could share 

many stories about the time when they were chased out of a 

yard by a dog or perhaps an angry constituent, which has also 

happened at times by some members, I‟ve been told. Or, Mr. 

Speaker, the occasions when there‟s a humorous or a really 

touching interaction with someone or someone takes the time to 

give some warm cookies and a glass of milk when you‟re out 

door knocking. Those are all things that stick out in your mind 

as you‟re door knocking and having contact with constituents. 

 

But what really stands out for me, what really sticks in my 

mind are the times when someone shares a real concern or a 

real priority they have, a real issue that they have a passion for 

and a concern about, Mr. Speaker, or something that‟s affecting 

their life. Those are the moments and the instances that stick 

out in my memory when thinking of my interaction with 

constituents and voters. And it‟s based on many of those 

interactions, Mr. Speaker, that informs the views that we take 

forward, whether that be in our respective caucuses, whether 

that‟s in the Assembly in debates such as this, or whether, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s in the things that we publicly report about. 

 

I remember one exchange, Mr. Speaker, I had with a senior in 

my constituency who lived in a complex on the western front, 

the western end of the constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

senior who lived on a very fixed income. This is a senior who 

really did in fact count her pennies, a senior who did not have 

disposable income, a senior who in many ways lived month to 

month, and a senior who was very careful and truly felt every 

increase in the cost of living and how it affected her life 

because what it meant for her was that it often came down to 

decisions about groceries, decisions about bus passes, decisions 

about a little bit of entertainment or decisions about buying that 

special gift, that special little token to give to a grandchild, and 

her desire to want to be able to give more and care for her 

grandchildren in a better way. 

 

And this constituent, Mr. Speaker, relayed to me a number of 

health concerns and problems that she had. And because she 

had these concerns, there were a number of prescriptions that 

she was on. And she talked to me about how much she 

benefited from the seniors‟ drug plan and the fact that the 

amount that she paid had stayed steady and was really allowing 

her to make the proper decisions around her medications, 

around her health care, and allowed her to take care of her 

needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that constituent expressed to me the importance of 

having an affordable drug plan for seniors. That constituent 

expressed to me how if there was an increase, even if it was $5, 

Mr. Speaker, as an example we see in the budget, even if there 

was what seemed as a minor increase on one prescription over 

the multiple prescriptions she had, and over the months, over 

the year, Mr. Speaker, that truly did affect her bottom line, 

affected her quality of life, and affected her ability to provide 

nice things for her grandkids, and make decisions around 

housing and shelter and food — those types of issues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That individual, Mr. Speaker, at no point in my interaction with 

her — and we‟ve had a few points of contact — at no point, 

Mr. Speaker, has she ever said, what I really want to see from 

the provincial government, what I really desire, what I really 

think is the silver bullet and the solution for our province is to 

add more politicians to the Assembly. What I really think, Mr. 

Speaker, is that that will solve my problems and help my 

quality of life. She didn‟t say that, Mr. Speaker. She didn‟t 

think that that was an appropriate expenditure. If she had, if she 

thought this was a burning issue — she‟s a very open person, a 

very upfront person, and very clear in her views and not afraid 

to make her views known, Mr. Speaker — she would have told 

me if she thought that was what in fact should occur, and that 

simply did not occur, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another example, another incident that sticks out, Mr. Speaker, 

are some interactions also with seniors, I should add, of a group 

of individuals that are really involved with the Western 

Development Museum in Saskatoon. These individuals pour 

their heart and soul into the WDM [Western Development 

Museum]. For them it‟s a community. It‟s an opportunity to 

contribute. And yes, it keeps them busy, and it provides good 

friendships. But it also they realize they are helping and 

contributing to many other roles and facets to Saskatchewan 

society. They know, Mr. Speaker, that every time they go to the 

WDM and give a tour, stand as a guide at one of the stops in 

Boomtown, Mr. Speaker, and interact with an elementary 

school child and talk about what Saskatchewan was like during 

the pioneer days and over the years of progress, Mr. Speaker, 

they know they are playing an important part in telling the 

Saskatchewan story, passing on our history, and developing an 

appreciation, developing an appreciation for Saskatchewan 

history and for our unique story. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not simply something for them to do to fill 

the days. For them it‟s something with purpose, and it‟s 

something that they thought, it was something that they 

believed was valued by the provincial government. You can 

imagine their surprise, Mr. Speaker, when in recent weeks they 

were informed that instead of providing the necessary resources 

to the WDM to have it open, to have it functioning as it needs 

to be, to host those school groups . . . and not only school 

groups, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatoon, the situation where I know 

best, when conferences come to town, it‟s very common for the 

conferences to have a meal, to have a banquet at the WDM and 

for Boomtown to be opened up. And this happens, Mr. Speaker, 

throughout the year on a variety of days. So you can imagine 

the surprise of these seniors when they heard that in fact there 

wouldn‟t be the proper resources during boom times to fund 

Boomtown, Mr. Speaker. There wouldn‟t be the proper 

resources to do that. 

 

But instead the government‟s main priority, when it comes to 

clearing government business and pushing something through, 

was the addition of more politicians which we know will be an 

expense of millions and millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my interactions with these people, some that I 

have met on the doorstep and some that I‟ve just gotten to know 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

through a variety of community involvements, not on one 

occasion have any of these individuals come to me and said, 

you know what? You know what, Cam? That‟s my name. You 

know what, member from Saskatoon Massey Place? Well we 

think the best solution is for Saskatchewan, for telling our 

history, telling our story especially through WDM is to increase 

the number of politicians. I think that is the solution. Mr. 

Speaker, I have never heard that because I don‟t think any of 

those volunteers that give so many hours to the WDM think 

that it‟s an appropriate decision to fund more politicians in the 

province over opening of the museum to the full amount of 

hours and days that it ought to be open. I‟ve never heard that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Other examples, Mr. Speaker, well I should say on this WDM 

incident or the decisions that members opposite have made to 

shortchange the WDM with respect to its funding and then 

having consequences for the days and hours that it can be open, 

what I heard, Mr. Speaker, that for the staff of the WDM, 

instead of allowing some of their colleagues, some of their 

peers to be laid off, the staff of the WDM actually agreed to 

take a couple of weeks without pay so that the cuts put on the 

WDM by members opposite could be absorbed by all of the 

staff, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If only, Mr. Speaker, some members on the front bench, if only 

provincial cabinet, if only the backbencher MLAs had the same 

commitment to the WDM, had the same commitment to 

tourism, had the same commitment to educating our children as 

the staff of the WDM, we would be in a much better place. 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, what we see from the priorities and the 

things that members opposite are pushing through, Mr. 

Speaker, is a willingness to add more politicians at an expense 

of millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve also had, in interactions I‟ve had with 

people, not as much in Saskatoon but certainly in Regina, the 

film television tax credit. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve heard in 

recent weeks so many individuals who chose to stay in 

Saskatchewan and again to tell Saskatchewan‟s story, but not 

just the cultural aspects of Saskatchewan history but to also 

participate in the provincial economy, especially the economy 

of Regina. And we‟ve heard, Mr. Speaker, from so many 

businesses that benefited from the film industry about how 

important it is in fact to have a vibrant film industry here in the 

province. And it‟s been sad to see the steps that members 

opposite have taken on this front. 

 

[11:00] 

 

So there‟s a number of components to this motion, and I know 

some of my colleagues will be speaking to other aspects of it. 

But at this time, I‟ll read the motion so that the Assembly 

knows what‟s up today. I‟ll move the motion. I would move 

this motion, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 

willingness to spend millions of public dollars on more 

politicians while increasing prescription drug expenses 

for seniors, eliminating the property tax rebate on early 

payments, raising tuition, shortchanging the Western 

Development Museum, eliminating the film and 

television tax credit, and gutting funding to the Go Green 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 

moved: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 

willingness to spend millions of public dollars on more 

politicians while increasing prescription drug expenses 

for seniors, eliminating the property tax rebate on early 

payments, raising tuition, shortchanging the Western 

Development Museum, and eliminating film and 

television tax credit, and gutting funds to the Go Green 

program. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

begin with, I obviously do not support this motion. I commend, 

I commend the Saskatchewan Party government, and I 

commend our Finance minister, the member from Canora-Pelly, 

for putting forward the only, the only balanced provincial 

budget in the whole Dominion of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a prudent government. This is a 

government that takes steps to ensure that what we put through 

is sustainable, is proper, is good for the people of 

Saskatchewan. It does not, it does not, Mr. Speaker, pit urban 

against rural. We support all of the people of Saskatchewan in 

this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s just back up a little while ago. Let‟s go back 

to the November 7th election when the NDP were going 

forward and going on, they had — what? — 5.5 billion and 

counting in promises, Mr. Speaker, that — let‟s face it — even 

their calculator on their own website couldn‟t keep up with. Mr. 

Speaker, had the NDP gotten in as government — I put it like 

this — it would‟ve been very similar to the good Captain 

Smith, the captain of the Titanic, saying that they ran into 

minor technical problems. And had the NDP got in, they 

would‟ve sunk us just as surely as the iceberg sunk the Titanic, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to look at all the good things there are in 

this budget, the things that we, we as a government listened to 

the people of Saskatchewan. And obviously the people of 

Saskatchewan listened to us and said this is a prudent 

government. This is a government that is working for us, and 

we are not, we are not going to drive this province into the 

abyss of the sea such as what happened with the Titanic, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Take a look. I‟ll just tell you some of the things that have been 

happening in my own constituency, the constituency of Carrot 

River Valley. You know, under the NDP, I was a director on 

Pasquia Regional Park for a number of years, and under the 

NDP they basically starved our regional parks. They kind of 

said we don‟t need that. They can sit there and talk about all the 

different things they were going to do, but you know 

something? They didn‟t get around to doing it. In other words, 

they didn‟t get around to it. 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, since we have formed government, our regional 

parks have had an increase in government funding by 600 per 

cent — 600 per cent for our regional parks — so that the people 

of Carrot River Valley can enjoy the Nipawin Regional Park, 

the Pasquia Regional Park, the regional park over in Hudson 

Bay, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, these are great things. 

 

The other thing, long-term care facilities, the NDP completely 

forgot to build any long-term care facilities for their seniors. 

No, they didn‟t care about the seniors. They claim now they do, 

but they really wouldn‟t do anything for them. And they 

short-funded, they short-funded the communities that actually 

wanted to put up long-term care facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is prudent. We looked at the 

various different places, and we said, you know this old 

formula of 65/35, let‟s change that. Let‟s change that and make 

it far easier for these communities to put up the long-term care 

facilities. So we changed it to an 80/20 formula. With that, what 

do we have? We have 13 new long-term care facilities going 

forward within this province, one of them in Tisdale which is in 

the Carrot River Valley constituency. I will tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, these are very, very important things for us people in 

rural Saskatchewan and in Carrot River Valley constituency. 

 

There‟s many things that the NDP talked about, but they 

wouldn‟t do it. Like I mean let‟s talk about the revenue sharing 

for the municipalities. Right from the Tommy Douglas days, 

they said that they wanted to improve the revenue sharing, the 

education portion of the property tax. They wanted to do 

something about that. But you know something, Mr. Speaker? 

They just didn‟t get around to it. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, this government, this Saskatchewan Party 

government has come up with a plan for revenue sharing — this 

year under this budget, 237.4 million in revenue sharing, this 

year. We‟ve already increased it in previous budgets. This year 

it‟s actually an increase of $20.6 million. This is what the 

municipalities have been asking for, for ages . . . and of course 

the education portion tax on property which this government 

hasn‟t eliminated but has certainly taken down to a substantial 

amount, far less of what it was under the NDP, which they kept 

on saying they were going to change. But it‟s the old story. 

They didn‟t get around to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing comes in health. Now let‟s take a 

look at how the NDP, how they operated health in 

Saskatchewan and how this government operates health in 

Saskatchewan. We have lowered the wait times for the people 

in Saskatchewan, the surgery wait times. We‟ve also increased 

the training seats for the positions up to 100. 

 

We have come up, during this budget alone, with a great 

program. And this is a great program for helping to get doctors 

out into our rural communities, Mr. Speaker. We have put 

forward a program that, with new physicians coming out, we 

will allow them to forgive up to $120,000 on their student loans 

if they work and up to $20,000 of forgiveness of student loans 

for nurse practitioners and new nurses to practice in the 

qualifying rural and remote communities for five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all great initiatives put forward in the 

budget by this government. This government, like I said, is 

working for all of the people of Saskatchewan. They are 

working great for Carrot River Valley. 

 

Another thing, the NDP was always undercapitalizing basically 

everything. The roads in Carrot River Valley, we can actually 

drive up and down the highways now. People can go to that 

regional park that the NDP underfunded, hauling their camper 

on a road . . . that, you know, they don‟t need a four-wheel 

drive to pull their camper over there. So the people in Carrot 

River Valley can enjoy the regional parks that the NDP 

underfunded for years. 

 

Also I have to say that, within this budget, we have a new 

school project slated for Hudson Bay. There again, the NDP 

never thought of that because, you see, they didn‟t have to 

worry about any new schools or anything. They were too busy 

shipping all of our youth to other provinces to try and get 

meaningful employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has worked hard, has worked 

very hard and very diligently to provide a budget which is the 

best one in Canada, which is the best provincial budget in 

Canada, to be able to move Saskatchewan forward, to be able to 

put Saskatchewan on the map, not only in Canada but also 

around the world. Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Ten minutes has elapsed. I recognize the 

member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

very honoured to stand today to support my colleague from 

Saskatoon. 

 

I think the motion that he‟s made to correctly tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that this whole silly idea of adding three more 

MLAs that the Saskatchewan Party and that Premier are trying 

to put forward on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan is going 

to be in many ways — since the member from Carrot River 

used the analogy of the Titanic — well, Mr. Speaker, this is 

going to be your titanic error in bringing in more politicians 

because the people in Carrot River and the people of 

Saskatchewan and the people all throughout the land, Mr. 

Speaker, don‟t want any more MLAs. 

 

They want to see some progress, Mr. Speaker. They want to see 

some great opportunity for our young people, Mr. Speaker. And 

the reason why they don‟t want to see more MLAs simply is 

because it‟s not common sense, and it doesn‟t really meet the 

needs of the Saskatchewan people. So the member from Carrot 

River, I would advise him that this is going to be your titanic 

mistake in making sure that you have more politicians as 

opposed to more programs and more services to the people of 

Saskatchewan, in particular for health care. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely rich. I sit here each day 

and I smile. And the reason why I sit here and I smile, Mr. 

Speaker, is because we have a right wing government who put 

this province fifteen and a half billion dollars in the hole. It 

takes the NDP years to rebuild, years, years, and years to 

rebuild, Mr. Speaker. And we went through some great, great 

leaders, as I spoke about yesterday in the Assembly. And we 

talked about the fact that in one year, I believe, that our debt, 

our interest on the debt was almost three times more than what 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

we spent on education, Mr. Speaker, almost three times more. 

That would translate in today for the Saskatchewan Party who 

had to pay $3 billion in interest today if they had the same 

conditions that the NDP took over from the previous PC 

[Progressive Conservative] government in 1991. They would be 

paying $3 billion today in interest alone, Mr. Speaker. They 

would not be able to sustain that in any way, shape, or form. So 

what the NDP done in those early years to rebuild the 

credibility of this province and to grab the opportunity to 

rebuild and to make sure that Saskatchewan prospered, Mr. 

Speaker, was absolutely remarkable and amazing. 

 

So today I hear the members from across the way talk about the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. And their answer, Mr. Speaker, is that we 

believe that three more politicians are in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan. And I can tell you right now today, what we 

have seen from the current government is they‟re taking credit 

for the economy. Mr. Speaker, they never developed the 

economy. They inherited the economy. Mr. Speaker, they‟re 

taking credit for the debt going down. Mr. Speaker, they 

inherited that money from the previous government and the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, talking about the growing population in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, the population was growing in 2003, 

2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, and we hope the population will 

continue to grow, Mr. Speaker. But they had nothing to do with 

it, Mr. Speaker. Let us absolutely be very clear: the 

Saskatchewan Party had nothing to do with the great fortunes 

that we have today, Mr. Speaker. It was all done by the people 

of Saskatchewan in concert with the NDP governments of the 

past, Mr. Speaker. So we have absolutely nothing to apologize 

for as New Democrats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And about all we see from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, all we 

see from the Sask Party is themselves tapping themselves on 

the back on a constant basis, bragging about how much money 

they have in their savings account, Mr. Speaker, while the rest 

of the people in the province suffer, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And now we look at what they‟re doing now. What‟s their 

latest foray into politics? Number one, they want to add more 

politicians — and I say shame on them. Number two, they want 

to go to war with the organized labour. Why go to war with the 

working men and women of this province, Mr. Speaker? 

What‟s the purpose of that, Mr. Speaker? And third thing that 

now we hear today, we‟re having a shortage of nurses. We‟re 

having a shortage of nurses in the hospitals, in the operating 

rooms. Why? Because we believe that the private for-profit 

clinics that these guys brought into place, Mr. Speaker, are now 

sucking nurses away from the public sector and public system 

into the private system — exactly what we said would happen. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, they want to bring three more MLAs. 

That‟s the Saskatchewan Party for you, Mr. Speaker. They take 

credit for absolutely everything that they had nothing to do 

with, and the people of Saskatchewan know that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as we stand here today, as we stand here today, I can tell the 

people of Saskatchewan one thing, we‟re in opposition right 

now. We‟re going to continue to fight. We are going to 

continue to remind people exactly what the Saskatchewan 

Party‟s about. And we asked the Premier, we asked the cabinet 

members, we asked the Minister of Justice if they would pull 

this Bill, pull this Bill that‟s asking for more MLAs. And all 

three of them said no, they wouldn‟t do it. All three groups said 

no, they wouldn‟t do it. 

 

Okay. If you‟re not going to pull this Bill, then let‟s go back to 

the public. Let‟s have a plebiscite on this Bill. Let the public 

decide. And, Mr. Speaker, they refused to do that as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And it‟s absolutely amazing, it‟s absolutely rich from 

our perspective to hear the right wingers claim credit for an 

economy they had nothing to do with. They had absolutely 

nothing to do in creating that economy. It‟s absolutely rich they 

claim credit for the population growth. It‟s absolutely rich for 

any of them to claim credit for reducing the debt, Mr. Speaker, 

and they had nothing to do with it. 

 

And what‟s really embarrassing, Mr. Speaker, is after they‟ve 

been patting themselves on the back through all this process, 

they are now going to continue their war with labour. They are 

now going to continue taking away resources from the public 

health sector to push for their agenda for the private health 

sector, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what‟s happening, the private 

for-profit clinics, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve done some of the work to 

make sure that those centres out there actually complemented 

the public system, not competed against the public system. That 

is a significant difference, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what you‟ve got from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, is you‟ve 

got simply people that are always patting, patting their back. 

They‟re always petting themselves or giving themselves a pat 

on the back. And I asked one day to a couple of my colleagues, 

what do you get when you mix an octopus with a Sask Party 

candidate? And I don‟t have the answer for that, Mr. Speaker, 

but that‟s what we see, a bunch of octopuses over there patting 

themselves on the back for doing all these things that they had 

absolutely nothing to do with — the booming economy, debt 

being reduced, and of course the population growth, Mr. 

Speaker. A great news flash for the Sask Party government: you 

had absolutely nothing to do with that. But please, as caretakers 

of the economy right now, don‟t mess it up. Please. That‟s the 

most important message. 

 

And so what we‟ve got from the Sask Party so far, Mr. Speaker, 

is they‟re claiming credit for the boom, and everybody in the 

world knew that Saskatchewan was going to start the move. 

Everybody in the world knows that Saskatchewan will continue 

to move, Mr. Speaker. That‟s the most important lesson. They 

will continue to move, despite the Saskatchewan Party‟s war 

with organized labour, despite the Saskatchewan Party‟s 

philosophy of trying to bring in more for-profit health clinics 

that will really begin to deteriorate our public health system, 

and, Mr. Speaker, what is even worse is that you have to look 

now that they‟re going to try and gerrymander the process by 

adding more politicians. 

 

Who needs more MLAs, Mr. Speaker? There are families out 

there that are suffering. There are people having a difficult time 

making ends meet. And it‟s not just the lower income people. 

It‟s the middle-income people and the middle class. We know 

they have difficulty, Mr. Speaker. It is young people starting a 

job. It is people coming out of our training institutions that want 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

to have a home, that want to own a house, Mr. Speaker. That is 

now something that is not being attained by many young 

families because the house prices now are just out of their 

reach. And what‟s the answer of the Saskatchewan Party, is 

they want to add more politicians. They want to add more 

MLAs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out one thing that‟s very 

clear, is that we asked and we challenged the Premier, the 

cabinet, and the entire Sask Party government, let‟s have a 

plebiscite on this matter. Let‟s have a public vote, Mr. Speaker. 

And they said no. You know why they said no? Because they 

would lose, Mr. Speaker. They would lose that vote in a 

heartbeat. 

 

So I tell the people of Saskatchewan, those guys keep patting 

themselves on the back for something they never created. And 

they‟re using the opportunity now as government to move their 

agenda forward to go to war with the working men and women, 

to forget about the environment, and to start sucking away 

resources in the public health care system — which we said 

they would do — into their for-profit, private clinics, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s what‟s being done now. 

 

So the message I‟ll have to every New Democrat and the people 

that don‟t believe in the philosophy of adding more politicians 

nor believe in the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, I would have one 

message for them: it‟s all downhill for the Sask Party from here 

on in, baby. And this opposition is going to continue working 

hard. We‟re going to hold them to account, Mr. Speaker, and 

we‟re ready to rock and roll. 

 

The Speaker: — Ten minutes has elapsed. Why is the Premier 

on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I noted 

the hon., I think the hon. member might have just called you 

baby. I‟m not sure, I‟m not sure how that fits with the rules of 

the House, but it‟s an interesting debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s an honour to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of this Assembly, a great-looking group of 47 

students from the great city of Swift Current, Saskatchewan, 

from Ashley Park School. And you can give us a wave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s always great to have students visit the 

legislature from Swift Current. It happens fairly regularly, but 

not necessarily from Ashley Park. We have some visits from 

l‟École Oman and a few from Ashley Park. So I just want to 

say to the teachers and those have chaperoned, thanks very 

much for bringing the students to their provincial capital and to 

their Legislative Assembly. I look forward to meeting with 

them in a moment, taking some pictures. And we‟ll maybe 

show them the Premier‟s office in a little bit and have a chat 

about what they might have seen here. 

 

So joining the students today, Mr. Speaker, are their teachers. 

Mrs. Blackmer, Ms. Eppich is here. We have educational 

assistant Mrs. Nykolaishen; school youth worker Ms. Carrie 

Davis; and chaperones Mrs. Alexandre, Mrs. Calkins, Mrs. 

Dekowny, Mrs. Duquette; and Mrs. Busse. That is a lot of 

chaperones for this group. They don‟t look like they need that 

many chaperones. They‟re very well-behaved. 

 

But I want to just take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 

welcome the kids and the chaperones and the teachers to their 

Legislative Assembly. And I look forward to meeting with 

them in a moment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Priorities 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to rise in the House 

today to enter into the debate about the budget and about the 

direction of the government. You know, I agree with the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place about one of the most 

enjoyable times during the campaign is when you‟re face to 

face with people on the doorsteps. And I think about the young 

families that I visited with, and I think about the families with 

the little kids and how nice it is to see all these kids back 

around town and how the community‟s growing and things like 

this. But my most favourite part of the time was when I was 

talking to the seniors because it‟s educational. They‟ve been 

there. They‟ve done that. 

 

And you know, that‟s what I would like to talk about a little bit 

today because I have no problem looking a senior in the eye. 

And no offence, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll use you as an example — not 

that you‟re actually there, okay — I have no problem looking 

you in the eye and saying, what we have is a sustainable 

program. What we need in Saskatchewan is programs that are 

good programs, a program like the Saskatchewan seniors‟ drug 

plan that covers 70 per cent of every prescription that the 

seniors buy unless it happens to be under $20. Covers 70 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s up to date. You know, we‟re not 

talking about drugs that were there always in 2007 when the 

program started under this government. We‟re talking about 

400 new drugs, 400 improved medications for our seniors, 400 

ways to make their life easier. 

 

Now all of us have watched TV on The National news and 

we‟ve seen these actual horrible stories, Mr. Speaker, of seniors 

who have to choose between food and prescriptions. And I am 

so proud to be in a province, so proud to be in Saskatchewan, 

where we can have a program that will cover 70 per cent. 

 

But what happens if they still can‟t pay it? What happens then? 

Well this government has programs that if your drug costs 

become too high, according to your income, they will cap them 

off and you won‟t have to pay. And I believe the deductible is 

$200 on that. For the low-income people, people on the 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

Saskatchewan Income Plan. Those people have the special rates 

and a special support program, and they don‟t pay for them. 

Now those people, when we talk about the Saskatchewan drug 

plan and the member from Saskatoon Massey is standing at a 

doorstep talking to the seniors in his constituency and brings it 

up, you know . . . And I heard yesterday a desire on both sides 

to give credit where credit was due. 

 

And in 2000 . . . No, pardon me, it wasn‟t 2000. It was 1992, 

and I believe it was under an NDP government that the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan, SIP, was introduced in 1992. Now 

it came out, and it was a good program. It gave seniors in 

Saskatchewan, a single senior $90 a month. Ninety dollars a 

month, and that helped. You know, you can imagine if you‟re 

just scraping by, just getting by, and you get $90 a month, 

that‟s a good program. And I compliment the NDP government 

at the time for doing it. 

 

Where I have a problem is, I can understand not raising it in ‟93 

or ‟94, ‟95, ‟96, but maybe by ‟97, chip a few dollars in. ‟98, 

‟99, 2000, still haven‟t done it. But you know, maybe after two 

elections, maybe chip a few dollars in because these people, 

they care. They just stand up and they tell me how much they 

care about these people that, from 1992 to 2000, they didn‟t 

raise the seniors‟ income plan. But they care. 

 

So 2001, didn‟t raise the plan, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005. And 

now they‟ve got the economy rolling in 2006, so they pour the 

money I don‟t where, because it sure didn‟t go to the seniors, 

you know. So here we‟re going, and we heard, you know, 16 

years and they were this close to actually doing something — 

16 years. It just, just, if they had have had a little more time. 

 

In four and a half years, in four and a half years, the 

Saskatchewan government took that plan from $90 to $190. 

And in this year‟s budget, this year‟s balanced budget, the only 

provincial budget in the country that is balanced, in this year‟s 

balanced budget, we raised it another $50 a month. And then 

are we going to leave it? No, we‟re not. No, we‟re going to give 

it $10 next year, a month; $10 the year after; and $10 again the 

year after. Remember from 1992 to 2006 — not a dollar. So 

while I compliment the idea and the plan, I do have some 

trouble with that fact. 

 

[11:30] 

 

You know, there‟s other things that happened, you know, with 

the senior income plan, with the adjustments made in the senior 

income plan. We‟re now nearly double the amount of people 

who we‟re helping. So not only have we given the raises, the 

increases too, but we‟re helping more than double. And we can 

see that in so many ways. We can see that in income tax, just 

allowing people to keep their own money, just allowing people 

to keep their own money. A person with $25,000 income is 

hardly rolling in the dough, yet the government was taking 

$1,979 away from him. In 2012 that figure from 2007 to 2012 

had dropped to $1,103. That‟s another $876 in that senior‟s 

pocket. 

 

Now a senior with 25 or a family of four with $50,000 — to 

just get away from seniors for a minute — theirs was $3,382, 

and there again they dropped from $2,431 . . . $2,431 saving on 

income tax. Now that works to $214 or $204 a month, 

something like that. That‟s a payment. You know, you could 

buy new appliances. You could buy furniture. You could buy 

. . . $2,400 a year, you can actually do something about that. 

 

And there‟s other things like WDM has been brought up. The 

increase to the Western Development Museum was 34.6 per 

cent in the last five years — 34.6 per cent. And we‟re accused 

of underfunding. Shortchanging I think was a quote that came 

from the other side of the House, shortchanging the WDM even 

though we raised it 34.6 per cent. Boy, would I love to be 

shortchanged like that, you know. 

 

And we talk about common sense, you know, common sense. 

One of the largest defeats in the Saskatchewan political history 

happened last November 7th. One of the largest defeats 

happened last November. Sixty-four per cent of the people 

voted for the government. One of the largest polarities ever, and 

they did nothing wrong, nothing. It was the people who were 

wrong. It was you and I who were wrong. It wasn‟t them. 

 

You know, they have to get that message, and I‟m fine if they 

don‟t. Actually I sit back. I relax, and I‟m so happy that they do 

not get the best . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member‟s time has expired. I 

recognize the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I‟m not sure if they‟re applauding for my speech or for the end 

of that speech, but I think it‟s probably the end of that speech, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It‟s good to rise in the debate today in terms of the motion in 

front of the Assembly which I‟d restate, reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 

willingness to spend millions of public dollars on more 

politicians while increasing prescription drug expenses 

for seniors, eliminating the property tax rebates on early 

payments, raising tuition, short-changing the Western 

Development Museum, eliminating the film and 

television tax credit and gutting funding to the Go Green 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly one of the things that I‟ve heard the 

member opposite just talking about, and certainly the member 

from Carrot River Valley before him, was the importance of 

going out and talking to people in the election. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, for me, that‟s one of my favourite 

parts of this work we do as politicians, is getting out and talking 

to people. And it‟s a real privilege in terms of the way that this 

work that we do gives you entrance to all sorts of different 

situations in terms of people‟s houses, in terms of people‟s 

lives, in terms of different organizations. And there‟s an 

expectation that they‟d welcome you. There‟s a tremendous 

generosity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the way that people will 

welcome you in and reciprocate the interest that you‟re showing 

by showing up to see what their issues are and the way that 

they‟ll very freely share that information with you. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I mean it‟s such a rare thing in this job, the 

way that you get to talk to all kinds of different people in all 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

kinds of different circumstances, and a real blessing in this job, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — a really excellent thing. This work is 

many things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it‟s never dull. It‟s never 

boring, and it‟s always pretty interesting. And again a lot of it 

has to do with those many different people and many different 

circumstances that we get to encounter as elected officials or as 

people seeking elected office. And certainly I really enjoy the 

opportunity to get out on the doorstep as often as I can, in terms 

of getting out to different events throughout the year, in terms 

of the constituency and across the province. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the election and in terms of 

that work that we get to do, going around and talking to people 

in different organizations, I‟ve yet to hear one of those groups 

say, you know, if you could just address that deficit problem as 

it relates to politicians. If you could just grow the number of 

politicians, that‟s really going to address the concerns that we 

have as a group or as a person or as someone out on the 

doorstop or at the kitchen table. I‟ve never heard that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And again in terms of going out and looking 

people in the eye and the election and saying that, you know, 

here‟s the respected platforms of the different parties. That, of 

course, was a huge part of the last election. We made the case 

for ours and held majority sway in Elphinstone, and I‟m glad 

for that. But certainly the government opposite has a mandate in 

terms of their platform that they ran on the campaign. Now the 

problem, Mr. Speaker, is that you find out that different things 

in that platform that they ran on weren‟t as they seem to be. 

 

So certainly the members opposite that just participated in the 

debate before me talked about the seniors‟ income plan and the 

interesting conversations he‟d had with the seniors across the 

province or across his constituency. And I suspect that was the 

case because of course there‟s a helpful measure involved in 

that for making sure that seniors can afford keeping bread on 

the table and a roof over their head and pay the bills which is as 

it should be. 

 

But I‟ll bet you, I‟ll bet you any money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that none of those members opposite went around and said, oh 

and by the way, we‟re going to charge you an extra ten bucks 

on each prescription under the prescription drug plan. They 

didn‟t talk about that in the campaign, Mr. Speaker. And the 

way that these things net out, Mr. Speaker, is that there was 

more money being clawed back in terms of the money being 

clawed back under this . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, than 

was being put forward under the seniors‟ income plan. So again 

giving on the one hand but take and take and taking on the other 

hand was the way that this operation worked on the part of 

members opposite. 

 

The constituency I represent, Regina Elphinstone-Centre, there 

are a lot of people that are involved in the film and television 

industry that live there, Mr. Speaker, a lot of different 

businesses that have their base of operations in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

soothing and positive noises that members opposite made about 

the importance of the film and television industry to the future 

of Saskatchewan and the way that that was important and the 

way they were quite happy to shine up things like declaring 

Corner Gas day or appearing as cameo guests on Corner Gas, 

Mr. Speaker, that of course belied what came in the budget 

which was a complete 180 in terms of nearly a decade of public 

commentary on the part of members opposite when it came to 

the film and television industry and when it came to the film 

employment tax credit. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of looking people in the eye and, 

you know, going out to seek support in the campaign and 

seeing what different people are up to across the province, that 

was nowhere in terms of the activities of the members opposite. 

But of course, it‟s not mentioned in the platform. It‟s not 

mentioned in the Throne Speech. But come the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, well it turns out that the expenditure related to the film 

employment tax credit was what made the difference on a 

balanced budget or not. So the members opposite argued that 

they had to do away with it. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that wasn‟t part of the conversation 

that we just had mere months ago on the doorstep with the 

people of Saskatchewan. That wasn‟t said by the members 

opposite. And so you put that alongside the fact that also not 

having been talked about was they couldn‟t go on that, Mr. 

Speaker. They needed to cut that program, but what they 

needed to grow was three more MLAs. So again in terms of 

what happened with the seniors‟ prescription drug plan 

alongside three more MLAs — make seniors pay more but, you 

know, grow the number of MLAs in the Legislature — that 

shows some priorities that are out of whack. 

 

But worse than that, Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t have the courtesy 

to talk to the people of Saskatchewan about their plans for it. 

We see that again with the film employment tax credit and the 

hugely detrimental if not fatal effect that will have on the film 

industry, Mr. Speaker. That was nowhere to be seen in the 

campaign but, you know, it‟s okay to bring in three more 

MLAs. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of spending those monies 

and the kind of questionable priorities that that demonstrates, 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing that wasn‟t mentioned in the 

campaign platform or the speeches by members opposite . . . 

And again, it‟s sort of galloping through the activities of this 

government because we see things that were decried in the 

campaign now being brought forward under the labour 

legislation review that‟s been launched yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 

and the way that that runs counter to different things that were 

said, different undertakings made by members opposite in the 

campaign. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, the last time we saw the 

government come forward with labour legislation that was 

under the heading of fair and balanced . . . well we saw how 

that worked out at the International Labour Organization with 

the United Nations condemning it. And we also saw how 

Justice Dennis Ball condemned their legislation as 

unconstitutional, as against the law. So they‟ll forgive us, Mr. 

Speaker, if we see them coming forward with what they 

propose as fair and balanced in terms of a labour legislation 

review, in terms of . . . Well we‟ve seen this movie before. We 

see them coming on this. 

 

But I guess the other thing that‟s common about this is certain 

undertakings that were made before the last election turned out 

to be not worth the hot air that floated them. And the same 

thing with this, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that they‟re 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

going after the payment of union dues and the detrimental 

effect that that will have on organized labour in this province. 

 

But they‟ve got time and energy and, you know, political 

capital to put towards those kind of activities, Mr. Speaker. But 

when it comes to showing some constraint or restraint on the 

number of politicians, well it‟s let‟s have three more politicians, 

and into the bargain, Mr. Speaker, eliminate everyone under the 

age of 18 in terms of the way that we build constituencies in 

this province and what that says about their equality rights 

under the Charter and what that says about the importance of 

those issues for people under the age of 18 . . . And then again, 

Mr. Speaker, coming forward today in the legislature and 

saying that somehow the labour legislation review was about 

discounting union dues for those under the age of 18. It defies 

belief, Mr. Speaker. And I think the public sees it for what it is. 

 

So I guess our concern, Mr. Speaker, is where were these things 

in the election? And if they‟d had the decency to come forward 

with these things at the election, we think it would have been a 

very different story in terms of the ballot box and in terms of 

what numbers were on that side and what numbers were on this 

side. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to enter into debate on the motion from the member 

from Massey Place, Mr. Speaker. And I know the motion refers 

choices and a willingness to spend public dollars. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s certainly my pleasure to talk about how our 

government spends its public dollars. 

 

I‟d like to talk about a certain thing in our budget, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s important to our province — certainly my family, the 

families in Regina Dewdney and, certainly I would imagine, the 

people of the province — and that‟s the active families benefit, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s something we‟re willing to spend our 

money on. 

 

[11:45] 

 

This program gives every child that wants to participate in a 

sporting activity or a recreational activity, Mr. Speaker, $150. 

In our first year in government, in ‟07 we had it from age 6 to 

age 14, Mr. Speaker, and in this most recent budget we bumped 

that up to all kids between now 6 and 18 are eligible for this 

grant. What it really does is reduce the financial barriers for 

kids to participate in sport. And I‟ll talk in a second about those 

things that I think are important about sport. But it certainly 

helps lower income families, Mr. Speaker. It helps families 

certainly with multiple children involved in sports. That can get 

expensive if you have 3, 4, 5 children and they all want to be 

involved in sports. And this certainly goes a long way in 

helping that out, making it more affordable. 

 

And certainly I know a lot of programs well here in Regina. 

This will cover not only the cost of one program; it‟ll help 

cover the cost of another program, Mr. Speaker. So not only 

can kids now afford one program; Mr. Speaker, they can try a 

multiple program. And I think that‟s a great thing, Mr. Speaker. 

I think especially in the early ages I like the model of trying 

different things, trying different sports, having fun in different 

activities rather than the model of just having one sport all the 

way through. And you learn different things about your 

proprioception and about how to try other sports and, you 

know, and they all build upon each other. So the idea to 

specialize so young, I like the idea of kids being able to 

participate in a variety of different sports, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the other thing we‟ve done, this past budget, for youth in 

sports and what we‟re willing to spend money on, Mr. Speaker, 

is we‟re giving $2,500 annually to community rinks out there, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s expensive to run those ice plants, and we 

know what a important part, especially in rural Saskatchewan, 

what a hub those rinks can be for communities, Mr. Speaker, 

and how important it is for our kids. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, the government has assigned a 

five-year agreement with KidSport to lower the lottery licence 

by four and a half million dollars. Now I could go on for a long, 

long time about all the great programs that Sask Sport is 

involved in, Mr. Speaker. One certainly that I‟m very proud to 

say we have here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is KidSport, 

and that again, that‟s another program that reduces barriers for 

kids to participate in sports, Mr. Speaker. And I know the 

people at Sask Sport are very happy with having a five-year 

agreement rather than each year a new agreement that gives 

them a chance to budget a little better, Mr. Speaker. So those 

are the things we‟re willing to spend with public dollars, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well it‟s well documented, I think, what sports can do for the 

people in our province and our society, Mr. Speaker. And one 

of the things . . . I think it helps build community pride. It 

builds school pride, Mr. Speaker, and it really brings families 

and communities together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can think of my own family, Mr. Speaker, my youngest 

son. He just began his, not career, but he started playing youth 

sports, Mr. Speaker, recently. I‟m not sure who was more 

excited, his parents — it‟s our last child to begin this — so I‟m 

not sure if it‟s parents or his brothers that were more excited or 

if he was more excited. And that gives our family and of course 

families across the province something to talk about, something 

to get behind. It was great to see all the parents along the field 

getting together in their lawn chairs, watching sports, cheering 

their kids on. It‟s just a great community thing, Mr. Speaker, 

just interacting with peers, interacting with kids. 

 

Sometimes at school you don‟t get a chance to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, as much. Sports teams allow that, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve 

seen many kids turn their lives around. It gives them something 

to do. It keeps them occupied. I know with children sometimes, 

if you don‟t give them something to do, they‟ll find something 

to do, and sometimes it‟s not, you know, the most constructive 

thing, so this gives them some way to burn off energy, to have 

some fun out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think it helps some kids when they‟re having trouble at 

home, maybe some trouble at school, gives them some 

sanctuary for a couple hours — you know, a couple of hours a 

week, Mr. Speaker, to be with their buddies, not think about 

their problems at home or at school or wherever it might be, 

Mr. Speaker. I think it teaches character, Mr. Speaker. Life will 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

knock you around a little bit, and I think sports helps you to sort 

of muster up the courage to pick yourself up and dust yourself 

off and keep going, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I think sports is a way to give back. It‟s a way of 

volunteers. There‟s many volunteers here in Saskatchewan. 

And I‟m involved with a flag football league. And you know, 

it‟s one thing for a parent to coach their sons or daughters in a 

league, but I think it‟s really important and a good thing to see 

that we have . . . well there‟s young adults coming out to coach 

kids, and they‟re volunteering their time. They‟re 20-years old. 

They played for the Rams. They played for the Thunder. And 

they‟re coming back and giving back to their sport and giving 

back to their community. And that‟s what youth sports does for 

our province, Mr. Speaker, gives people a chance to give back. 

And that‟s great to see. That gives me, you know, such a great 

feeling to see those kids do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, it‟s certainly more and more here in Saskatchewan. 

We have new Canadians coming into our province, more and 

more each day. And it gives those kids a chance to be involved 

in . . . It‟s hard to put your thumb on what Canadian culture is, 

but I think sport has a part to play in that certainly when you 

think about hockey — it‟s very important here in Canada — 

Canadian-rules football, Mr. Speaker, lacrosse. And to see kids 

coming into our province and giving those sports a chance, it‟s 

really a positive thing for our community as a whole, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And certainly, you know, we see obesity rates increasing here 

in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Giving youth a chance to be a part of a 

sporting culture and a part of an event, Mr. Speaker, it gives 

them the ability to learn how to be fit. And studies have shown 

over and over, if you‟re active when you are young, there‟s a 

much better chance to be active when you‟re older. Mr. 

Speaker. And when you talk about heart disease and 

cardiovascular and all those costs to the health system, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that $150 is something we‟re more than willing 

to spend to get those kids active, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, being a teacher, I know what it does 

in schools. It gives kids a sense of self-confidence, of self . . . 

[inaudible] . . . rather, I‟m sorry. And it, I know a lot of kids or 

teachers use sports as leverage to do better in school, Mr. 

Speaker. They say, well you know, if you don‟t have your 

grades where they need to be, Mr. Speaker, you know, you 

can‟t participate in sports. So they use that as a little bit of a 

carrot. That‟s another thing youth sports can do, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think it gives kids a chance to do well in high school, so 

they can get a chance to get a scholarship maybe in a 

post-secondary institution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there‟s a lot, a lot of things that sports do in our community 

and to our youth. And I know our government in the first term 

. . . And of course they need a place to play, Mr. Speaker, and 

we‟ve put $122 million for sports capital projects just in our 

first term in government, Mr. Speaker. And I can quickly think 

here in Regina. I can think of Leibel Field, Mr. Speaker, a great 

. . . There‟s going to be no rainouts now, Mr. Speaker. There‟s 

no gopher holes on the field, Mr. Speaker. And what‟s very 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, is that opposition, they voted against 

this budget to have kids be involved in youth sports, Mr. 

Speaker. If it was up to the, if it was . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. I 

recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on April 24th the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana stated and I quote, “It‟s an 

expectation, I think, of any property owner that you have to pay 

your fair share of taxes.” Under the former NDP government, 

the Saskatchewan people paid the highest education property 

taxes in Canada. They promised property tax relief but did 

nothing. I ask the member from Saskatoon Massey Place, why 

does the NDP not support legislation that provides equality and 

fairness on education property tax, ensuring that all ratepayers 

pay their fair share? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow for the question. Clearly taxes are 

important, Mr. Speaker, to whatever order of government that 

they are paid because they do fund the programs and the 

services that people need. And people have an expectation 

when they receive these programs and services, especially in 

the area of education, that the services be there. I know in my 

constituency in Saskatoon Massey Place the good people of 

Hampton Village need a school, Mr. Speaker. Members 

opposite have not moved on this school. I know my 

constituents want that school, and I would encourage members 

opposite to make this a priority and provide a school for my 

constituents. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 

question to the member from Dewdney: how many people on 

the doorstep told him that they were looking for more 

politicians in the legislature? And how many seniors did he talk 

to about how their prescription drug costs were going to go up? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m really happy to talk 

about the previous election, Mr. Speaker. I think the people of 

Regina Dewdney, they wanted a Sask Party candidate, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think the people of Saskatchewan made their 

choice six months ago. They wanted responsible, sustainable 

government spending, Mr. Speaker. They wanted balanced 

budgets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they don‟t want their kids burdened with the unsustainable 

spending that those members over there had in their platform, 

Mr. Speaker, five and a half billion dollars over four years that 

would have led to massive deficits and that would have been 

. . . [inaudible] . . . over onto our kids or they would have had to 

raise taxes massively, Mr. Speaker. The people of the province, 

they didn‟t want that, Mr. Speaker. They didn‟t want those 

people over there to buy votes with their own money, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think we saw the results in this Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker, on November 7th. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 

member from Melfort, I‟m sure he loves the province and loves 

our history as do all members in this Assembly. An important 

part of our history is the role of the WDM in telling in our 

story. Volunteers do this. Employees do this. And they‟ve been 

doing it, Mr. Speaker, for some time. My question to the 

member from Melfort, his government has a willingness to 

spend millions more on politicians, but his government isn‟t 

providing the necessary resources for the WDM to stay open 

according to its traditional hours, teach young people, and 

welcome tourists. To the member from Melfort: how does he 

justify to the volunteers and the staff at the WDM that he‟ll 

spend millions on politicians but not on the WDM? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to have the question 

from the member from Saskatoon Massey. I think I answered 

the question while I was up on my feet, but I imagine I was 

going fairly, fairly rapidly. 

 

So in the last five years, the provincial government, the 

Saskatchewan Party provincial government has spent 34.6 per 

cent more in funding to the WDM. So I think that pretty much 

speaks for itself. And you know, when we talk about the WDM, 

you know, we‟re talking about Saskatchewan history. And you 

know, there‟s a lot about Saskatchewan history that is so 

important to all of us. But the part that I have trouble with more 

than anything in the Saskatchewan history is the fact that prior 

to 2000 . . . not prior to, in 2000, I‟m sorry . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Athabasca seems to be on both sides of this debate, as quoted 

from Hansard on March 5th, 2012, adjourned debates evening 

sitting. First quote: “There is no question that as our population 

growth continues that the question has to be asked when we‟re 

getting more seats,” page 294. 

 

Second quote: “. . . the obvious answer is yes, as the population 

grows. And you should have more MLAs as the population 

should reflect that in the number of seats that we have in the 

Assembly,” again page 294. 

 

Third quote: “I think [that] the overall thrust of the Bill in the 

terms to have more MLAs, and we think it is a great idea,” page 

296. “. . . there is a growing population and we need more seats. 

We agree with that, [and] . . . there is a growing population and 

more seats are necessary. We would applaud that . . .” page 

297. 

 

Yet in today‟s debate, he seems very much against Bill 36 and 

voted against the many good initiatives in the 2012-13 budget. 

To the member from Athabasca: will he support the Bill 

increasing constituencies? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — I thank that member for that question. 

What‟s important, Mr. Speaker, when we made those 

statements it was before we‟d seen the harmful cuts by the Sask 

Party government, before we saw that the elderly population in 

our province were paying more for their prescriptions, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟d done that before we heard about the amount of 

people that were losing their jobs and the programs, whether 

it‟s the film tax employment credit, Mr. Speaker, or a number 

of a host of other programs that the Sask Party cut, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now that being said, that being said, Mr. Speaker, the message 

I would have today: how about this proposition? How about the 

Saskatchewan Party and the NDP say okay, instead of having 

this debate back and forth, let‟s have the people decide. And I 

challenge that member, why don‟t you call for a public vote on 

this, a plebiscite, and let the people decide as opposed to the 

politicians going back and forth on that? Will that member 

accept the challenge to have a plebiscite on this Bill to add 

more MLAs or not, yes or no? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member‟s time is up. I recognize 

the member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca 

says, shared some useless information with us about octopus. 

Well here‟s some more: that a well-trained octopus can open a 

jar of shrimp. 

 

Seriously, Mr. Speaker, one of the building blocks of our 

society and one of the founding principles is that of equal 

access to quality education for all students, no matter what. On 

April the 5th, Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosemont, 

regarding education, stated that a top priority for us should be 

establishing a long-term vision. 

 

To the member from Athabasca: do you agree that eliminating 

the education property tax discount will help address funding 

for education and lead to greater equity for all students? Or 

should we return to the old, over-reliance on the property tax? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the most important thing that 

people ought to know is that education has been largely 

underfunded, Mr. Speaker, by this government. That‟s the 

bottom line. And as much as they try and change the channel 

and switch focus to their position on a few things, Mr. Speaker, 

overall we know that education in the province is suffering, and 

all roads lead to the Sask Party government in terms of how 

they failed to address a number of deficiencies within the 

education system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I go back to my earlier point. We‟d look at what the NDP 

done to rebuild this province, Mr. Speaker. When we started off 

rebuilding from the Tory mess left of the ‟80s, we had to pay 

three times, each and every year, on the interest of the debt left 

by their cousins — three times more than what we could afford 

to spend on education. So today that would translate into $3 

billion on interest alone for that government, Mr. Speaker. We 

faced those challenges and we met them head-on. 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Sask Party, shortly after the 

election, they‟ve pushed forward with increasing the costs for 

seniors and families with prescription drugs. They‟ve cancelled 

the property tax discount, and they‟ve spent millions of dollars 

moving forward to increase the number of politicians. 

 

None of this was talked about in the election. Why wasn‟t the 

member from Melfort straight with Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very pleased to 

answer this question, that I think we were. I think we were very, 

very straight with the Saskatchewan people when we talked 

about our fiscal responsibility, our balanced budgets, the way 

we run this province, the things we get done, the lack of having 

16 years without things happening. I think we had the answer to 

that question and I think the people in Saskatchewan said they 

kind of liked that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park, sorry. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP raised 

questions about tuition and affordability even though their 

record on post-secondary investment is abysmal — no 

enhancement to student financial assistance, paltry investments 

in student housing and high interest . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No 1 — Support for Keystone XL Pipeline 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Stewart.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It‟s my privilege and honour to rise today to 

speak in support of this motion calling upon all parties to 

support the Keystone XL pipeline without any further delay. 

And I‟m pleased to add my comments today and put them on 

the record. 

 

In recent months, there has been much more debate and 

discussion in traditional media and elsewhere regarding the job 

creation benefits of Keystone XL. During the last three years, 

TransCanada has provided facts on jobs for various 

governments, labour, media, and other interested stakeholders. 

Job data was provided throughout the three-year regulatory 

process for Keystone XL in the US [United States] by many 

presentations, regulatory filings, and permit proceedings. 

 

Most recently, TransCanada released additional details about 

Keystone XL‟s job creation potential. In total the $7 billion 

Keystone project would directly create 20,000 jobs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — 13,000 in construction and 7,000 in manufacturing. 

In Saskatchewan River‟s constituency, putting constituents first 

has always been our government‟s commitment. And in rural 

Saskatchewan, these jobs would be most appreciated. 

 

Thus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, employment opportunities are a 

good thing for Saskatchewan Rivers, for small villages, towns, 

all the rural municipalities. Growth and economic stability are 

needed to revitalize rural communities in Saskatchewan. Years 

of neglect have put infrastructure challenges in today‟s picture, 

and this government is addressing these issues. 

 

Now constituents from across Saskatchewan Rivers are looking 

forward and they‟re very optimistic to a resurgence of the forest 

industry after the closing of several mills under the previous 

government. Local communities such as Meath Park, Weirdale, 

Love, White Fox, Debden — all across the line of Sask Rivers 

constituency are eager to add this good news to our list of 

positive opportunities present in our communities today. The 

Keystone XL pipeline would create thousands of jobs with a 

ripple effect in the economy, creating more restaurants, 

mom-and-pop shops, tire stores, gas stations, and numerous 

retail outlets. Potential suppliers and new companies in the 

marketplace would be great opportunities for employees, 

attracting and retaining additional talent would be a very good 

problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to present to business and 

community groups. 

 

Current opportunities in growth forthcoming from the oil sector 

would also present job opportunities for First Nations and 

young people in the province. For many years, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we saw the outpouring of our young people, our 

greatest resource, over to other provinces. And now with this 

current government, we see the young people coming back, as 

well as other businesses. And I think this is a good news story 

for Saskatchewan. More people than ever can benefit in 

Saskatchewan, and we could actually say now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, Saskatchewan is now hiring. This would be a 

significant industry expansion, ranging from entry-level, 

unskilled labour to professional engineers if the pipeline would 

be allowed to come across the provinces. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would like to build our province into a 

leadership position. For many years, the previous government 

would say, we can‟t grow. We‟re stagnant; there‟s nothing we 

can do. But under the leadership of our great Premier, we see a 

different vision. We see hope, and we welcome new businesses, 

newcomers, thus providing growth and spin offs into the 

economy. And yes, hope does beat fear. So we‟re very proud of 

what our government is doing today. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re also proud of our unique province, 

and we are busy promoting it. Our province‟s position is 

growth and a balanced budget. We support growth and the 

economic benefit that this growth brings. We try to balance a 

growing province and a balanced budget to achieve and 

maintain a good quality of life. And this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

is called the Saskatchewan advantage. This advantage is about 

taking the benefits of having a strong, growing economy and a 

balanced budget, putting it to work for the Saskatchewan 

people and for the constituents of Saskatchewan Rivers that I 

represent. 

 

To support our historical growth, we are making investments — 

investments for our future generations, investments in 

highways, investments in health care, investments in 

agriculture, historical investments in our annual budgets, more 

than 2.2 billion in our highways system since 2007. People 

across the province are finally being able to have a breath of 

fresh air and say, your government is doing the right thing. We 

like to see what‟s happening. It‟s a good thing to see road 

construction in the summer months. 

 

Frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is ready to 

explore ideas that would benefit the Saskatchewan people, ideas 

like supporting the motion to support the Keystone XL pipeline, 

ideas like job and economic growth. This government will 

represent and listen to all Saskatchewan people. We will plan to 

grow. We will keep the economic momentum and facilitate the 

right business plan. We are determined to balance the only 

balanced budget in Canada, and we are very proud of that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We think this is all possible. And this 

government will continue to work on this plan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We are willing and able to explore ideas that will 

benefit Saskatchewan people, benefit with a balanced budget, 

and remain fiscally responsible and sustainable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to make sure we are proper 

stewards of our resources and lakes in Saskatchewan and we 

are providing monitoring and proper protection. Environment is 

very important to all of us. It‟s important to our families, our 

constituents. It‟s important to the whole province as well as the 

globe. We want to ensure proper assessments are done in 

Saskatchewan to keep us moving forward, thinking of the 

generations to come. 

 

Some of my colleagues on this side are a little older, so we are 

grandparents already. We speak with our grandchildren. We 

discuss with them the important aspects of the environment and 

how to protect our world. And in Saskatchewan Rivers 

constituency, we do enjoy a high quality of life with pristine 

lakes and beaches. I am very proud to say I have one of two 

national parks in Saskatchewan and many regional and 

provincial parks. I invite you to come out there and to see 

everything Saskatchewan has to offer. We are very proud of our 

province, and we are even prouder of the people who look after 

our province. 

 

Our government wants to ensure environmental regulations and 

management are being followed. We believe we can have both 

proper environmental stewardship and the economic growth of 

the Keystone XL pipeline. Location, quality, quantity — all of 

these things are very important to the residents and to the 

government of Saskatchewan. Our government is moving 

towards many long-term plans addressing the needs of this 

province. We want to work with all levels of government, and 

we will continue to work together as we face the challenges 

every government faces, every growing government faces. 

Supporting the Keystone XL pipeline is a prudent decision to 

make. Our government recognizes the economic growth this 

employment opportunity would facilitate. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, today in Saskatchewan, people expect 

balanced budgets, lower taxes, spending on infrastructure such 

as schools and hospitals. Today in Saskatchewan, we have the 

management of a great government and leadership. Mr. 

Speaker, the US government‟s decision to sideline portions of 

this project, the XL pipeline, until at least 2013 is jeopardizing 

a $7 billion project that will create thousands of jobs on both 

sides of the border — Saskatchewan, all in Canada, and in the 

United States — and billions more of additional dollars. 

 

The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that not all Canadian federal 

parties are united in support of this project, particularly the 

federal NDP. Mr. Speaker, if their opposition is rooted in 

ignorance to the facts, I would like to use this opportunity to 

inform them of the state of energy in Canada and 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Saskatchewan is Canada‟s second-largest producer of oil, home 

to a large part of the Bakken play. A formation of the US 

Geological Survey says it‟s the largest conventional play in 

North America, and one we share with both Montana and North 

Dakota, Mr. Speaker. Our province is the third-largest producer 

of natural gas. We produce 20 per cent of the world‟s uranium, 

and 5 per cent of the lights in the US are lit by Saskatchewan‟s 

uranium. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have 45.6 billion barrels of oil in place, and 

more than 38 billion barrels of that cannot be recovered using 

existing technology. Mr. Speaker, if we could increase our 

recovery rate through innovation and technology by just 5 per 

cent, it would triple our recoverable reserves of oil. Increasing 

our recovery rate by 10 per cent would increase our recoverable 

reserves sixfold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today‟s motion is about energy security in North 

America in general. But it‟s also specifically the Keystone XL 

pipeline and the jobs it will generate, the ripple effect it will 

have in the province. In general, Mr. Speaker, I do believe this 

is a very good motion. 

 

Here is some more facts of the Keystone XL pipeline. There 

will be 20,000 new North American jobs in construction and 

related manufacturing created by this project. There will be 

more than 118,000 spinoff jobs generated during the two years 

of construction. Mr. Speaker, think of all the young people that 

will be employed here. Our families will stay. Our cities will 

boom. Our villages and towns will have spinoffs — more 

restaurants, more shops . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟ll be great growth. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — It is. It‟s very great growth. Mr. Speaker, 

without Canada‟s oil, American‟s dependence on oil from the 

Middle East will continue. And a life cycle comparison of 

North American and imported crudes shows that oils from 

Venezuela and Iraq has about the same carbon dioxide footprint 

as Canadian oil sands oil and less than California heavy oil and 

Nigerian crude. Mr. Speaker, these findings were confirmed by 

the United States Department of Energy. 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

The Keystone XL pipeline enters Saskatchewan near McNeill, 

Alberta and continues south east to Monchy, Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, the total length of the pipeline in Saskatchewan is 

approximately 259 kilometres long. The Keystone XL pipeline 

is a National Energy Board regulated pipeline. So I do believe 

we feel fairly comfortable with this coming through 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the majority of the route follows the existing 

Foothills Pipeline constructed in 1981. Within the Great Sand 

Hills, the same route is followed. Through the Great Sand Hills 

includes crossing through approximately 3 kilometres on the 

extreme southwest edge of the Great Sand Hills. Again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the XL pipeline would be very good news for 

Saskatchewan — all the jobs generated, the ripple effects, the 

mom-and-pop shops, the tires, the restaurants. This is very good 

for Saskatchewan and our neighbouring provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about the 

environment and the environmentally sensitive areas within the 

Great Sand Hills. The portion of the Keystone pipeline that 

crosses the Great Sand Hills falls entirely in an environmentally 

sensitive area. But we have strict development conditions. And 

the crossing of the pipeline is not within the proposed 

biodiversity conservation area identified within The Great Sand 

Hills Regional Environmental Study. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Great Sand Hills advisory committee and 

rural municipalities influenced by the program have been 

consulted. And I believe that‟s very important, the consultation 

process. No concerns have been raised to date. I believe it will 

leave a much smaller footprint on the environment. And this 

government wants to leave a clean and healthy place for our 

grandchildren, our communities, and all our friends in 

Saskatchewan, our community, our province, and our globe. 

 

We are also investing in our greatest resource, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is our young people. Mr. Speaker, with the pipeline more 

young people will stay — more jobs, more schools, more 

families together. And that is a good news story in itself. If our 

young people don‟t have to leave the province, then families 

will be a lot happier, more economically stable. And I do 

believe this is the vision that our province has moving forward 

in a sustainable manner with growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now know that the state of Nebraska voiced 

concerns in the past about the XL pipeline being routed through 

environmentally sensitive areas. But TransCanada has since 

agreed to divert the 1,700 mile project away from the sensitive 

Nebraska Sandhills region. Investors are also united in the 

support for this pipeline. In fact Murray Edwards, one of the top 

investors and entrepreneurs in Canada‟s energy sector, regards 

“building pipelines” as one of the top issues in 2012. A 

November 29th piece in the National Post states: 

 

. . . existing pipelines will likely fill up around 2015 to 

2016 as oil sands production expands. That gives the 

sector a window of only three or four years to obtain 

regulatory approval and build new capacity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pipelines such as the proposed Keystone XL one 

serves a very important purpose, one that is obviously 

overlooked by some members of the House. Mr. Speaker, oil 

needs to get to market, and most markets are not located near 

the oil. Local demand isn‟t sufficient to consume the amount of 

oil extracted from the oil sands. And in some cases, there isn‟t 

enough labour or resources to handle the sheer number of 

projects going on, Mr. Speaker. We do have a lack of labour 

and resources, so they can make these projects economically 

unfeasible. That‟s jeopardizing the province‟s economic 

strength through loss of jobs.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this pipeline means jobs on both sides of the 

border. In fact, support for this pipeline is overwhelming. The 

American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial 

Organizations has voiced its support for the Keystone XL 

pipeline. On November 17th the Building and Construction 

Trades Department announced that it unreservedly supports the 

Keystone XL pipeline. They also said, and I quote: 

  

. . . that Keystone XL will create longer term employment 

in both Canada and the United States in refinery 

conversion projects, operations and maintenance. 

Moreover these jobs will keep an enormous amount of 

money circulating within North America. Energy security 

for North America comes from developing the oilsands 

and other Canadian energy projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same news release went on to quote Joseph 

Maloney, chairman of the CBDT, Canadian executive board 

and international vice-president for the International 

Brotherhood of Boilermakers, stating that: 

 

Jobs in Canada‟s oilsands are vital to North America. 

They support our standard of living and to be blunt, what 

is better for the North American economy, to support the 

United States and Canada or to support unfriendly foreign 

regimes? 

 

So thus, Mr. Speaker, I would like to state on record again, we 

do support the Keystone pipeline for all above reasons. For job 

security, financial support, ripple effect, mom-and-pop shops, 

keeping families together, it‟s very important that this comes 

through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP has apparently turned its back on this 

country‟s labour movement by effectively ignoring the 

concerns of an organization that represents over a dozen labour 

organizations including United Association of Journeyman and 

Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry of the 

United States and Canada, International Union of Operating 

Engineers, Sheet Metal Workers‟ International Association, 

International Association of Heat and Frost Allied Workers, 

International Union of Elevator Constructors, Plasterers and 

Cement Masons‟ International Association, Teamsters Canada, 

International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, International 

Union of Painters and Allied Trades, Laborers‟ International 

Union of North America, International Association of Bridge, 

Structural and Ornamental Iron Workers, the United 

Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America. Why would 

the NDP be so opposed to something that is vital to the interests 

of Canadians and which also has the unreserved support of 

Canada‟s labour movement, Mr. Speaker? 

 

There‟s certainly a lot of people involved here and everyone 

has an opinion. But, Mr. Speaker, we can only assume that the 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

NDP have become star-struck. Yes, Mr. Speaker, they saw an 

opportunity to rub elbows with the few celebrities who have 

turned faltering acting careers into a launch pad for ill-informed 

activism. 

 

How else would you explain the fact that two federal NDP MPs 

[Member of Parliament] went to Washington to lobby against 

the Keystone pipeline? Megan Leslie, the NDP environmental 

critic and Claude Gravelle, the NDP Natural Resources critic 

both lobbied the US federal government to reconsider the 

Keystone. What can you say to this? Loss of jobs, loss of 

family, everyone moving away. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with their new-found status as the official 

opposition, these two might be extending themselves just a bit 

too far. Why would they take the side of Robert Redford, as 

much as I do admire him as an actor, and Daryl Hannah, star of 

the movie Attack of the 50 Ft. Woman? Why would they take 

the side of these people, jeopardizing jobs for thousands and 

energy security? Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a very confusing 

situation — job security, moving the province forward, and 

listening to someone else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this pipeline isn‟t about the star-struck NDP MPs. 

It is about jobs and energy security for North America. We 

know that objections to this project for fear of an environmental 

catastrophe are very unfounded. In August of 2011, the United 

States Department of State, Bureau of Oceans and International 

Environmental and Scientific Affairs released its final 

environmental impact statement for the proposed Keystone XL 

project. 

 

[12:30] 

 

An Hon. Member: — What did it say? 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Well this report consulted the Pipeline and 

Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, which is the 

primary federal regulatory agency responsible for ensuring the 

safety of America‟s energy pipelines. And, Mr. Speaker, both 

organizations determined that, with Keystone agreeing to 

special conditions, the Keystone XL pipeline would: 

 

. . . result in a project that would have a degree of safety 

greater than any typically constructed domestic oil 

pipeline system under current regulations and a degree of 

safety along the entire length of the pipeline system that 

would be similar to that required in high consequence 

areas as defined in the regulations. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, this states itself, self-explanatory. Mr. 

Speaker, this may be one of the most heavily scrutinized 

pipelines and for good reason. It‟s important that energy 

security does not come at the expense of public safety and the 

environment, at our families, at our constituents of 

Saskatchewan, my own Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen Transcor 

Corporation and the Governor Heineman of Nebraska agree to 

reroute the proposed pipeline after concerns were raised by 

environmentalists. Everyone from state governors to organized 

labour to private industry has done their homework on this 

project, and the evidence is overwhelmingly in support of this 

pipeline. Mr. Speaker, as we travel across the province and visit 

our constituents, they tell us that this is a very good project. It 

will bring work. It will bring more revenue into their small 

towns, villages, rural municipalities, cities. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Across Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Yes, and not only across Saskatchewan but 

across North America and the border. Mr. Speaker, the only 

ones who haven‟t said that they‟re in support are a handful of 

ill-informed celebrities and a few of the remaining fans in the 

federal NDP and perhaps some other people in the House here, 

I‟m sad to say. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I have a few more facts about this pipeline. A 

recent report by The Heritage Foundation stated the following, 

and I quote: 

 

Delaying or even rejecting the construction of the 

Keystone XL pipeline will not achieve the 

environmentalists‟ goal — to shut down Canadian tar 

sands production itself. Whether the pipeline crosses 

through the U.S. or not, the oil from Canadian tar sands is 

not staying in the ground. [Mr. Speaker] Canadian Prime 

Minister Stephen Harper told President Obama that while 

the U.S. delays its decision, Canada will begin 

diversifying by shipping its oil to Asian markets. [Mr. 

Speaker] Harper said of the delay: “This highlights why 

Canada must increase its efforts to ensure it can supply its 

energy outside the U.S. and into Asia in particular. 

Canada will step up its efforts in that regard and I 

communicated that clearly to the President.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we see that opposition to this pipeline is 

not rooted in any reasonable argument. This same report also 

highlights how opposition to this project may have to lead to 

undesirable and unintended consequences for 

environmentalists. And I quote: 

 

With China‟s rapid economic growth, it is no surprise that 

that country would welcome the opportunity to import 

more oil from Canada. In fact, Canadian Natural 

Resource Minister Joe Oliver said that China was “very 

eager” to import oil from Canada. In addition, Enbridge, 

another Canadian company, is proposing to build a 

pipeline from Alberta to British Columbia to ship the oil 

to refineries in China. From an environmental standpoint, 

this means that Canada will ship the oil overseas in 

tankers, a much less efficient method of transporting oil. 

 

And I do hope the opposition is listening to this as I believe if 

you‟re interested in the environment, this is a critical piece of 

the puzzle, of the argument, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also means that China will refine the oil in refineries 

that are subject to fewer regulations than those in the 

United States — causing more, not less, environmental 

harm than if the pipeline were built in the U.S. 

Furthermore, the U.S. will have to import more oil via 

tankers from overseas or carry crude oil from Canada in 

trucks or rails. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe the facts do speak for themselves, 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

and that‟s why the people, the colleagues, the government on 

this side of the House are supporting the XL Keystone pipeline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the pipeline would also support the dramatic 

increase in oil production in North Dakota where pipeline 

infrastructure is lacking. Shutting down the Keystone XL 

pipeline project means that the environment and Americans, 

who would benefit from jobs and economic growth, lose out. Is 

this the scenario the NDP have in mind — less efficient 

shipping routes, jobs overseas, increased reliance on foreign oil 

from oppressive regimes, the risk of greater environmental 

danger? Mr. Speaker, these are the consequences of delaying 

and preventing this project, this very important Keystone XL 

pipeline project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to being on the wrong side of energy 

and food security, the federal NDP have resorted to insulting 

supporters of the Keystone XL in our House of Commons. 

When the NDP‟s Megan Leslie isn‟t chasing celebrities who are 

long past their prime or supporting efforts that jeopardize 

hundreds of thousands of North American jobs, she is lowering 

decorum in our House of Commons by calling Canada‟s 

Natural Resource minister “grumpy old man” during debate 

proceedings about the Keystone pipeline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, name calling isn‟t appropriate for this important 

issue. Yet this is what the federal NDP have been reduced to. 

Mr. Speaker, we are however pleased to see that today the US 

House of Representatives were able to pass legislation forcing a 

quick decision on the Keystone XL pipeline. I do apologize. It 

wasn‟t today; it was in the past, Mr. Speaker. It is our hope that 

President Obama along with the US senate and all federal 

parties join in support of this very important project. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here‟s what the oil and gas industry contribute 

to the Saskatchewan economy. Mr. Speaker, the oil and natural 

gas sector represents 16.3 per cent of economic value created in 

Saskatchewan, measured in current gross domestic product. The 

oil and gas producing industry continues to be one of the largest 

contributors among primary industries to provincial GDP [gross 

domestic product]. 

 

Also industry investment and new exploration and development 

in 2010 was approximately 4.5 billion and 4.3 billion estimated 

for 2011. Mr. Speaker, in 2010, the upstream oil and gas 

industry accounted for approximately 30,400 direct and indirect 

jobs and 31,850 estimated for 2011. Mr. Speaker, this is great 

news — job security. Sixty-five per cent to seventy per cent of 

Saskatchewan‟s crude oil production is exported to the United 

States. On average, Mr. Speaker, during 2010 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, as a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the member‟s point of order? 

 

Ms. Sproule: — We‟ve been asked to support a motion yet 

have been denied an opportunity to enter into debate on the said 

motion. Therefore we would appreciate an opportunity to speak 

to it, and as such I would like to move the following 

amendment, that this motion . . . 

 

The Speaker: — That is not a point of order. I recognize the 

member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, the 

combined value of oil and gas sales for 2010 was 

approximately 10.8 billion and 11.7 billion estimated for 2011. 

2,730 oil wells were drilled in 2010. As one of the first of 

November 2,899 oil wells have been drilled in 2011. 1,531 

horizontal oil wells were drilled in 2010. As one of the first of 

November, 1,643 horizontal oil wells have been drilled in 2011. 

Total land sale revenue for the 2011 calendar year amounted to 

248.8 million, making 2011 the fourth best on record for land 

sales revenues. Mr. Speaker, how can you not say this is not 

good news? This is great for our economy, great for the 

residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are approximately 81,500 oil and gas wells currently 

capable of production in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we can all 

see that our oil and gas sector is very important, vitally 

important to Saskatchewan‟s economy. Of course it‟s 

reasonable to assume that the oil and gas sector is equally 

important to other economics within North America. 

 

Pipelines are essential to ensuring the safe and efficient 

transportation of oil in various states of production, and I can 

say that the member from Rosetown, the Minister of Highways, 

has put 2.2 billion into our highway system over the next four 

years. This will enable us to help in the economic growth of 

Saskatchewan. If Canada only produced as much oil as it 

consumed, Mr. Speaker, the national economy would be 

decimated. Exporting oil from Saskatchewan and Canada is 

very vital to the national interest. From the US, importing oil 

from Canada is better than the alternative of importing oil from 

countries that do not aspire to the democratic values of 

Canadians and the residents here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So in a sense, Mr. Speaker, this is not just about energy and 

food security, nor is it simply about creating new jobs for 

Canadians and Americans, although these are very worthy goals 

and of themselves are very good things. Mr. Speaker, this is 

about providing our neighbours to the south with a product that 

is recovered and transported from a country that is ethical. Our 

oil and oil sands are, without a doubt, ethical when you 

compare our nation‟s policies to that of other major oil 

producing nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on all fronts this Keystone XL project has been 

shown to benefit all stakeholders, notwithstanding the whining 

and bleeding of a few uninformed NDP MPs and celebrities. 

And, Mr. Speaker, with a new leader we hope that the 

provincial and federal NDP will now throw its support behind 

the Keystone XL pipeline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our neighbours to the west just had an election. 

And even after this, Alberta remains a strong supporter of its oil 

industry. They are focusing on new markets for Canadian crude 

and will try to persuade Washington to let the Keystone XL 

pipeline go ahead. Mr. Speaker, in an article for Reuters, dated 

April 24, 2012: 

 

“We expect the focus of the [Alberta] government will be 

on maintaining a stable, healthy economy, one that 

continues to attract investment to our province, provides 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

good jobs, and improves Alberta‟s overall quality of life,” 

the Canadian petroleum producers said in a statement. 

“Alberta has the opportunity to „set the tone‟ and 

demonstrate leadership for policy and regulation that 

enables responsible oil . . . development.” 

 

[12:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Redford used her first news conference after her 

victory to reaffirm her support for this oil industry. And I have 

been talking to my colleagues from the west over the border, 

discussing the merits of this pipeline, the benefits to all of our 

provinces, opening up more markets and jobs. And we have 

great discussions, Mr. Speaker, on the XL pipeline. And in our 

discussions, Mr. Speaker, we were saying it‟s all great for the 

economy that the pipeline would go through, but this XL 

pipeline would also give back to our communities. Can you 

imagine what it would give back to our communities in many 

different ways, the growth? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that Saskatchewan is moving in 

the right direction with our balanced budgets and our historical 

announcements as well as supporting the motion for the 

pipeline. In the Keystone Connection, Canadian edition, 

December 2011, I would like to quote: 

 

TransCanada has worked with the DOS for the past three 

years in what has been by far the most exhaustive and 

detailed review ever conducted of a crude oil pipeline in 

the United States. To ensure Keystone XL would be the 

safest pipeline ever built, a draft, supplemental draft and 

Final Environmental Impact Statement were all issued for 

Keystone XL — totalling over 10,000 pages. Since 2008 

more than 100 open houses and public meetings in six 

States took place, thousands of pages of supplemental 

information and responses to questions were submitted to 

state and federal agencies. and the DOS received over 

400,000 comments on the project. 

 

Fourteen different routes for Keystone XL were studied, 

eight that impacted Nebraska. They included one 

potential alternative route in Nebraska that would have 

avoided the entire Sandhills region and six alternatives 

that would have reduced pipeline mileage, crossing the 

Sandhills or the aquifer. TransCanada hopes this work 

will serve as a starting point for the additional review and 

help expedite the review process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the pipelines have been operating safely and in 

accordance with high standards for decades in Saskatchewan. 

The lack of pipeline capacity in North America has resulted in 

challenges for Saskatchewan‟s oil producers, and it is possible 

that this could slow down the growth of Saskatchewan‟s 

production. The construction of the Keystone XL pipeline will 

result in hundreds of jobs for Saskatchewan people, thousands 

of jobs for North America and across the border, and 

considerable economic benefits for communities and businesses 

in the area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is all great news, great news for the growth of 

Saskatchewan along with our balanced budget. Expansion of 

the pipeline capacity, going both north and south and east and 

west, is critical for the continued expansion of Saskatchewan‟s 

oil and gas industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have to say that the NDP history hasn‟t been 

so great with the Keystone XL pipeline. The NDP have been all 

over the map on their support or rejection of the oil and gas 

industry. Does this mean they don‟t want jobs, they don‟t want 

growth, they don‟t want their families to stay here in 

Saskatchewan? Do we want to see our young people migrate 

away again? 

 

The NDP have had several resolutions at their conventions in 

the past, and they‟ve called for a phase-out of oil while when in 

government, they actively promoted the industry. So it is very 

confusing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Keystone Connection, Canadian edition 

dated December 2011, I would like to quote: 

 

We remain confident Keystone XL will ultimately be 

approved. This project is too important to the US 

economy, the Canadian economy and the national interest 

of the United States for it not to proceed. 

 

This came from the president and CEO of TransCanada, Russ 

Girling. 

 

He says how the delay in the US impacts Canada: 

 

With the recent announcement by the US Department of 

State to defer its decision on the Keystone XL pipeline, 

we understand that our Canadian stakeholders may have 

some questions regarding the status of the project. While 

we were somewhat surprised at the DOS decision, 

TransCanada remains confident that Keystone XL will 

ultimately be approved as it is too important to the US 

economy and its national interest. As well Keystone XL 

remains the best option for producers to supply crude oil 

to US Gulf Coast refineries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from The Globe and Mail: 

“Canada‟s oil sands: Not so dirty after all.” This was published 

on Monday, February 20th, 2012. I will quote: 

 

Canada‟s government, which has threatened a trade war 

over a proposed European rule to penalize oil-sands crude 

in a bid to clean up transportation fuels, has a powerful 

new argument in its favour, as new research shows other 

energy sources are far more dangerous to the climate. 

 

On Thursday, a committee of the European Union will 

vote on a proposed fuel-quality directive intended to 

reduce the carbon footprint of gasoline and diesel on that 

continent. The directive directly penalizes oil-sands crude 

for its high-emissions content, using language that 

oil-sands supporters and others have called “flawed” . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have something from the Stateline Midwest. This 

is discussing decisions on an oil pipeline run through the 

Midwest: “The Keystone XL pipeline project: A time line of 

the application and approval process.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of discussion and thought has been going 

into the XL Keystone pipeline. It doesn‟t matter whether you 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2012 

talk to our neighbours to the West, the Albertans, or our 

neighbours to the South, in Montana, our American friends. 

Everyone is saying the XL pipeline should go ahead. It creates 

jobs. It creates growth. It keeps families together. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟s about the people. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — It is. It is about the people. Mr. Speaker, as we 

talk about the XL Keystone pipeline, and there‟s been much 

debate in the recent months, the media has weighed in about job 

creation benefits of XL Keystone. And during the last three 

years, TransCanada has provided facts on jobs to all the various 

governments, the labour, and media and other interested 

stakeholders. Job data was provided throughout the three-year 

regulatory process for Keystone XL in the US. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP claim that the Saskatchewan Party 

government is secretly trying to sell off our oil and water to 

dangerous foreign . . . other people. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the creation of pan-Canada strategy for 

energy production and exports has been widely discussed for 

several years. There is no secretive element to current 

discussions of the strategy. Energy and Mines ministers met in 

July 2011 and announced the draft of a Canadian energy 

strategy that would look to explore new markets for energy 

exports as well as articulate a vision of Canada as an energy 

superpower. During the December 2011 meeting of the three 

New West Partnership premiers, it was announced that a 

Canadian energy strategy would integrate the energy economy 

and include technology, infrastructure, and market access 

dimensions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP has some history about this. The NDP 

had no vision for the province as an energy superpower and in 

the 2011 election denounced the oil and gas industry despite its 

importance to the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see that our oil and gas sector is vitally 

important to Saskatchewan‟s economy. Of course it‟s 

reasonable to assume that the oil and gas sector is equally 

important to other economies within North America, our 

neighbours to the west, our neighbours to the south, and 

pipelines are essential to ensuring the safe and efficient 

transportation of oil in various states of production. Exporting 

oil from Canada and Saskatchewan is vital to the national 

interest, Mr. Speaker. For the US, importing oil from Canada is 

better than importing oil from other countries. And our oil and 

oil sands are, without a doubt, very important and ethical when 

you compare our nation‟s policies to that of other major oil 

producing nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the XL pipeline is not just about energy and oil 

security, but it is about growth in Saskatchewan. It‟s about our 

own Saskatchewan balanced budget, how we are doing the right 

thing with a vision, how we are under the right leadership, how 

the colleagues on this side listen to their constituents about 

what they‟re saying about oil security and growth in the 

province. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we see that opposition to this pipeline 

is not rooted to any reasonable argument. The opposition may 

think we have some scary things happening, but it isn‟t so. We 

want to see our province grow. And I believe we can have it all. 

We can have a balanced budget with sustainable growth, a 

pipeline that brings things, positive things to Saskatchewan and 

our neighbours, safe transportation . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It being near the hour of adjournment, it is 

my duty pursuant to rule 26 to advise the Assembly that this 

item of business has been previously adjourned three times and 

that every question necessary to dispose of the motion will now 

be put. 

 

The motion before the Assembly from the member for Thunder 

Creek: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all parties in the federal 

Parliament of Canada to unite in support of the Keystone 

XL pipeline project without further delay. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

[13:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members, recorded division. 

 

[The division bells rang from 13:00 until 13:05.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the member for Thunder Creek: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all parties in the federal 

Parliament of Canada to unite in support of the Keystone 

XL pipeline project without further delay. 

 

All those in favour, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 37] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Krawetz McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Bradshaw Reiter Ross 

McMillan Harpauer Harrison 

Wyant Hickie Elhard 

Hart Tell Brkich 

Stewart Ottenbreit Weekes 

Heppner Wilson Michelson 

Kirsch Merriman Doke 

Makowsky Jurgens Steinley 

Doherty Lawrence Tochor 

Moe Marchuk Phillips 

Docherty   

 



May 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 6] 

 

Nilson Belanger Wotherspoon 

Broten Sproule McCall 

 

Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those agreed to the motion, 

37; those opposed, 6. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. The motion is carried. It 

now being after the hour of adjournment, this House stands 

adjourned to 1:30 p.m., Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:08.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1399 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1399 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1406 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1406 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1412 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1399 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1399 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1399 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1399 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Spring Festival of New Plays 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

 Good News for Saskatoon 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

 Impressive Performance at a National Debating Tournament 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

 Corporate Income Tax Rebate on New Rental Housing 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1401 

 A Lifetime Dedication to Community Service 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1401 

 International Day of the Midwife 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1401 

 Special Olympics Bowling Tournament Awards 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1401 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Review of Labour Legislation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1402 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1402 

 Supply of Nurses 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1403 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1403 

 Medical Training Programs 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1404 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1404 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1405 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of the Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1407 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Priorities 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1407, 1416 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1409 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1410, 1417 

  Phillips ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1412, 1417 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1413, 1416 

  Makowsky...................................................................................................................................................................... 1415, 1416 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1416 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1417 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1417 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1418 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1418 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No 1 — Support for Keystone XL Pipeline 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1418 

  Sproule (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................... 1422 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 1422 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1424 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


