




















































Hansard: October 29, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 3A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 29, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1597 

 October 29, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce and welcome a very 

special guest, Mr. Tony Kay, consul general of the United 

Kingdom at Calgary, to the province of Saskatchewan and to 

our Legislative Building. This is not only Mr. Kay’s first 

official visit to our province, but it is the first visit of a consul 

general of the United Kingdom from their newly opened 

consulate office in Calgary. 

 

Mr. Kay will be in this post for four years, and we look forward 

to working with him closely during his time on the Prairies. Mr. 

Kay was awarded the Order of the British Empire by Her 

Majesty The Queen earlier this year for his work during the 

Arab Spring. Congratulations to you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many reasons that Saskatchewan 

celebrates its relationship with the United Kingdom. 

Saskatchewan has strong cultural linkages with the United 

Kingdom. Saskatchewan’s Legislative Building was officially 

opened by Queen Victoria’s son Prince Arthur, Governor 

General from 1911 to 1916 and with Earl Grey, former 

Governor General being in attendance. Forty-three per cent of 

Saskatchewan’s population claims some British ancestry, with 

1,671 new residents arriving between 2006-2011. The UK 

[United Kingdom] is Saskatchewan’s sixth largest trading 

partner and the fifth largest foreign investor in Saskatchewan. 

 

While in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kay will meet with 

many cabinet colleagues, leaders of post-secondary and 

business communities. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan enjoys a strong bond with the 

people of the United Kingdom, and it is through missions like 

this that we will continue to strengthen that bond. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all members of this Legislative Assembly 

to join me in welcoming Mr. Kay to Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

welcome the consul general to Saskatchewan. It’s a very good 

role and we appreciate the fact that you are serving in a 

full-time capacity. 

 

I am the former Norwegian consul for Saskatchewan, and so I 

understand how the consular corps works. I encourage you to be 

involved with the consular corps of Saskatchewan because they 

have many valuable experiences that are available for you. So 

on behalf of the official opposition, we welcome you to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to welcome a 

whole crew of students that are in the east gallery. We have 47 

grade 5 and 6 students from Ethel Milliken School in Regina 

Lakeview. And one of the students, Mikyla Myers, is down here 

on the floor. They’re accompanied by Janice Hiebert and Lori 

Skoberg, the teachers; and educational assistant Holly Sinclair 

who’s up in the gallery; and Bailey Kasko who’s here down on 

the floor. And I ask all members to welcome them to the 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members, I would like to introduce two individuals 

from the University of Regina who are seated in your gallery. 

Ms. Anna Dipple is the vice-president external with the 

University of Regina Students’ Union who is here today, as 

well as Joseph Mburu who is an instructor at the U of R 

[University of Regina]. I’d ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these individuals to the legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of this House, I’d like to introduce some 

folks in your gallery. We have here today Brenda Shenher, 

Tracy George, Terry Mialkowsky, Paul Compton, Luke 

Annand, Ian Gardner, and Mike Burns. These are all folks, Mr. 

Speaker, who are involved in the film industry and are waiting 

hopefully for the government to put in place a program that 

works. But every week they’re watching their colleagues and 

friends leave the province, Mr. Speaker. With that, I would like 

my colleagues to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that positive statistics show that convenience stores and gas 

station robberies are down by one-third since 1999, largely due 

to increased safety practices, including two people working 

together on late-night shifts. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Jimmy’s law, to 

ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to rise today to present a petition on expanding cell 

coverage. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cellular service to the Canoe Lake First Nations, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon, 

and the neighboring communities of Michel Village and 

St. George’s Hill; the English River First Nation, also 

known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations and the neighboring 

community of Turnor Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition here has signatures from people from 

Patuanak, from Meadow Lake, from Saskatoon, and all 

throughout the province. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of Saskatchewan people as it relates to the finances in 

our province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

standards in following the independent Provincial 

Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin to provide 

responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy financial 

management as deserved by Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Saskatoon and Weyburn. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of the leadership in the community of Wollaston 

Lake. And the prayer reads as: 

 

Let the Government of Saskatchewan stop turning their 

back on the people from northern Saskatchewan and start 

investing in public highways in the North. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the construction on the 

road to Wollaston Lake, which was started under the 

previous NDP government, has shown little to no 

progress and must be completed quickly. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of Wollaston Lake. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Persons Day 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, October 18th was Persons Day in 

Canada, which marks the day the Persons Case was handed 

down in 1930 by the Privy Council. This was an historic 

milestone for women’s legal rights. Due to the efforts of a 

group of activist women known as the Famous Five, which 

included Nellie McClung and Emily Murphy, women were 

finally legally recognized as persons, 51 years after 

Confederation. 

 

Today organizations such as the Saskatoon Council of Women 

continue to work on improving the quality of life for women in 

our communities. On October 23rd the Saskatoon Council of 

Women celebrated Persons Day with a luncheon to honour the 

accomplishments of two Saskatoon women, and my colleague 

the member for Saskatoon Riversdale was present at that 

luncheon. 

 

At the event, Brenda Baker and Shirley Haines were inducted 

into the Saskatoon Women’s Hall of Fame. Brenda Baker is a 

noted singer-songwriter and mentor in the Saskatchewan music 

scene. She is the founder of Kids of Note, a children’s choir that 

is accessible for children with disabilities. She devotes her life 

to the arts, working for social justice, and contributing to many 

other community organizations. 

 

Shirley Haines has been an educator, actively participating in 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation while leading the way 

in many other organizations working to improve lives and 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating 

Brenda Baker and Shirley Haines, along with the Saskatoon 

Council of Women, on the important contributions that they 

make to our lives and our communities. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 20th I 

had the distinct pleasure of presenting at the 2012 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce ABEX [Achievement in 

Business Excellence] Awards. In 1984 Saskatchewan’s 

Chamber of Commerce introduced ABEX awards to honour 

outstanding achievement in business excellence. The awards 

have gained prominence as the most highly esteemed symbols 

of business excellence in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 

enterprises are recognized for the commitment to their 

employers  in their communities as well as long-term growth 

they have achieved. 

 

It was an honour to present the 2012 ABEX award for 

Aboriginal Business Partnership to Kendall Netmaker of 

Neechie Gear. Neechie Gear was also a 2012 ABEX award 

winner in the community involvement category. Kendall and 

Neechie Gear are a purpose-driven clothing company that 

elevates young athletes from across Canada while promoting 

the positive aspects of sports among youth. 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

Neechie Gear also uses their large customer base to support and 

develop their non-profit organization, the NG Athletics Club 

which creates, develops, and supports youth-based sports teams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Kendall Netmaker and all of the 2012 Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce ABEX Award winners for their commitment to 

their communities all across our province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Ânskohk Aboriginal Literature Festival 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

weekend Saskatoon hosted the Ânskohk Aboriginal Literature 

Festival. The Saskatchewan Aboriginal Writers Circle started 

this annual event in 2004. The event was hosted in partnership 

with the Saskatchewan Writers Guild and the Saskatchewan 

Aboriginal Literacy Network. Mr. Speaker, this event is one of 

only two literacy festivals of its kind in all of Canada. 

 

Festivals like this one make it possible to bring Aboriginal 

authors from all across Canada to educate the public on the 

richness of Aboriginal literacy and to promote further 

understanding of Aboriginal people. Special guests include a 

legendary country singer, Sylvia Tyson; Darren Prefontaine, 

winner of the 2011 Book of the Year Award for Saskatchewan 

Book Awards; and John Lagimodiere, publisher and editor of 

Eagle Feather News; past poet laureate of Saskatchewan, 

Louise Halfe; and Curtis Peeteetuce, artistic director of 

Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company. 

 

On behalf of the NDP [New Democratic Party] caucus, I ask all 

members of this legislature to join me in congratulating the 

organizers of this very successful event. I’m proud of the talent 

we have in this province, and I thank Ânskohk Aboriginal 

Literature Festival for showcasing this talent. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

rise in the House to draw attention to Breast Cancer Awareness 

Month. Breast cancer continues to be the most common cancer 

in Canadian women over the age of 20. It is estimated that one 

in nine women are expected to develop breast cancer over the 

course of their lifetime, and in 2012 nearly 23,000 Canadian 

women will be diagnosed with breast cancer. Mr. Speaker, I am 

sure everyone in this House has known someone who has been 

affected by breast cancer. Too many of our mothers, daughters, 

sisters, and grandmothers have been lost to this terrible illness. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, effective screening offers the best chance for 

early detection and treatment of breast cancer. New digital 

mammography equipment is now available on Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency’s mobile unit that travels throughout rural 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, every woman screened is a 

potential life saved. 

 

Through continued innovation in research and treatment, early 

detection, and an unconquerable desire to beat this illness, we 

will continue to make historic gains in the fight against breast 

cancer. Mr. Speaker, together, through initiatives like Breast 

Cancer Awareness Month, we will continue to make progress in 

the fight against breast cancer. Together we can beat breast 

cancer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Foundation Donates to Saskatoon Art Gallery 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in this 

House to pay tribute to two proud Saskatchewan citizens, Dr. 

Frederick Mulder and Ellen Remai. Dr. Frederick Mulder, a 

London-based art dealer who grew up in Eston and is a 

University of Saskatchewan alumnus, assembled a collection of 

405 Pablo Picasso linocut prints over a 10-year period. It is 

considered the most impressive collection of Picasso linocuts 

on the planet. 

 

Ellen Remai, a Saskatoon businesswoman and a philanthropist, 

purchased the collection, and through the Frank and Ellen 

Remai Foundation she has donated the entire $20 million 

collection to the Remai Art Gallery. It is among the most 

valuable art donations in Canadian history. 

 

In addition to the world-renowned Picasso prints, the 

foundation has also donated 30 million to the Remai Art 

Gallery for the construction and future programming of the 

gallery. Mr. Speaker, the extremely generous donation by the 

Frank and Ellen Remai Foundation, although the biggest, is not 

their first. The foundation has been active in the Saskatoon 

community for years, particularly in the fields of education, 

social issues, and the arts. Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank Ms. 

Remai for her generosity and, most importantly, her passion for 

Saskatchewan arts and culture. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

International Year of the Co-operative 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 2012 has been 

designated by the United Nations as the International Year of 

the Co-operative. Co-operatives are democratically controlled, 

member-driven organizations that are formed to provide goods 

and services to its members. Around the world, co-operatives 

employ 100 million people — 20 per cent more than 

multinational enterprises — while in Canada, 150,000 people 

are employed by co-operatives. 

 

Saskatchewan has a long and storied history of co-operatives. In 

1895 a group of dairy farmers in the settlement of Saltcoats 

formed Saskatchewan’s first co-operative butter creamery. In 

1935 Consumers’ Co-operative Refineries Ltd. was established 

by farmers in Regina. And in 1985 the first debit card was 

piloted in the Swift Current area at Pioneer Co-op. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan there are more than 1,200 co-operatives 

that employ nearly 15,000 people across the province, and 28 of 

the top 100 companies in Saskatchewan are either co-operatives 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

or credit unions. In Saskatchewan, 56 per cent of the population 

are members of at least one co-operative. Co-operatives are an 

integral part of Saskatchewan’s economy. They provide gainful 

employment and valuable services across the province. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing the important 

contributions of Saskatchewan co-operatives and to 

congratulate them on 2012 being the International Year of the 

Co-operative. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Canadian Patient Safety Week 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government started 

the journey to transform our health system with the concept that 

patient comes first. And that principle is driving quality, 

service, and safety throughout the system and to the front lines 

where service begins. For this reason, Mr. Speaker I’d like to 

recognize October 29th to November 2nd as Canadian Patient 

Safety Week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to commend Saskatchewan’s health 

providers, along with the Canadian Patient Safety Institute, for 

their commitment to safety practices and procedures. Mr. 

Speaker, our doctors and nurses now routinely use surgical 

safety checklists in hospital operating rooms. This simple but 

important practice ensures standard steps are followed. It also 

encourages better communication between health care 

providers, which improves patient safety significantly. Health 

providers are also taking additional safety steps to reduce the 

number of infections among surgical patients based on 

best-known evidence and practice. 

 

Reducing the number of falls among patients is another safety 

focus. Through the Saskatchewan Falls Collaborative, health 

regions are taking measures to reduce falls and injury from falls 

among long-term care patients and home care residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to patients and their 

safety. We will continue to ensure top quality health care, 

delivered in the safest way possible, for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Influenza Immunization 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Families across 

Saskatchewan are concerned with the news that flu shots are 

suspended across the province due to problems with the vaccine 

provided by the company Novartis. These vaccinations are very 

important to Saskatchewan residents, especially to young 

children and seniors. 

 

My question to the minister: when will the flu shot clinics 

reopen across the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly safety of patients is our first priority. When 

we were notified late last week that there was an issue that was 

seen in a batch of Novartis vaccine that was being 

manufactured, Mr. Speaker, we took the recommendation of 

Health Canada that we temporarily suspend vaccination 

programs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are, as we speak, working with not only the 

manufacturer and Health Canada to determine when we can 

begin again with Novartis. And in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, 

should that not be the case, there are other provinces that have 

ample supply of the other two vaccines that have been approved 

by Health Canada. And we will know within the next day or so 

whether we will continue on with Novartis in our flu clinics or 

whether we will continue on with the other two vaccines. And 

we’ll be making that announcement within the next day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The recommendation 

from Health Canada was made last Friday regarding the 

concerns with the vaccines from Novartis. The news however 

has had a different impact in different provinces. In some 

provinces, Mr. Speaker, the flu clinics have been proceeding as 

normal. This is because Novartis is only a percentage of their 

flu vaccine supply. As reported in the media, Novartis makes up 

1 per cent of supplies in Manitoba, 22 per cent in Alberta, and 

30 per cent in British Columbia. 

 

My question to the minister: what percentage of 

Saskatchewan’s flu vaccines are provided by Novartis? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is in a fairly unique 

situation along with one or two other provinces in the fact that 

Novartis currently makes up the vast majority of our flu 

vaccine. This is, Mr. Speaker, because provinces across Canada 

as well as Health Canada have bulk purchased the flu vaccine 

for this year. Three vendors, suppliers had been selected. And 

just in terms of logistics to supply all the different provinces, 

Novartis was essentially the supplier of choice for the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, we do know that at least three 

other provinces have ample supply of the other two vaccines in 

the event that Novartis cannot be continued to be used. Mr. 

Speaker, if that is the case then we will take our supply from 

those other provinces. And as I said, we’ll make that decision in 

the next day or so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Flu shots are very 

important to Saskatchewan patients and residents. It’s peace of 

mind for many families and they have a real benefit saving 

health dollars in the long run and helping Saskatchewan 

residents through the flu season. It appears, Mr. Speaker, that 

other provinces have been better at diversifying their supply of 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

the vaccine. My question to the minister: why is it that our 

supply of the vaccine has not been diversified as we’ve seen in 

other provinces? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and to the member for his question. Certainly I think it is fair to 

say that the flu vaccine across Canada has been well diversified. 

That allows us within just a matter of days to be able to 

determine that other provinces are in the position to supply flu 

vaccines from the other two manufacturers in the event that 

Novartis can no longer be used in the province. 

 

I think it’s important though for me to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

while the regulatory agency in Italy, where this manufacturer is 

located, has identified issues with the current lot of this vaccine 

that is being produced, certainly at no time when the lot of this 

vaccine was being manufactured did that regulatory body 

identify any concerns, nor did Health Canada who is the 

regulatory body within Canada for this vaccine and with all 

vaccines. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important to note that at this time 

we don’t have any concerns with those people that have already 

received the flu shot, Mr. Speaker, and we hope to be able to 

continue on with the important work of our flu clinics within 

the next week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party’s 

spring budget decimated the film industry. Every day since then 

people have had to make the most difficult choice — stay in the 

province they love and not work or earn a living in another 

province that actually understands competitiveness. We want to 

stem that out-migration and so do the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Recently I learned the Minister of Culture has been briefed on a 

study partially funded with public dollars through SaskFilm. 

This study shows the Sask Party government’s decision to axe 

the film employment tax credit was the wrong one. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister has this information that shows the 

industry deserves support to keep our cultural economy 

flourishing. 

 

Can the minister tell this House today what he has been briefed 

on in this study and why he has taken no action to reverse his 

government’s decision to kill the film industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

with respect to the question that the hon. member asked, she 

and I had a discussion about this. She knows full well that I was 

presented with a report from the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce that was done in conjunction with SaskFilm. And as 

I have said to her in our private meeting that we had last week, 

that we sat down and talked about these issues, I’m okay if the 

Sask Chamber of Commerce wants to release the report or if 

SaskFilm wants to release the report. They have asked me not 

to release it, Mr. Speaker. It’s not my report. 

 

Now what I can say, and I’ve said this to the hon. member in 

our conversation, is that particular study showed that there was 

an economic benefit to the province for the film industry. And 

as I asked her, I said, show me an industry in Saskatchewan that 

doesn’t derive an economic benefit if you’re receiving a 

refundable tax credit to help offset your labour costs. I can’t 

imagine what the mining sector would do in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, with the same kind of refundable tax credit, or the oil 

and gas sector or the agriculture sector. 

 

What I’ve said to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, the refundable 

tax credit in its current form was gone as of June 30th of this 

year. We have implemented a creative consultation process with 

our creative industry to sit down, talk to the film industry, the 

visual arts, the crafts people, the publishing industry, the music 

industry, Mr. Speaker, on how government can support all of 

our creative . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Usually you don’t 

cut a program that is key to a sector and then do consultations. 

When public dollars go into a study — public dollars, Mr. 

Speaker — the public has the right to know what the study has 

found. The minister believed it worth his time to be briefed on 

the study. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand the study found that the net cost of 

the tax credit to the province is $735,000, less money than this 

government has budgeted for a non-refundable tax credit that 

will be useless to the industry. Mr. Speaker, the minister should 

help clear the air. Will he table the study and explain to the 

people of the province why, when presented with the facts, he’s 

still not standing up for the film industry now, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said to 

the hon. member, I have no difficulty if the chamber of 

commerce, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce wants to 

release that study; if SaskFilm wants to release that study. I’m 

sure they’d be more than happy to share it with you. 

 

But interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, what the study did show 

is that there was a net cost to the taxpayer in this province for 

implementing the refundable tax credit to the film industry. So 

what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is we are working in 

conjunction with MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

here that were appointed by the Premier, cabinet committee, 

and going around the province and talking to all of our creative 

industries — all of our creative industries — on creating a 

mechanism, Mr. Speaker, that will benefit all of our creative 

industries. 

 

And what that model looks like, Mr. Speaker . . . And you don’t 

have to take my word for it. The Saskatchewan Media 

Production Industry Association sent me a letter in their formal 

presentation asking that a new model program needs to place a 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

greater emphasis on indigenous production. I don’t think we 

have a problem with that, Mr. Speaker. It should support greater 

Saskatchewan expenditures to promote industry sustainability. 

It should be as cost neutral as possible. It needs to be . . . 

[inaudible] . . . requirements will not participate in what is seen 

as a bidding war. And it cannot be a tax-related initiative, in 

other words not a refundable tax credit, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

SMPIA’s position on this. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see that he’s had a 

week to work on his talking points on this matter. The only 

way, Mr. Speaker, for the people to know the facts is for the 

minister to release the information provided in the 

taxpayer-funded study that was commissioned by SaskFilm and 

the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. It is common sense 

to keep an industry that creates jobs, economic spinoff, and 

pride of place. Shamefully the minister and this Sask Party 

government doesn’t seem to let facts get in the way when they 

make decisions. 

 

As the minister referenced, I had a chance to meet with him last 

week. He told me the study even includes details about the 

things like the number of hairdressers who benefit from our 

province’s film and television sector — highly detailed. 

 

When was the minister aware of the study and why is he not 

using the information contained in the study to reverse the bad 

decision his government has made? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell you is 

during this creative industry consultation process we’ve had 45 

submissions come into the government online. We’ve had 

several meetings in the city of Saskatoon and the city of Regina 

where we’ve had 77 representatives come out from the creative 

industries — all creative industries in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. The film industry is the only industry in Saskatchewan 

that enjoys the benefit of a refundable tax credit, a refundable 

tax credit to help offset labour costs. 

 

Now we know what the position of Mr. Weir is on this. Mr. 

Weir has come out and said in his leadership contest for the 

NDP he would reinstate the refundable tax credit and he would 

do it by a $200 million tax grab by increasing taxes on small 

businesses. And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP position, the Finance 

critic when asked what he thought about that said, I don’t know; 

I need to study that plan. Mr. Speaker, we reduced taxes on this 

side of the House. The Minister of Finance reduced small-

business tax from four and a half to 2 per cent in the most 

recent budget. They want to increase taxes on small businesses, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is such a shame 

that this government cannot seem to admit its glaring error on 

this file. Supporting the film industry means supporting a tax 

incentive to leverage investment and create jobs as it does with 

other industries that receive support from this government. We 

saw this in the Throne Speech with the tax cut for big business, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister knows a study exists. He knows it contains 

information that proves his government made a bad decision. 

He knows the report shows a refundable tax credit creates jobs 

and boosts the economy in so many ways. And he knows the 

net cost to the province would be $735,000. The minister and 

his government have put $1 million on the table for a tax credit 

that won’t work. Why will he not listen to the industry and the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce? Why will he not rely on 

the independent study that shows the original refundable tax 

credit would actually cost taxpayers less in the end? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. In difficult 

budget decisions this past budget, this government chose to 

invest in low-income seniors in this province — the most 

vulnerable seniors in this province — and you folks didn’t give 

a dime’s worth of increase in 16 years, Mr. Speaker. We chose 

to invest in people living with disabilities, a sector of our 

society that you people ignored for 16 years as well, Mr. 

Speaker. We chose to invest in education and health care and 

highways and infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the Leader of the Opposition, when given the 

opportunity to say where would he find money for the film 

industry, he would cut agriculture spending and revenue sharing 

with municipalities, Mr. Speaker. Then we have a leadership 

contest, Mr. Speaker, a leadership contender who says he would 

increase taxes, a $200 million tax grab on small businesses to 

implement the refundable tax credit again, and the Finance 

critic can’t make up his mind whether that’s a good idea or not, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Immigration Issue 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today at noon for a 

second time, university students at the U of R rallied in support 

of their fellow students, Victoria Ordu and Ihuoma Amadi. Ms. 

Ordu and Ms. Amadi are two international students who have 

been studying at the U of R since 2010. As part of their visas, 

international students are permitted to work on campus, but Ms. 

Ordu and Ms. Amadi mistakenly believed that their social 

insurance numbers permitted them to work off-campus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an honest mistake. But now, for less than 

two weeks of off-campus work, the federal government wants 

to deport these students. As a result, Mr. Speaker, these two 

women have been forced to hide in a local church since the 

month of June. My question to the Immigration minister: does 

he believe this case is being handled by the federal government 

in a fair and just manner? 

 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member opposite for his question. Saskatchewan has had a long 

tradition of welcoming students from around the world, both 

under this administration and under previous administrations. 

This is something that is a hallmark for this province. We 

believe that this is a very good thing to have international 

students come to our province. 

 

This situation is indeed troubling. I have taken the opportunity 

to write to federal Minister Toews with respect to this situation. 

We would hope that the federal government would take a close 

look at this and agree with our position, which is simply that 

these students probably didn’t do anything necessarily too 

terribly wrong. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not only U of R students and 

faculty who have been rallying in support of these students. It’s 

also the U of R administration. The administration is backing up 

these students in their bid to stay here in Canada and to 

complete their education here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it just makes common sense. These students made 

an honest mistake in finding part-time jobs off-campus despite 

the fact that they were only permitted to work on campus. The 

common sense solution here, Mr. Speaker, is not to deport the 

students but to explain the rules to them and to ensure everyone 

in the province understands what the rules are for students in 

this situation. 

 

The Minister of Immigration referenced an earlier letter, Mr. 

Speaker, but I would like him to clearly state, going back to my 

previous question, is it his opinion that this situation is being 

handled in a fair and just manner? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time we 

haven’t received any communication from the federal 

government so it’s difficult to tell how they are going to 

adjudicate this situation. It’s my understanding that today in 

Ottawa there is a group of people that are going to be 

addressing this situation to the federal government and the 

federal minister, and that is after all the appropriate jurisdiction 

that they should be raising this issue because it is an area of 

federal responsibility. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, one of the women had this to say: 

 

This is a small mistake we made and now everything is at 

risk. It doesn’t make any sense. They’re looking for us like 

we’ve killed someone. We’re just students at university, 

but it’s like we’re running away and living in fear every 

day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they made an honest mistake and for less than two 

weeks of work off-campus, they’re being chased by the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker, and being threatened with 

deportation. You would think, Mr. Speaker, that this would be 

an opportunity, this would be a time when the Sask Party 

government could use its supposedly great relationship with 

Ottawa to pick up the phone — not simply write a letter, but to 

pick up the phone — and ask for some action here that is just, 

that is fair, that is based on common sense. 

 

My question to the Immigration minister: instead of referring to 

some letter he wrote some time ago, will he commit today to 

pick up the phone, call the federal government, Mr. Speaker, 

and ask for fairness for these two women? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the federal 

government may have additional information, I’m not aware of 

any additional information that they may have. On the face of 

this situation, it appears that there is nothing too particularly 

troubling, at least not to our administration, with respect to this 

situation. 

 

With respect to your question, the federal minister, I 

understand, is going to be in Saskatchewan during the next 

couple of days at some point in time. Our Justice minister at 

that point will be raising this situation with the federal minister 

to see if there’s any way we can resolve the situation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Support for First Nations Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, an investment in education 

is an investment in our province’s future. It’s also common 

sense. The more educated our province is, the better we all do. 

That’s why so many in our province are concerned by the 

unacceptable, unfair underfunding of First Nations education 

on-reserve in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first step in fixing a problem is recognizing a 

problem exists. The federal Conservative minister said we don’t 

have a funding problem. In fact he suggests that on-reserve 

education funding is in fact higher than the provincial education 

funding. Does the minister agree with the position of Minister 

Duncan and the federal Conservatives? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

and thanks to the member opposite for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, you know, we want the best outcomes for all 

Saskatchewan students, whether they’re on-reserve or not. And 

we take issue with the funding disparity very openly. And that’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, our Premier has spoken personally with the 

Prime Minister. I have spoken directly with Minister Duncan 

. . . [inaudible] . . . we have been in consultation with the 

representatives from FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations]. And we agree that that’s an area that we need to 

mitigate before we can bring to full fruition the disparity 

between outcomes for on- and off-reserve. 

 

As the member opposite realizes, I’ve spent many years out in 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

Treaty 4 area and I can speak first-hand with regards to some of 

the results that result from that disparity in funding. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s good to see that we have some 

shared concern here on a file that should matter to all of us. We 

recognize that on-reserve First Nations funding is 68 cents for 

every dollar spent off-reserve. This disparity itself is simply 

wrong. It’s an injustice and it offers harsh consequences for us 

all. It’s holding back our province’s full potential and 

threatening a wider gap in everything from income to 

employment to health to quality of life. 

 

The minister outright denied the underfunding and directly 

challenged the numbers of the AFN [Assembly of First Nations] 

and FSIN. Referenced by the minister was a meeting of the 

Premier with the Prime Minister. Referenced as well was a 

conversation with the federal minister, his counterpart. What 

I’m interested in hearing is, how did that meeting go? What 

case was put forward by Saskatchewan? What representation 

did we have there? What was our position? And also, as it 

relates to the actual numbers, what’s the minister’s position on 

the actual numbers of the AFN and FSIN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again, 

again our government recognizes the funding disparity between 

on- and off-reserve. Again we have been working with our 

counterparts at FSIN. We’ve been working with First Nations 

individually to look at the disparity. In the 2012-13 budget, Mr. 

Speaker, our government committed $4.3 million for First 

Nations and Métis education fund and, in individual 

achievement accounts, another $500,000 to support initiatives 

in school divisions that support closing those disparities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s growth plan also sets an agenda for 

our government to reduce the difference in graduation rates 

between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal students by 50 per cent 

by 2020. Mr. Speaker, we have a growth plan. We’ve 

articulated goals and targets. We’re not afraid to do that. And 

we’ll do what we need to do to mitigate that disparity in 

funding. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Without a doubt there’s clearly a 

discrepancy that needs provincial and national attention. We 

hear words from this government; we also need action to 

support that. I know Simon Bird, FSIN vice-chief said, I quote, 

“The . . . numbers are in fact fairy tales. Their falsified numbers 

are really Pinocchio accounting.” And it’s certainly a matter 

that we all need to stand up and to be heard on. 

 

What will this minister do? We hear the words here today, but 

what will this minister do to push for immediate attention and 

action from a federal government that’s clearly abdicating its 

responsibility and engaged in damaging and divisive spin? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again 

thanks to the member opposite for the question. The list of 

initiatives that the Ministry of Education, our government, has 

ongoing with First Nations people is quite extensive. We have 

the First Nations and Métis Education Achievement Fund. We 

have the First Nation and Métis provincial advisory committee. 

We have the shared standards and capacity-building committee. 

And above all, Mr. Speaker, we have the task force — the joint 

task force with the First Nations, with the FSIN, and the 

province — and we intend to use the results of that task force 

along with the results from the other reports and committees 

that we’re working with to mitigate those results. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to be clear, the question 

was about the unacceptable underfunding of First Nations 

on-reserve education. All of Saskatchewan includes our First 

Nations students. Our government must work with all of 

Saskatchewan. I’ll quote Vice-Chief Bird. “It is extremely 

disappointing that the Federal Government would attempt to 

poke us in the eye by issuing such fairy tales about First 

Nations Education funding.” 

 

The provincial government has remained conveniently silent. 

The Sask Party government was more than willing to publicly 

praise the federal government’s spring budget when it 

suggested it was going to increase funding for First Nations 

education, but now entirely quiet when it was evident that the 

feds had broken that promise and that not a dollar had flowed to 

Saskatchewan. When will this government work with all of 

Saskatchewan, stand up, speak up, and represent this province’s 

best interests? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, our government has 

made education a priority for all people in Saskatchewan. All 

people in Saskatchewan. And we’ve established that with a 

$500 million investment in infrastructure and a 21 per cent 

increase across the board for . . . [inaudible]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix editorial 

board put it bluntly. “It’s a real problem that needs a real 

solution, not simply more spin and murky numbers.” Time is of 

the essence. The gap is widening. Is this government ready to 

step up to address this injustice with every tool it has available, 

and quite simply, what’s its plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That would 

be a rookie mistake. Mr. Speaker, our government is committed 

to education in this province. We’ve made it a priority. We’ve 

set targets, we’ve set goals, and we’re going to attain those 

targets, working together. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

Education. 

 

Extension of Degree-Granting Authority 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to rise in the Assembly to recognize a historic moment 

for post-secondary education in Saskatchewan. Today marks 

the proclamation of The Degree Authorization Act and its 

regulations. 

 

This new legislation allows the government to extend 

degree-granting authority to post-secondary education 

institutions other than the University of Regina and the 

University of Saskatchewan. Our universities have their own 

robust internal quality assurance processes and for this reason 

they are exempt from the new legislation. 

 

This government consulted broadly on the issue of expanding 

degree-granting authority to ensure changes will enhance 

options for students and improve our ability to meet labour 

market needs. Institutions seeking degree-granting authorization 

must undergo a rigorous quality assurance review process. To 

achieve that, the newly created Saskatchewan Higher Education 

Quality Assurance Board will play an important role in the 

evaluation of proposed degree programs. 

 

The board members, drawn from academic communities in 

Saskatchewan and across Western Canada, bring a wealth of 

expertise and experience in post-secondary education and 

quality assurance. Several board members have deep roots in 

Saskatchewan. The Chair of the board is Dr. Grant Isaac of 

Saskatoon, senior vice-president and chief financial officer of 

Cameco Corporation. Prior to joining Cameco, Dr. Isaac was a 

professor and dean of the Edwards School of Business of the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

The board’s Vice-Chair is Dr. Ronald Bond, the provost 

emeritus of the University of Calgary and former Chair of the 

Alberta Quality Council. Other board members include Dr. 

Marie Battiste, professor in the College of Education and the 

most recent director of the Aboriginal Education Research 

Centre at the University of Saskatchewan. Dr. Battiste is a 

former recipient of the National Aboriginal Achievement 

Award. Another board member with a strong Saskatchewan 

connection is Bill McLaughlin of La Ronge. Mr. McLaughlin’s 

career is in post-secondary education in the province of 

Saskatchewan and has spanned 37 years working extensively in 

the regional college system. He’s served as president of 

Northlands College since 1993 until his recent retirement. 

 

The other board members are Karen Barnes, president of the 

Yukon College in Whitehorse; Dr. Robin Fisher, provost and 

vice-president, academic of Mount Royal University in Calgary. 

He was the founding Chair of the Saskatchewan Council on 

Admissions and Transfer. And also Ms. Irene Lewis who has 

served as president and CEO [chief executive officer] of SAIT 

[Southern Alberta Institute of Technology] Polytechnic in 

Calgary since 1998. And I might add that Ms. Lewis is 

originally from Prince Albert. 

 

I want to thank each board member for their service to 

post-secondary education and for accepting this new challenge. 

This initiative will ensure that there is greater accessibility for 

students while preserving and protecting the quality of 

Saskatchewan’s post-secondary education system. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 

minister for sending his remarks across earlier. This 

announcement by the minister today flows out of legislation 

that was passed in the previous session and has been debated 

extensively. The issue at hand here is if degree granting is 

extended to more institutions that there needs to be the highest 

standards in order to ensure that the quality of those degrees are 

at the level that everyone in Saskatchewan, within Canada, and 

abroad would expect them to be. 

 

So the announcement here today of the individuals sitting on 

the board flows out of the earlier discussions we’ve had. The 

individuals listed by the minister indeed have experience and 

are accomplished. And I wish them well in their work as they 

ensure that Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions that may 

be newly degree granting would be doing so in a way that is 

effective and enhances our reputation at home and abroad. 

 

So thank you for these comments and I wish the board all the 

best. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Opposition House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Please state your point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During question 

period the Minister for Culture quoted from a document, I 

believe it was a letter. If the minister would be so kind as to 

table that document with the House as per practice in this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Okay. Well, I see the Government House 

Leader did get to his feet, so I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The point of order 

is well-taken and that document will be tabled. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has indicated 

that the letter will be tabled. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Cox, seconded by Mr. 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

Docherty, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Nilson.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker. it’s a 

pleasure to stand and support the Speech from the Throne, 

“Planning for Growth,” that was delivered last week. Mr. 

Speaker, growth provides strength. It strengthens our economy. 

By strengthening our economy, we mean it strengthens our tax 

base. A strong securities tax base provides better funding for 

infrastructure and assisted government programs. It builds 

health centres. It builds schools. It upgrades and constructs 

highways and houses, improving the Saskatchewan economy. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s about growth and planning for growth. 

 

I talked to constituents in Moose Jaw North during the spring 

and summer. There were several topics they were willing to 

discuss. Roads and highways were a priority, which was a bit of 

a surprise seeing that I have an urban constituency. Housing 

was a concern, as was student housing, social programs, health 

issues, seniors’ needs and care for those with special needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw is a terrific community, challenged 

with growth as many communities are in Saskatchewan. But it 

is in managing the growth and planning for growth that 

Saskatchewan and Moose Jaw will meet those challenges. 

Moose Jaw is growing. There are new businesses along 

Thatcher Drive East. Two new hotels are being constructed. 

The Grand Hotel is in near-completion stage of being 

reconstructed for condominium living accommodations. And 

the Walter Scott Building is beginning to be totally renovated 

for additional residential apartments. There are three new 

residential subdivisions and new moderate- to low-income 

apartment buildings being constructed through the 

Saskatchewan housing program. 

 

I’d like to report too, Mr. Speaker, that the planning for the new 

hospital continues with some of the best architectures in the 

business, some of the top advisors, and some of the best design 

experts that we can find. These discussions go on with the 

medical staff at the Five Hills Health Region and the Moose 

Jaw Hospital and with a lot of patient input. Mr. Speaker, this 

will be a state-of-the-art hospital. It’ll be a health centre to serve 

the needs of Moose Jaw and the Five Hills Health Region, and 

construction on this fine facility is due to begin next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth is good. Growth is happening in Moose 

Jaw, and I appreciate this in the Throne Speech outlining the 

plan for growth. Planning for growth provides a plan far into 

the future. The Throne Speech builds on the Saskatchewan plan 

for growth. We realize that there are challenges that come with 

growth; however a statement at the conclusion of the Speech 

from the Throne sums it up very well. That statement was “. . . 

the challenges of growth are preferable to the challenges of 

decline Saskatchewan faced just a few short years ago.” 

 

A few short years ago. Let’s look back just a few short years 

ago. Our youth, the future of our province, were looking for 

other jurisdictions for opportunities. The infrastructure of this 

province is falling apart with no long-term plan to improve it. 

Schools were being closed. Hospitals were being closed. 

Businesses were choosing other jurisdictions to expand and 

invest. Our surgical wait-lists were the longest and the worst in 

Canada. The elderly and the underprivileged were all being 

neglected. There was minimal support for community-based 

organizations and no increase to the senior’s supplement for 16 

years. Saskatchewan had some of the highest tax rates in 

Canada. And many of our highways were in a disgrace. Mr. 

Speaker, this was a few years ago. A few short years ago. 

 

But I’m proud to be in a province that now leads the nations in 

so many sectors. I’m proud of this government’s record of 

improving growth and prosperity, and I’m proud of the plan for 

continued growth as was delivered in the Speech from the 

Throne supporting the Saskatchewan plan for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear the members opposite disagreeing with 

the Throne Speech. They disagree simply, Mr. Speaker, I 

suspect it is because they have never understood growth. Their 

record just a few years ago was managing decline. And today 

they don’t understand what managing growth is all about. In 

fact after the Premier’s announcement of The Saskatchewan 

Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 the member from Regina 

Lakeview — yes, the Leader of the Opposition — was quoted 

in The Globe and Mail on October 17th saying: 

 

A document like this distracts . . . [everyone], and I think 

his [meaning the Premier] popularity will stay up there as 

long as there’s sort of a myth of a booming economy. 

 

A sort of a myth. The Leader of the Opposition is calling this a 

myth. Well I don’t know what kind of mythical delusion that 

member is living in, but it is clear those members opposite just 

don’t understand the meaning of growth. 

 

To dispel any myths that may be in the minds of those 

members, let’s look at some of the recent economic indicators. 

Mr. Speaker, our population is now at its highest level ever at 

1,079,958. It has grown by over 22,000 people in the past year. 

In the past six years, Saskatchewan has grown by nearly 88,000 

people, the fastest and most sustained period of growth that this 

province has had for decades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, new employment numbers show that 540,800 

people were employed in September of 2012, the highest level 

of employment on record for the month of September. 

Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate now stands at 4 per cent, 

the lowest rate in Canada and well below the national average 

of 6.7 per cent. 

 

And there are dozens of press releases to further emphasize the 

improved economic position of Saskatchewan. Record retail 

sales in August; August was a record month for retail trade in 

Saskatchewan. August wholesale trade, second best on record. 

Building permits more that double the national increase. 

Saskatchewan’s non-residential construction — best in Canada. 

Manufacturing increases more than triple the national rate. 

 

These are some of the press releases that have been just recently 

come out. Job positioning up on saskjobs.ca; there were 15,323 

job postings in September. Ten thousand six hundred more 

Saskatchewan people working in September. And here’s a good 

example in July: new all-time high for average weekly earnings. 

Then to follow that up in August, the weekly earnings in 

August hit record. Take-home pay continues to rise for 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

Saskatchewan workers in August, according to the news report 

on payroll employment earnings and hourlies released by Stats 

Canada. Five years ago the average weekly wage in 

Saskatchewan was $744, well below the national average. 

Today it is 938, up $195 a week or 26 per cent, and well above 

the national average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the world is watching Saskatchewan and is keenly 

interested. The consular corps delegation of diplomats 

representing countries from around the world attended the 

Speech from the Throne last Thursday. Mr. Speaker, these were 

representatives from Indonesia, the Netherlands, Iceland, 

Mexico, Italy, Japan, Germany, and Pakistan were all in 

attendance. These nations are interested in Saskatchewan. It’s 

no myth. These nations are interested because they can see what 

we have and the opportunities it will bring to their countries, 

improving their lifestyles, and also improving the quality of life 

for the people of this province. 

 

But the Leader of the Opposition thinks it’s a myth. He clearly 

doesn’t understand growth. So I would ask that member what is 

his thinking of reality if he thinks those are myths? Well his 

reality is probably mass exodus where we saw 16 years in their 

government, population decline, our youth moving to other 

jurisdictions for employment opportunities. Their reality is 

closing schools, closing hospitals, forcing the sale of potash 

mines like K+S and nationalizing the industry. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, after 40 years K+S is back, and at the sod-turning 

ceremonies, the president of K+S made it well-known that they 

were kicked out the province by the former government 16 

years ago. The other thing is their reality is bad investments, 

very bad investments, Mr. Speaker — SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company], Navigata, Craig 

Wireless, Channel Lake, Guyana, Coachman Insurance — over 

$200 million of taxpayers’ monies lost because of the bad 

investment that that former government made. That’s their 

reality. They have no vision of the future of this province and 

that’s their reality. They do not set goals. They would not set 

goals because they may not achieve them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s like a farmer not seeding because he may 

not get a chance to harvest or like an oil company not drilling 

because they may not find oil. Can you imagine, at an airport, a 

jet taking off without a flight plan because they may not know 

where they’re going? That’s just totally ludicrous and totally 

absurd. But that unfortunately was their reality. That’s the way 

they live and that’s what they believed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe in Saskatchewan. We believe 

Saskatchewan has a bright future. We believe in setting 

ambitious targets, targets to attract investment, targets to be 

competitive in our tax structure, targets to invest in 

infrastructure like highways, hospitals, health, and education. 

Targets for population growth — 1.2 million people living in 

Saskatchewan by 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the speech lays out the province’s priorities for 

our government to continue growth, and benefit all the citizens 

of the province. Our government’s priorities will be investing in 

infrastructure, addressing the skilled labour shortage, and 

ensuring Saskatchewan remains competitive. We will focus on 

improving our health and education systems, improving life for 

people with disabilities, and improving educational outcomes 

and employment opportunities for First Nations and Métis 

people. Mr. Speaker, we will do this, maintaining fiscal 

discipline and all within a balanced budget. 

 

The planning for growth through the Throne Speech will seek 

growth to improve the quality of life for everyone who is living 

in our great province. Mr. Speaker, we will continue the growth 

agenda and to continue to work with Saskatchewan people to 

meet the challenges that growth has, and its opportunities. 

 

I speak in favour of the Speech from the Throne. God bless 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

welcome everyone back to the second session of the 

twenty-seventh legislature, and look forward to a productive fall 

session. I would like to acknowledge also that we are in Treaty 

4 territory. 

 

After listening to the Speech from the Throne 2012 and reading 

The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 and Beyond, I 

have a few points to discuss about the goals and progressive 

plan of our government. The current global economic climate 

reveals a turbulent global economy, one that Saskatchewan has 

managed to avoid due to an abundance of natural resource and a 

strong export economy. This is also due to fiscal restraint and 

keeping our provincial house in order. Saskatchewan people 

now and in the past generations are no stranger to tightening our 

fiscal belt and making do with what we have. Now more than 

ever should we continue with ongoing fiscal responsibility. 

 

Sun Tzu, as the infamous Art of War states, “Know the enemy 

and know yourself; in a hundred battles you will never be in 

peril.” I use this quote as an analogy to interpret what is 

happening in the global economy, the enemy being global 

economic turbulence and what measures need to be undertaken 

to avoid it. The Saskatchewan plan for growth has many goals 

in place to foster growth and mitigate the challenges of rapid 

growth. We know all too well what is happening in other areas 

with the global recession and we can learn from their 

challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to share with the other members a 

concept that is well ingrained in traditional teachings of my 

Aboriginal community. And it’s published, so I have 

permission to share it. And being a traditional Anishinabe kwe, 

my thought process always includes teachings that I grew up 

with and practise today. It is what is called the seventh 

generation sustainability teaching, which is an ecological 

concept that urges the current generation of people to live 

sustainably and work for the benefit of the seventh generation 

into the future. There is a debate on where it originated from 

and with what tribe, either the Anishinabek, the Nehiyaw; some 

of the eastern tribes claim it. Regardless, the concept being to 

think seven generations ahead, a couple of hundred years into 

the future and decide whether the decisions they make today 

would benefit their children seven generations into the future. 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

And I quote: 

 

In every deliberation, we must consider the impact of the 

seventh generation . . . even if it requires having skin as 

thick as the bark of a pine. 

 

This is an often repeated saying. In fact the original language 

translated into English is as follows: 

 

In all of your deliberations in the . . . Council, in your 

efforts at law making, in all your official acts, self-interest 

shall be cast into oblivion. Cast not over your shoulder 

behind you the warnings of the nephews and nieces should 

they chide you for any error or wrong you may do, but 

return to the way of the Great Law which is just and right. 

Look and listen for the welfare of the whole people and 

have always in view not only the present but also the 

coming generations, even those whose faces are yet 

beneath the surface of the ground — the unborn of the 

future Nation. 

 

Quote: 

 

We are looking ahead, as is one of the first mandates given 

[to] us as . . . [governors], to make sure and to make every 

decision that we make relate to the welfare and well-being 

of the seventh generation to come . . . [So we think about] 

What about the seventh generation? Where are you taking 

them? What will they have? 

 

These are the kind of questions that must be pondered while 

making decisions that will affect the people in Saskatchewan 

and the future citizens of this great province. Our government is 

planning for this future in introducing the Saskatchewan 

heritage initiative, the use of non-renewable resource revenue 

and a debt free Saskatchewan to identify options and provide 

advice to the Government of Saskatchewan for how best to 

utilize Saskatchewan’s non-renewable natural resource revenue 

after the province’s debt has been fully retired. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan will establish the 

Saskatchewan heritage initiative. This heritage initiative 

embodies the teachings of the seven generations. This will 

ensure that our descendants will be in a better fiscal position 

than my generation and the generations before me. We owe it to 

those who came before us and those who will come after us. 

This is why we have a plan for a 25-year water strategy and, 

Mr. Speaker, this is just the start. For environment, the newly 

created Water Security Agency will implement a 25-year water 

strategy to protect water quality and sustain water supplies for 

residential, industrial, agricultural, and recreation use. 

 

I have been involved in the committee that engaged 

consultations with the creative industries, and I can’t help but 

include a quote from the artist, Andy Warhol: “They always say 

time changes things, but you actually have to change them for 

yourself.” And this is what happened in Saskatchewan in the 

last five years. People in Saskatchewan have changed the 

climate in our province to one being positive and a place you 

want to stay and raise your children. 

 

To benefit from the quality of life we enjoy here at home — and 

I emphasize the words, at home — from 2007 to 2011, funding 

for arts and culture increased 35 per cent compared to the 

previous four years. Our government has invested 46 million 

over five years in our parks system to ensure visitors have the 

best experience possible. This year there were more than 3.5 

million visits to our provincial parks, which is a new record. 

More than 60,000 reservations were booked on the 

government’s new reservation system. 

 

Democracy, being a system under which the process of 

government is the process of public decision making, is subject 

to popular control. The people of Saskatchewan helped write 

the Saskatchewan plan for growth after consultations this past 

summer. Highlights include: our government has released The 

Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 and Beyond. The 

plan sets a bold target: 1.2 million people living in 

Saskatchewan by the year 2020. 

 

In the past five years our government has invested more than 5 

billion to improve and expand highways, schools, health care 

facilities, and municipal infrastructure. The total doubles the 

amount spent during the previous five years, and our 

government has committed to funding a minimum of 2.5 billion 

in infrastructure investments over the next three years. 

Saskatchewan has a thriving housing sector with more than 

8,000 housing starts forecast for this year — the most since 

1979. Government initiatives will help add 12,600 new housing 

units between 2011 and 2016. 

 

Aristotle, the famous Greek philosopher, has said: 

 

The society that loses its grip on the past is in danger, for 

it produces men who know nothing but the present, and 

who are not aware that life had been and could be different 

from what it is. 

 

We must always be cognizant of the past, Mr. Speaker, and the 

struggles we have endured in the past population decline when 

our young people were leaving in droves to pursue a better 

quality of life. However it is a very different Saskatchewan 

today. Our population from July 2000 to July 2007 to July 

2012, Saskatchewan’s population increased by nearly 80,000 

people. In the last year alone, Saskatchewan grew by more than 

22,000 people and the most growth in any year since 1921. 

Every Saskatchewan city and nearly 80 per cent of 

Saskatchewan towns saw their population increase during the 

most recent census period. In the previous census, over half of 

Saskatchewan cities and more than 85 per cent of our towns 

decreased in population. 

 

In August the number of people employed in Saskatchewan hit 

an all-time high of nearly 550,000 after growing by more than 

20,000 in just the past year. For employment, at least 60,000 

more workers will be required by 2020 to meet the objectives 

set out in the growth plan. 

 

Since 2007, 3.5 billion has been invested in post-secondary 

education including more funding for programming to assist 

First Nations and Métis students. The number of registered 

apprentices has increased by 43 per cent, and there are now 

more than 35,000 training opportunities available in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the health of a community affects the quality of 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

life of a community. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been fortunate to 

meet the new doctors who have come to our province through 

the SIPPA [Saskatchewan international physician practice 

assessment] program. This fall 24 international medical 

graduates entered the Saskatchewan international physician 

practice assessment. Since the program began in 2011, 37 

foreign-trained family physicians have successfully completed 

the assessment and more than 90 per cent are practising in rural 

or remote communities. In the upcoming year, up to 90 

international medical graduates are expected to enter the 

assessment. 

 

Nearly 9,000 Saskatchewan children contract rotavirus each 

year. Beginning this fall, our government will expand the infant 

immunization program to provide free, universal access to the 

rotavirus vaccine. 

 

And our government will forgive up to 120,000 in student loans 

for new doctors and up to 20,000 for new nurses and nurse 

practitioners who agree to practise in rural, remote, and 

underserved communities for up to five years. These physicians 

are excited to call Saskatchewan home. They have brought their 

young families along with them, and I was honoured to 

welcome them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am a firm advocate in education and a believer 

of education levelling the playing field. Our goals in education 

include: during the past five years my government has invested 

3.5 billion in the province’s post-secondary education system. 

Our government introduced the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship which provides high school graduates with up to 

$2,000 over four years to attend a Saskatchewan post-secondary 

institution. This fall approximately 4,000 students received the 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, and the Saskatchewan 

graduate retention program provides tuition rebates of up to 

$20,000 over seven years to post-secondary graduates who stay 

in the province. 

 

This fall our government will introduce legislation to create the 

Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings. This new 

program will help Saskatchewan families who are saving for 

their children’s post-secondary education by providing up to 

$250 per year per child. Our government will support schools as 

they prepare students for post-secondary studies and through a 

new student achievement initiative. And this four-year program 

will see the introduction of provincial assessments for each 

student enrolled in the pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to grade 12 

system. 

 

By 2016 all school divisions will consistently and transparently 

measure and report student progress. Our government’s goal as 

outlined in our growth plan is to have the province lead the 

country in high school graduation rates by 2020. 

 

For innovation, our government will continue to enhance 

Saskatchewan’s reputation as an innovator in agriculture by 

establishing the Global Institute for Food Security. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on with other aspects of the 

Throne Speech but we are only allowed a certain amount of 

time. And I would like to close with a quote from Niccoló 

Machiavelli, The Prince: 

 

There is nothing more difficult to plan, more doubtful of 

success, more dangerous to manage than the creation of 

the new system. The innovator has the enmity of all who 

profit by the preservation of the old system and only 

lukewarm defenders by those who would gain by the new 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new system is the new Saskatchewan and the 

difficulty of planning is the future of Saskatchewan. And the 

doubters are those members across the floor. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker, and I support the Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise today and to offer my 

comments on the Throne Speech that we heard last week, and 

of course we do have a lot of concerns. 

 

But before I get into the formal part of my comments, I do want 

to say some things about my riding, Saskatoon Centre. It’s been 

quite an eventful summer in Saskatoon Centre. You know, it’s 

one of the oldest parts of Saskatoon, and so many of the local 

organizations and churches and groups are celebrating their 

centennial. In fact I was very fortunate this year to take part in 

the St. John’s Anglican celebration that they were marking their 

100th anniversary, and of course they’ve had a bit of a time 

capsule as well. 

 

But you know, one of the things they take the most pride in is of 

course their church. And many people, if you’ve walked down 

Spadina Crescent just down from the Bessborough, it’s a 

beautiful part of Saskatoon. It’s a wonderful part. I think a 

wonderful part of our province, really actually. And many 

visitors who come to our province stay at the Bessborough, 

particularly so they can walk along the river and enjoy the 

architecture. And of course St. John’s is right front and centre. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that I just want to take a moment 

and recognize St. John’s Anglican for the good work. But I’d 

also be amiss if I didn’t say to the Knox United folks just down 

the street that’s also marking their 100th anniversary this fall, 

what a great church that is. And we’re so proud of our churches 

in our communities that add that support to us in times of need 

and times of celebration and times of passing. So I want to say 

that first. 

 

Our community, Saskatoon Centre, ranges from those who are 

very well-off to those who are experiencing challenges, 

experiencing poverty first-hand, and especially experiencing 

what it’s like not to have a grocery store in your neighbourhood 

and actually having to go quite a distance. In fact we refer to 

that often as a food desert. And this year, this fall, just actually 

just a couple of weeks ago — and I’ll be speaking more about 

this in a member’s statement — but we were very fortunate to 

have the grand opening of the Station 20 West facilities. That 

really marked how strong our community can be when we 

believe a social cause is right. And we rallied around in spite of 

what this government did in the spring of 2008 when it cut the 

funding to Station 20 West, thought that project was killed. In 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

fact the community rallied and made sure it was strong. And it’s 

in place. 

 

And I was so proud to be at that opening because it really was a 

community initiative and the community rallied around it and 

made sure it happened, and it did. And part of that of course is 

the Good Food Junction, a food co-op which is a great place to 

go shopping. I try to do a bit there every once in a while and 

support that because I do believe it’s important that we have 

access to good food in our neighbourhoods, all neighbourhoods. 

And really this is really, really important. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, right off the bat I do want to say that I won’t 

be supporting the main motion but in fact supporting the 

amendment. Because the other thing about people in my riding 

is we don’t much like surprises from our government. We think 

when you say something in the Throne Speech, that really is the 

blueprint that you’re going to be going ahead from. 

 

When we saw this from last fall with this government when 

they came back, some of the things that they were talking about, 

particularly around the labour legislation review: not announced 

in the Throne Speech a year ago, but all of a sudden it sprung 

up in May. The cutting of the film tax credit, which really 

meant the end of the film industry for Saskatchewan, they don’t 

much like surprises like that. In fact what they really believe in 

— it’s a pretty common saying in Saskatchewan — don’t fix 

things unless they’re broke. Don’t fix it if it isn’t broken. And 

this government seems really bent on fixing things based on 

ideology and not common sense. They’re driven by ideology, 

and it’s an ideology about corporate interests or big business 

but not about people in our province. Not about people in our 

province, and I’m really worried about this and so are many 

people in my riding. 

 

And in fact it was interesting that it was in my riding that the 

Premier gave his deluxe version of the Throne Speech a week 

before. I understand the price was $100. Now the Premier said, 

listen, it was free on the Internet. You just had to go on the 

Internet, if that’s where you watched it. That’s where the 

common folks will be watching it. Others will be paying $100 a 

plate. That’s just not the way we do things in Saskatchewan. 

We know the way, the place to deliver your Throne Speech is 

here, here in this House. Here in this House, this is where you 

start. This is where you start the legislative session, here with a 

Throne Speech that we hear first. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, what I found interesting in the Throne 

Speech, what I found interesting in the Throne Speech were 

words that weren’t in the Throne Speech that should have been 

in there, should have been in there. Not a word about poverty. 

That’s something that matters a lot to people in my riding, 

people right across this province. Not a word about poverty. 

What are we going to do about that? Not a thing. 

 

Also, and I appreciated that my colleague from Cumberland 

brought some folks down from the North because not very 

much in the Throne Speech about the North, particularly around 

highways which means so much to them.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I found very interesting when they talk 

about how they’re friends of business and the financial 

community and making things happen in this province, not a 

word about the co-ops, particularly seeing this is the 

international year of the co-ops. Why is it that they are 

neglecting co-ops? And I’ll talk more about that as we go 

forward. But, Mr. Speaker, and I will talk a bit more about this, 

was what the government announced last May, May 2nd, about 

their review of 15 pieces of labour law here in Saskatchewan. 

And where that came from, we’re not sure, but out of the blue 

they decided that they were going to overhaul 100 years worth 

of legislation in 90 short days. 

 

Now it is something that I think that we can all agree on that it’s 

a good thing that government every once in a while decides to 

review legislation. It’s the right thing to do to make sure that 

you’re current, that you’re up-to-date, and you’re meeting the 

needs of people here in Saskatchewan. You’re meeting the 

needs of people and businesses, and it’s a fair balance. That’s 

what you’ve got to do. But to do it in 90 days, to say you can 

only write in, people were really concerned about that. Because 

you know, people really felt that they were part of what made 

this province go so well right now. They were part of the 

economy that built this province, but now they’re being told 

that something wasn’t quite right. 

 

Now when I look at this on page 6 of the Throne Speech, 

enhancing competitiveness, this is the part that talks about the 

employment Act, two short paragraphs about it. But, Mr. 

Speaker, what’s left out? What’s the other word that I don’t see 

in there? It talks about most modern, competitive, fair, and 

balanced labour and employment environment in Canada. Many 

of those parts I agree with. But you know what’s a real priority 

here in Saskatchewan, I’ve got to say, Mr. Speaker, is safety. 

Where is safety in this mandate? It’s just not there. And yet we 

as a province have the highest or the second highest injury rate 

in Canada. If there’s one thing we need to do, we need to get 

that right. We need to get that right. 

 

Too many people are being hurt at work and that’s a priority. 

That’s a priority. That’s something that’s broke, and that’s 

something that has to be fixed. But yet it’s not part of the 

Throne Speech, not part of the Throne Speech. Why is that, Mr. 

Speaker? We’ve got to do better than that. And that’s what 

people in my riding and, I think, right across the province are 

saying. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have some real, real concerns about that and 

what the real mandate is behind this. I’m really worried about 

that. And of course when we talk to people through our 

consultation process and, Mr. Speaker, you may have heard that 

we went to nine communities over a period of about three 

weeks actually in September because we wanted to hear from 

people about what they thought about what we should be doing 

about labour legislation. And the number one thing they said, 

the number one thing they said is, do the consultations the right 

way. They’re not afraid of change. They want to make sure it 

gets done right, but talk to people. Get out there and talk to 

people. Be proud of what you believe in. And if you do believe 

in it, you’ll talk to people about it. And I’ve not heard people so 

far, from their side, talk about people coming up to them and 

saying, hey listen, you got to fix that labour code. You got to fix 

that labour legislation. That’s a real problem. So that’s 

something that’s really important. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that was happening at those 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

meetings, some of the groups that couldn’t make it out — or 

when I phoned them and said, please come out; I want to extend 

this invitation to come out — they had not even heard about it. 

Because of when the announcement was made, made in May, 

people were already starting to get a bit in that summer, late 

spring mode, and did not know about it. For example, the 

students — students at the University of Saskatchewan, 

University of Regina, and Kelsey — I can tell you did not know 

about this. In fact I had to share with them the government 

document, our invitation, what our plan was. They had not heard 

about this. And I think that’s really important. It’s students that 

hadn’t heard about it. 

 

You also had seniors. When I met with the senior Council on 

Aging in Saskatoon, as a group, they want to talk about 

employment. That was part of their agenda. They said, let’s talk 

about employment. And I said, have you heard about the 

government’s new plans about labour employment? They 

didn’t; they hadn’t heard a word about it. And I know that 

several of the government-side MLAs from Saskatoon had met 

with that group but not raised the issue about the employment 

labour code that might be up for . . . that’s up for review. 

 

And newcomers, clearly we’re very proud of the fact that we 

have in our province more newcomers, and it’s a good thing to 

see. But again, another group that’s not being included. And 

again the First Nations and Métis not fully engaged. 

 

And, of course, Mr. Speaker, these things are complex. And it’s 

important that you develop a capacity so when you consult with 

groups they can actually have an informed opinion. You just 

can’t walk up to them and say, so what do you think? And they 

go, wow, you know the 15 pieces of legislation, that’s hundreds 

of pages. What are they going to say? They want to know more, 

but they want to make sure what they say is what reflects their 

true values. So you have to develop that capacity. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be talking a lot about this employment 

code that we’ve heard about. We hope that it gets introduced 

sooner than later, not on the last day of session, because we 

want to have as much time to review it as possible. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, of course you know that I’ve been 

advocating a lot around Jimmy’s law, and I’m hoping that we 

can see progress with that shortly. We’re going to be talking a 

lot about that and we hope that that . . . Because I think that’s a 

common sense issue that we have to tackle. And I really think 

that we have to get on this as soon as we can. And I’m looking 

forward to seeing more about that.  

 

And I am also looking forward to seeing more details about the 

orange zone speeding law. I know that I can feel very good 

about that. That’s a very important one. Speeding through those 

construction zones is just not on. That is something that needs to 

be fixed, and so we look forward to that. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, the other issue around labour that just 

needs to be fixed, needs to be fixed as quickly as possible is 

around essential services. The Throne Speech was silent on that, 

not a word about that. And I clearly think if the people of 

Saskatchewan want one piece of legislation fixed in this 

province of those 15 pieces of legislation, it’s that one that 

Judge Ball said, you’ve got to get back and work with the 

stakeholders, work with unions. Get it right and then we can 

move on. 

 

Here’s a piece of legislation that’s broken, that was poorly 

written, lack of consultation. In fact Judge Ball even cited that 

as an issue. It was an international embarrassment for us in 

Saskatchewan. We actually have a strong reputation in terms of 

labour, whether it’s occupational health and safety or whether 

it’s labour standards. And here we had this embarrassment of 

the essential services legislation. We need to get that fixed as 

quickly as possible. 

 

The government needs to talk and include and work with all the 

stakeholders to make sure everyone feels that it’s a fair and 

balanced approach to how trade unions can practise in this 

province. And that’s all they’re looking for, is it’s fair and it’s 

balanced. Not one side have more power than the other, but that 

we can get collective bargaining resolved in a way that does not 

endanger public safety but also can make sure people can 

exercise their rights. That’s hugely important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well I wanted to touch briefly on municipal 

affairs. As a critic for Municipal Affairs, I want to first extend 

my congratulations to all the people who will be coming back to 

sit on city councils, town councils across this province. I also 

want to recognize and thank all those people who put their 

names forward to serve our communities across the province. 

That’s not an easy job, and it’s one that when you do that you 

really do put yourself out there publicly. And it’s really one that 

I think we should take a moment and thank everyone for doing 

that. And now we have new city, town councils, RM [rural 

municipality] councils across the province, and we’ll be happy 

to work with those folks. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I do want to talk a little about infrastructure, hugely an 

important issue. I was able to take in some of the National 

Infrastructure Summit here in Regina this fall. Very important. 

Of course we know that’s a huge deficit right across Canada, 

and Saskatchewan’s no exception. And I will be looking 

forward to see how this government talks about asset 

management, particularly when it comes to provincial interest. 

What’s our interest when it comes to seeing what is restored, 

what is built, what is new? What do we do about our roads, our 

water systems, and that type of thing? 

 

But also, Mr. Speaker, it’s a real opportunity, it’s a real 

opportunity to talk about sustainability. How can our 

communities be sustainable? How can they be green 

communities so that they can last longer than ever before? 

We’ve learned things about infrastructure over the last few 

decades and we can put that into play. Let’s make sure we don’t 

go in a way that we regret later on where we want to have our 

cities, our communities, our countryside . . . I mean it’s a 

beautiful province and we want to make sure that it’s 

sustainable and our communities are sustainable. 

 

I do have to say, just I want to touch on one issue around the 

P.A. [Prince Albert] bridge. It was interesting that we were out 

in Prince Albert just after Labour Day weekend. Of course it 

was the talk of the town. And I don’t know if the folks from 

Prince Albert will talk about this, but the concern was the story 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

of people trying to cross the bridge on Labour Day Monday 

afternoon when the line across was something like 5 miles. And 

they’re trying to get an answer from the government: where is 

that second bridge in terms of a priority for this government? 

It’s not mentioned. 

 

Now we’re saying there should be some sort of list, some sort 

of inventory of what are important infrastructure projects for 

this province. And I’ve got to say, Prince Albert, the second 

bridge would make a big difference not only for the city of 

Prince Albert, for the northerners, the mining industry, the 

economic growth of the North. It’s huge. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I see that housing has been put on the 

Throne Speech, and rightfully so. But I do have to say that after 

five years you would think that we would not be talking so 

much about housing affordability, that more would have been 

done in this area. But clearly what we see are some real, real 

significant gaps in a housing strategy, that folks are still raising 

concerns. And we saw the new mayor of Regina talking about 

that he’s going to do a housing summit on affordable housing, 

and rightfully so. But this government has failed, has failed 

over the last five years to really make a dent in this market. We 

see extremely low vacancy rates and in a few weeks we’ll see 

what the new ones are from CMHC [Canada Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation]. Will you have Regina just floating 

around point six per cent? And I don’t know if that’ll change 

very much. But you have Regina in that kind of a circumstance. 

That’s a real problem. And we still see high rents, and we see 

high rents and we still have people talking to us about, what can 

we do about that? And we know the government here put 

forward a piece of legislation last spring about rent, rogue 

landlords. That was a very interesting piece of legislation that is 

just totally ineffectual when it comes to protecting tenants from 

being gouged. And still they’re not really addressing that. 

 

Couple of things that I was looking for in the Throne Speech. 

Housing First, just not there. Just not there. Anything around 

co-op housing you would think would be there this year . . . 

[inaudible] . . . going to be a year for co-op housing and special 

initiative, international year of co-ops. Not a word about co-op 

housing. And of course we know many of them, their funding 

becomes a risk over the next couple of years. That’s a huge 

issue. So more around that. 

 

But we saw this summer the government announced plans 

around their social housing program for Sask Housing that will 

affect some 15,000 families or people in their units. And of 

course they targeted 800 people. We’re not sure. They decided 

to go right at that in the cities. But in the rural areas and the 

northern areas, this press release said clearly they’re going to 

consult. But I don’t know what’s happening with that. And 

we’re going to have lots of questions. But we’re getting letters 

from people who felt that they were in a place where their rent 

was going to be predictable and it’s not. And some bizarre logic 

by some of the folks at Sask Housing about how this is going to 

create new spaces. But where do those 800 people go? I mean it 

just doesn’t seem fair and not well-thought-out at all. Everyone 

needs a place. So we have to approach this in a common sense 

way, but to make a media project out of it was a problem. And 

we hear more especially around northern housing and senior 

housing, a lot more has to be done around that. So it’s really, 

really something. 

I just want to speak briefly about highways and a couple of 

other topics here. First, highways. I want to say that, you know, 

I was shocked when yet we had another press release on the 

twinning of Highway No. 11. I believe it is, since 2008 . . . Six 

times? Six times? That’s amazing. Six times, and I’m sure 

we’re not finished yet, are we? Are we going to hit 10? 10? 

Who says 12? Maybe it’ll be 12 press releases. Who knows? 

Who knows? And of course what happened last Friday around 

the Hatchet Lake road. The promise, the one press release that 

they could have kept — they issued a press release — and they 

should have kept that but they chose not to. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I was really shocked about was 

the fact that we did not hear about highway safety and the fact 

that in Saskatchewan we have some real challenges around 

highway safety. And you know, I was on the Internet and taking 

a look at how do we stack up across Canada. And of course you 

know, we had in the year — this is from SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] — 2010, 167 traffic fatalities in 

Saskatchewan. And I know for every family, every group, this 

is really a tragic situation when we have a highway death or a 

death on a road. 

 

How do we stack up against other provinces, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Well here are the stats from 2009. Per 100,000 

population, we have 14.7 highway deaths. That’s number two. 

Only the Yukon is higher; they have 20. Where’s Manitoba in 

terms of highway deaths? 7.1. And where’s Alberta? 9.6. But 

we’re over 30 per cent higher than Alberta, at 14.7. How does 

that work? How does that work? 

 

And here we go. How about if we look at it in terms of per 

100,000 licensed drivers? We have 21 fatalities per 100,000 

licensed drivers. Alberta has 12. Manitoba has 11. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in the Throne Speech not one word about highway 

safety, about fatalities on highways. We’re very supportive of 

the orange zone, but what about these folks here? We could do 

more. We should be doing more. And if there’s something 

that’s broke, this is it, and we should be fixing it. So that’s a 

real problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I just want to say health, not a word about mental health. I know 

that’s an issue that’s a big concern in my riding. That, you 

know, the issues around addictions is a big deal, but not a word 

about addictions. Not a word about addictions, and not a word 

about bullying. Clearly we need to do more about this. And 

mental health issues in Saskatchewan, Canada, are becoming a 

bigger and bigger issue as we recognize the impact it has on our 

families, our communities. And we saw that just recently in BC 

[British Columbia] with the tragic death of a young high school 

girl because of bullying. We can do more, and we should be 

doing more. And not a word in this Throne Speech about 

mental health. We should be doing much more. 

 

And of course I just want to, as a teacher, just to talk about 

education and their approach that is outlined in the Throne 

Speech about standardized testing and how that’s going to 

resolve the issue around grade 12, the falling grade 12 

graduation rates. And clearly, Mr. Speaker, that may be one 

way to approach it, but many of us who were at the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] luncheon, and we heard 

other causes. You know, when we start, when kids start to 

experience success in school, it really is at an early age. It’s not 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

in grade 9 or grade 10. You can’t start in high school. You have 

to start even pre-school. And we see what this government 

thinks about pre-school education. So we have to start at an 

earlier age, and we have to talk about what really is . . . How 

can we make the connection between kids in schools better? A 

lot of it is housing; it’s nutrition; it’s poverty — those things. 

That’s the challenge that we have to do to make sure every kid 

comes to school ready to learn. And we do it in grade 1. We do 

it in pre-school. We do it in kindergarten. And if we do it then, 

you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll have a good group of 

high school kids that will do well. But you’ve got to make that 

connection early on so they’re strong. 

 

And really, standardized testing, while it’s one interesting way 

of approaching it, I’d be curious to know what the STF has to 

think about this. And we’ll be looking for this. I know the 

Premier stood up with his three pages of endorsements. I’m not 

sure if the STF was on that list or not. He didn’t read through 

the list. I’d be very curious about it. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to wrap up because I know 

we’ve got lots of people who want to weigh in on this debate. 

Of course I have really a lot more that I could say around the 

environment too. I mean we could go on and on. But we’ll have 

more time when we debate specific concerns. 

 

What I look for is what’s in it for people in the middle class, the 

people that are in my neighbourhood. I didn’t see an awful lot, 

Mr. Speaker. I didn’t see people who are looking for resolutions 

around bullying in our schools. I didn’t see that kind of stuff. I 

didn’t see . . . not much for my neighbours. I know my 

neighbours weren’t down at that $100-a-plate dinner. 

 

They’re worried about the surprises that they may get. This 

government is getting a bit of a reputation for delivering 

surprises on the last day before the end of session in December 

or early . . . or at the last days of spring session like they did last 

year around labour legislation or the three more MLAs. Please, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, no more surprises. That’s what my people 

are saying. No more surprises. We want straight talk on our 

finances. This government’s getting a reputation as well as not 

. . . not straight talk that they can really, really believe in. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in summary, I will be supporting the 

amendment that’s put forward, that there’s very little that is new 

in this Throne Speech. In fact it’s the rehash of old ideas that 

allows ideology to trump common sense, and that it’s put an 

agenda that puts politicians ahead of people, and it ignores the 

middle class and small businesses of Saskatchewan. So 

therefore I will be supporting the amendment and not the main 

motion. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it’s a pleasure to rise in the House once again on the 

second session of the 27th legislative sitting and talk about the 

Speech from the Throne, our plan going forward called 

planning for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as always when I stand here in the Legislative 

Assembly, I feel very humbled and honoured, and there’s a few 

people I’d like to thank before I get going into my Throne 

Speech response. 

 

First and foremost I want to thank my beautiful wife who’s up 

in the west galleries of your Legislative Assembly. As the 

member from Martensville said, she’s as far away from me as 

she can possibly get, so that’s nice of her. But, Mr. Speaker, my 

wife has been with me for the long . . . for three years now, and 

it’s been a short three years for me, but maybe a long three 

years for her. We’ve been through a campaign. We’ve been 

through building a house together. And she is my rock that I 

rely on, and our future looks better and better every day I get to 

wake up beside her. So thank her very much for being here. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wouldn’t be able to stand in this House 

today and give my response to the Throne Speech without the 

good people of Regina Walsh Acres giving me their support in 

the election. It’s almost a year. It happened a year ago from 

November 7th. They humbled me with a 50 per cent approval 

rating basically, and I’m going to work hard each and every day 

to make sure that I’m representing them and how they feel our 

province should be going, and I feel that this Throne Speech is a 

part of that. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I’d like to actually talk a little bit about consultations. Our 

member from across the hall there from Saskatoon Centre 

talked about how we don’t do consultations. And I don’t know 

how they made public policy back 16 years ago. It’s probably a 

little different than we do it. But this document, the Throne 

Speech and our Saskatchewan plan for growth, they weren’t 

forged at the cabinet table in Regina. They were assembled 

from ideas around every kitchen table across our province. 

 

Our 49 members went out and we asked the people of 

Saskatchewan where they want to see their province going in 

the next decade, Mr. Speaker. And the ideas that they brought 

forward and gave us are what you see in the Saskatchewan 

growth plan, vision 2020 and beyond. And what you see in our 

Throne Speech is assembled from our 49 members going 

talking to their constituents, consulting with our constituents, 

having ideas, and these ideas are what really filled the books in 

this little booklet, as the Leader of the Opposition would say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, talking about our Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s some things we’d like to go through. We as a province 

are leading in economic growth throughout our country. Our 

population is at a new record high, Mr. Speaker. That means 

over the last — from July 1st, 2012 — over our last five years, 

our population is now at 1,079,958, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 

growth of nearly 80,000 people in five years, and the fastest 

growth in our province in the last 90. 

 

Just to compare and contrast where our government is going 

and where the previous government has been, in July 1st, 1991 

to July 1st, 2007, our population went from 1,002,713 to 

1,000,171. That’s a decrease, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s 

perhaps why the opposition has some trouble understanding 

how we plan for growth when the only thing they ever did was 

mitigate decline. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as always we welcome some ideas from 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

our members across the hall, but planning for growth is not one 

that they know very much about. And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 

seek growth just for the sake of growth. It’s not an end; it’s a 

means to an end, Mr. Speaker. We look for growth so that we 

can invest in education and post-secondary education, in 

highways, in health care. That’s what growth means to us. It 

means an expansion in our tax base. It means an ability to 

provide people with the necessities they want to improve their 

quality of life all across Saskatchewan. 

 

So the question that we went and asked our constituents was, do 

we want this growth to continue? And, Mr. Speaker, the answer 

that we heard when we consulted with them was a resounding 

yes. But, Mr. Speaker, along with growth come challenges 

arising from our growth. They want to ensure the benefits are 

widely shared, and we heard that loud and clear from our 

constituents. And to that end, that’s why we announced our plan 

for growth in our Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. And the main 

goal for our plan for growth is to reach 1.2 million people by 

the year 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with our growth plan there’s six components to it. 

The first component is infrastructure. And we’ve created 

SaskBuilds, a new government organization, to drive innovation 

in infrastructure, financing, and design. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

our focus over the next two years will be on renewing roads, 

water systems, health care facilities, and schools. 

 

The second component of our plan, Mr. Speaker, is to keep the 

Saskatchewan economy competitive. Our government will 

lower business tax from 12 to 10 per cent by 2015. Mr. Speaker, 

this fall we will introduce the Saskatchewan employment Act, 

which will clearly outline the rights and responsibilities of 

employers, employees, and unions in the workplace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third component of the growth plan for 

Saskatchewan is fiscal responsibility. Mr. Speaker, all of our 

plans within this Throne Speech will be contained within a 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. That’s fiscal probity and that’s 

something that we take serious. That’s the brand of our 

government. Our government fulfills commitments, but we 

fulfill our commitments within a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fourth component of the growth plan is 

education and training. Mr. Speaker, as a younger voice in our 

caucus, this is something that I feel very passionate about, 

post-secondary education and secondary education. I think it’s 

something where if you don’t educate your children, you won’t 

have much of a future in their province. And we take this very 

serious. That’s why we’ve already committed to the 

infrastructure of secondary education — fixed 50 per cent of 

our schools already, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I remember growing up in a small town. We’d go to school. 

Our school, when it would rain, we’d have buckets catching 

water all over the school, Mr. Speaker. The roof was leaking. 

The wind would howl through the windows. And that’s 

something that we’re changing, Mr. Speaker. Our Finance 

minister and our Education minister are committed to good 

education facilities, and that’s something that we’re very proud 

of moving forward. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our post-secondary institutions have 

received over $3.5 billion in the first five years of our 

government, and that’s something we pride ourselves in. We’ve 

done a great job in making sure that post-secondary education is 

available to everyone. And we feel that, as an institution, we’ve 

committed in this Throne Speech to add 300 more training 

spaces to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology], Mr. Speaker, so that we can meet that 

challenge of trying to make sure that we have the skilled 

workforce to continue to grow our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fifth component of the plan is innovation. 

We’ll continue to support world-leading research in agriculture 

and energy. And, Mr. Speaker, this government isn’t afraid to 

make goals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And some of the goals that 

we’ve made in agriculture is increasing crop production by 10 

million tonnes by 2020 and increasing exports of agri-food 

products by 50 per cent to $15 billion in 2020. Mr. Speaker, this 

is something that was long forgotten in a bygone era when the 

previous administration was in place. They forgot about our 

agriculture sector. They didn’t keep their commitments. They 

didn’t think that rural Saskatchewan was going to ever catch up. 

They didn’t think rural Saskatchewan could grow, and they 

really just tried to leave us in the past. 

 

And growing up on a farm, I know that we had some tough 

years in the mid-’90s and early 2000s. And I think the 

agriculture community in rural Saskatchewan really appreciates 

the effort that this government has made to ensure that they 

have the capacity to grow. And moving forward we considered 

the agriculture sector as being of one of our main areas where 

growth is going to help this province move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the sixth component of the growth plan is 

strengthening Saskatchewan’s role on the world stage. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, our government will appoint a Premier’s 

advisory committee on Asia as part of our strategy to double 

Saskatchewan’s exports by 2020. 

 

Our government will work to develop new markets in Central 

and South America. And under the new Saskatchewan 

international future scholarships, 20 students a year will study 

business at an international institution with government support. 

Mr. Speaker, in return, these students, they’ll agree to live and 

work in Saskatchewan for five years after they graduate. That’s 

the new Saskatchewan really is about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

having opportunities for our students after they’ve gone through 

their post-secondary education or training at SIAST or gone to 

regional colleges. They see their future is right here in our 

province. And that is why a year ago, a couple of years ago, we 

agreed to a $20,000 rebate for one of the most aggressive 

student retention programs in the country, and why we’ve 

added the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship of up to $2,000 

for any high school grad in Saskatchewan that gets trained at a 

post-secondary institution right here in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our growth plan does include targets. And those 

targets include by the end of 2014 no one will wait longer than 

three months for surgery. By 2017 no one will wait to receive 

emergency room care. And by 2020, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Saskatchewan will have the highest grade 12 graduation rate in 

the country. 

 

The Saskatchewan economy is being propelled by our natural 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

resource wealth. There’s been a lot of debate about what we 

should do with royalty revenues once the debt is paid off, Mr. 

Speaker. And don’t take my word for paying off debt before we 

decide what we do with the royalty rates as being a good idea. 

There is some third party quotes that I’d like to share with you 

about some of our future growth plans. And one of them is 

actually from . . . Well, I’ll read the quote first, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I agree with Premier Wall that it is a matter of accounting. 

It makes sense to pay off the existing provincial debt 

before creating a new savings fund. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s from one of the leadership candidates 

of the NDP, Erin Weir. And it’s nice that he agrees with some 

good public policy, and he’s really one of the only people that 

has started to put out public policy for the leadership race. And 

we look forward to seeing what the other candidates are going 

to say about this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, paying off debt just makes sense. Any time you 

look at a family, a household income, you can look and see that 

paying off debt makes sense before you start saving money. So 

I don’t know why anyone would think that paying off debt 

would be a bad thing, but I’d like to hear what our leadership 

candidates from Rosemont or Saskatoon Massey Place have to 

say about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but when the debt is paid off, and it will be paid 

off at some point in time, Premier Wall has asked the former 

University of Saskatchewan president, Peter MacKinnon, to 

look at the question by leading the Saskatchewan heritage 

initiative. Professor MacKinnon will develop and recommend 

options on what Saskatchewan should do with its resource 

revenues after we pay off the provincial debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after years of stagnation, Saskatchewan is 

growing. But we do need to do things right to sustain this 

growth, to deal with the challenges of growth so that our 

children and their children can build a good life right here in 

our province. And that’s what our Throne Speech sets out at 

this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It sets out how we can continue 

to maintain our growth and grow in a sustainable way and make 

sure that we don’t forget about some of the infrastructure 

challenges that we may face during our term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a plan that I think the people of Saskatchewan 

had a great deal of input into. I know that my constituents, I had 

a wonderful summer of going out and talking to constituents, 

and they did mention paying off the debt was very important to 

them. They did mention that we know that growth is a good 

thing. We want to increase our tax base. We want to make sure 

that more people are coming to Saskatchewan, and we want to 

ensure that people that have their education in Saskatchewan 

have opportunities to stay in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I agree with the fact that when we grow our 

tax base, when we grow our province, when more and more 

people want to move here, there are going to be challenges that 

we face. But these challenges are challenges of growth. And I 

think that growing our province is something very important. 

And when we continue to hit, and when we do hit that 

population of 1.2 million, I think, I think it may be before 2020. 

I’m a little optimistic. Call me an optimist, but I think we can 

do it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we do do it, it’s going to be another 

example of how we made a goal and we set it. We made it a 

goal of recruiting 800 nurses. We made that goal. We set it; we 

attained it.  

 

And I think another one of our brands that people are coming to 

realize is that we do what we say we’re going to do. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s something that once you do it over and over 

again, when you do it over and over again, Mr. Speaker, I think 

it’s something that when people learn to respect you. And it’s 

something that when we go and door knock in 2016 when the 

next election comes up, and we say, you know what, this is our 

platform, we’re going to roll this out, they’re going to believe 

what we say. 

 

And for us as politicians to have people believe what we’re 

going to say, it’s important, and I think it’s a great, great reward 

for us. And I believe that our Premier leads the way in making 

sure that we do what we say we’re going to do. And our great 

caucus, our 49-member caucus, they’re all people of great 

honour and integrity. And when they go forward and they tell 

people what we’re going to do is what we’re going to do, the 

province is believing us. And I think that’s very important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will strongly disagree with the amendment 

put forward by the Opposition Leader. And I believe let the 

people of Saskatchewan see through that their need to oppose, 

obviously strongly oppose us. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll agree with 

the motion put forward by the member for Battleford, and I’ll 

proudly stand behind this Throne Speech. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a true 

honour to rise and speak today on the 2012 Speech from the 

Throne. You know it’s been almost a year since the first time I 

was able to stand up in this Assembly and speak to my 

colleagues and to the people of Saskatchewan, and the honour 

hasn’t lessened one iota, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is tremendous, 

the ability that my colleagues have put forward to move 

Saskatchewan ahead. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Before we go any further, Mr. Speaker, I need to thank my 

family, most and in particular my wife and my best friend, 

Marjorie. The encouragement and support myself and my boys 

receive from her is immeasurable. And as all of us know, 

without our support at home we wouldn’t be able to do the job 

that we’re able to do. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I need to thank my parents. I have a lot of 

friends that they talk about the hours we put in as legislators 

working here and back in the constituency. And this goes back 

to an interview I had when I was . . . before I started working at 

SaskTel. The people at SaskTel, they asked me during the 

interview, they said, are you going to have trouble working 35 

to 40 hours a week? And I wasn’t sure where this was coming 

from because I’d worked in the oil field. So my answer to them 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

was, what do I do after Wednesday? And they were taken aback 

by that, and they said, what do you mean? I said, well we put in 

12 hours on Sunday, 12 hours on Monday, 12 hours on 

Tuesday. Does that mean we get the rest of the week off? And 

they’re like, no, no, no. You don’t get the rest of the week off. 

 

And the reason I was able to do that is the work ethic that my 

parents instilled in me. We talk about a legacy. That is 

something my parents have given to me and it’s something my 

boys picked up. They tend to be there, first ones on the job and 

a lot of time they’re the last ones to go. I’ve talked about my 

boys. The two most recently have changed jobs. And they’ve 

had actually their managers come up to them and said, look, it’s 

3 o’clock. Have you taken your coffee break yet? Coffee break, 

no I haven’t even taken my lunch break yet. You need to take a 

break. End of the day there’s still customers waiting, and 

they’re waiting to wait on the customers. They’re not, it’s 4:30; 

it’s time to go home. And that’s the work ethic that my parents 

have instilled in me, my wife and I have been able to instill into 

our children. And this is the work ethic as a government that we 

put forward with the direction from the people of the province. 

 

We talk about the Saskatchewan plan for growth which sets out 

the Government of Saskatchewan’s vision for the province all 

the way out to 2020. And it’s unique. And the Premier spoke 

about this in our luncheon today in Moose Jaw. Previous 

governments — and he said governments of all stripes, not just 

the previous government — governments of all stripes tend to 

plan in four-year stints. Well as a long-term vision, that doesn’t 

work for the province. We need to think out long-term, so we’re 

planning out to 2020. Within that, we’ve set goals. 

 

You know, that’s one of the differences that attracted me so 

much to this government on this side of the House is that when 

we say we’re going to do something, we’re going to set out and 

try and do it. We’re going to set those goals, we’re going to go 

ahead and we’re going to work and we’re going to do our best 

to do it. Our member that spoke previously spoke well to it. He 

said we’re going to reach out for 800 nurses, and we’re going to 

do that. Well, what did we do? Well in that time frame it was 

over 900 nurses that we recruited. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nine hundred and forty. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Nine hundred and forty. There we go, over 

900. I was close. Well, no, 900 is more . . . Over 900 is 940. 

There we go. 

 

So the other things we’ve done, or are planning to do, investing 

in the infrastructure required for that growth. When the Premier 

set us forth this summer, at the end of our last session, it was to 

go out and talk to our constituents, the people in our ridings, 

and see what they thought. Overall meeting after meeting, 

contact, coffee, it was we need to invest in our infrastructure. 

So first platform in our growth plan, invest for the infrastructure 

for growth. Next educating, training, and developing a skilled 

workforce. Well we have to start somewhere, so let’s get going 

and we’re going to work on that. Ensuring the ongoing 

competitiveness of Saskatchewan’s economy and supporting 

increased trade and investment exports through international 

engagement, advancing Saskatchewan’s natural resource 

strengths, particularly through innovation to build the next 

economy. Again, planning for the future. We plan for the 

future. That’s what we do. And on top of that, we need to do 

this: ensuring fiscal responsibility through balanced budgets, 

lower debt and smaller, more effective government. 

 

There are many, many highlights in this speech that I 

considered to address today but, for me, the focus that this 

government is giving to the area of social services makes me 

incredibly proud. Mr. Deputy Speaker, for far too many years, 

the previous government was prone to giving this lip service but 

not truly delving into the heart of an area of issues of our 

province’s most vulnerable. 

 

As many of you know, my wife and I, Marjorie, are foster 

parents. We have been foster parents for several years, and 

before we were foster parents for what were called persons of 

interest, we actually had Social Services contact us and say, 

look, we have kids that need a place to stay. Can they stay with 

you? We stepped up and we did that. So we have witnessed 

first-hand what neglect can do to children who are not cared for 

as they should be. 

 

We’ve also witnessed how a neglected child welfare system can 

stymie progress that a foster family may be making with 

children in their care. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is so 

important that we as a government take this so seriously and 

we’re working on it and making it a priority. The numbers show 

the number of our children in child care has decreased by 

seventeen and a half per cent since March 2009. And the 

number of foster homes with more than four children has 

dropped by 54 per cent in the same period. So great job. 

 

However a true transformation will only occur when fewer 

children are entering the system in the first place, and our 

government will begin a development of an early year strategy 

that puts a priority on parental training and their family. This 

government and our Premier have been clear — crystal clear in 

fact — that the child welfare system is a priority. In fact since 

2010 alone, this government has invested $74 million, $74 

million into the child and youth agenda. You know, it’s so 

wonderful that we walk the walk that we talk. Or no, how do we 

really say that? We do in fact walk the walk, not just talk the 

talk. I’ve got to get a new pair of glasses. 

 

The Saskatchewan child and youth agenda is already impacting 

our at-risk children, youth, and families, over and over. We 

have $34 million and it’s been invested already into this critical 

area. Work is being done to transform the current system. And I 

can’t thank this government enough for the vision and heart that 

they are putting into this complex issue. I know the cabinet 

committee on children and youth are working tirelessly to help 

create opportunities for these young people. And you know, the 

thing is I get to work with this day in and day out. I have foster 

children in my home right now. I get to see first-hand what we 

do as a government to try and help these children strive to 

become all that they can be. And we don’t just talk about it; we 

actually do it. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s part of the plan for growth. 

You know, by 2020 we want 1.2 million people in this 

province. Why do we want 1.2 million people? It’s pretty 

simple. It’s to expand the tax base so we can actually provide 

for those that have trouble providing for themselves, to give 

them a hand up, not a handout. 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

We have a plan. You know, we sit there over and over and over 

again, what are we going to do? What are we going to do? What 

are we going to do? Well here’s what we’re going to do. We’re 

going to sit down. We’ve sat down. We put the plan together. 

We’re going to work on this. We’ve been working on it since 

we started governing, and we’re making progress. 

 

The difference between us and the members opposite: we set 

goals. We set goals that are hard to attain and we strive for 

those. So at the end of the day if we don’t make those, we’re 

going to have a lot to answer for. But you know what? In the 

meantime we’ve met the goals that we’ve set. We’ve set the 

goals for the nurses. We’ve set the goals for reducing debt. 

We’re reaching these goals and unfortunately the other side 

doesn’t know how to set goals. They get mad at us because we 

set goals. We speak about it day in, day out. We’re going to set 

the goals. We’re going to strive to do our best to achieve those 

goals and we are going to achieve those goals. We’re going to 

achieve those goals through the help of the people of 

Saskatchewan in growing this province. 

 

For this reason as well as the others, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 

going to speak in favour for the motion from the member in 

support of the Speech from the Throne and against the 

amendment from the member opposite. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today to enter into the Throne Speech debate. Each and 

every MLA in this room actually serves two masters as it were 

— each of us represents our own constituency and at the same 

time we are called upon to provide the best possible 

government that we can for our province. So indeed I am 

looking forward to hearing the exchange of ideas in the Throne 

Speech debate. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to do a little 

bragging about the Melfort constituency which I’m sure is 

probably the leading constituency in the entire province . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes we are. I also want to look at 

how the Throne Speech and the Saskatchewan plan for growth 

affects the Melfort constituency and how it helps to lead in the 

new Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to start by saying thank you to my beautiful wife, 

April, who has encouraged me and supported me so well, and I 

would like to also express my pride in April as she was elected 

to the Melfort city council last week. 

 

I would also like to thank my CAs [constituency assistant] back 

home, Laurie Hookway and Peggy Gordon. As this past year 

has been my first as an MLA, these two ladies have been and 

continue to be invaluable to both myself and the entire 

constituency. 

 

And in speaking about people of the Melfort constituency, I 

want to thank them for their encouragement during the past 

year. And in particular I would like to thank the RMs, the 

village, the towns, the cities, and First Nation councils who 

have worked with me so well in the past 12 months. 

 

The Melfort constituency runs north to the Saskatchewan River, 

south to just about two kilometres north of Highways 6 and 16 

at Dafoe, east and west about 60 kilometres, with Highway No. 

6 as the backbone of the constituency. 

 

The landscapes vary from heavy forest and the beautiful 

Saskatchewan River valley in the north to the wide open spaces 

of the south. There are many recreational sites in the area — 

provincially known Wapiti ski hill, lush golf courses, gorgeous 

lakes, fishing, hunting, camping, and various municipal 

facilities. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And a great MLA. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — And a great MLA? I would hope so. Some 

day. Economy-wise, agriculture has long been an important part 

of the local economy, as some of the very best farm land in the 

world is caught up within those boundaries. But there is more. 

There is so much more in this constituency. 

 

Each year there are up to 5,000 hopper cones built and shipped 

from within 30 kilometres of Melfort. More cones are built in 

that area than anywhere else in Canada. Added to this is an iron 

triangle which encompasses Bourgault Industries and Bourgault 

Tillage Tools, Free Form Industries, and others in St. Brieux, 

which today just borders on the constituency, tomorrow will be 

in the constituency with the new boundaries. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Annaheim is the hometown of Doepker 

Industries, Schulte Industries in Englefeld, Michel’s Industries 

in St. Gregor, Failure Prevention Services, which is one of my 

favourites, and Sapphire Water in Watson, just to name a few. 

The reason that Failure Prevention Services is one of my 

favourites is because they employ 20, 30, 40 people in Watson, 

but they don’t ship to anybody within 100 or 200 miles of 

Watson. They build filters for the largest machines in the world 

at Watson and export throughout the world. These are the 

world-class industries, and all from the Melfort constituency. 

 

On the horizon is BHP Billiton Jansen Lake potash mine, the 

largest potash mine in the world, and that’s just south of LeRoy 

in the Melfort constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With $2 

million being invested each and every day from the new mine, 

don’t let anybody tell you that it’s not going to happen; it’s not 

going to be a reality. 

 

And there’s other megaproject considerations in the 

constituency, including the Pehonan hydro development on the 

Saskatchewan River and the Shore Gold diamond discovery just 

across the river from the constituency, so I will claim it as well, 

with apologies to the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you can see, when we talk about the 

new Saskatchewan, the Melfort constituency is very much a 

leader in our great province. This past summer the member 

from Batoche and myself had the honour of officially opening 

the new and reconstructed Highway 368 which services over 

1,000 workers along the western portion of the constituency. 

Add to this the improvements in Highway 3, Highway 5, 

Highway 6, grid 640 and the newly announced Highway 41 

improvement. 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

This Saskatchewan government understands the needs of the 

people in this province. The Saskatchewan plan for growth, 

which is largely what the Throne Speech is about, was 

developed after consultations with thousands of Saskatchewan 

people who willingly submitted their ideas for a better 

Saskatchewan. These people told us to keep growing 

Saskatchewan, to keep balancing the budget, pay down the 

debt, and more than anything, more than anything, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they told us to keep providing our citizens with good 

government that uses growth to improve the quality of life in 

our province. 

 

But what does the Throne Speech and the growth plan mean for 

the Melfort constituency? It means that the municipalities that 

are now growing will get help with their infrastructure. And I 

find that interesting that four out of five municipalities, towns 

and villages and cities, are growing where almost that same 

number, 85 per cent, were losing population under the tired, old 

NDP government. It just switched it around. And that’s what 

Saskatchewan is doing now. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it means help 

for industries that are growing but have limitations due to 

employee shortages. 

 

But let’s focus on a couple of items. Let’s talk about places 

where the government has set definite goals. After all, if you 

don’t know where you’re going, how are you going to know 

when you get there? With agriculture, industry, and mining 

being so important to the Melfort constituency, let’s have a look 

at exports. Our government has set a goal to grow trade and 

investment and double export sales by 2020. In the past five 

years this government and our people have already started along 

that path. Oil exports up 48 per cent, potash up 127 per cent, 

wheat up over 10 per cent, canola 170 per cent, pulse crops 81 

per cent higher, and canola oil up by a whopping 449 per cent. 

That’s the way we’re doing it in Saskatchewan, in the new 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This year, 2012, Saskatchewan is on pace to pass British 

Columbia as the fourth largest exporting province in Canada. 

We are building trade partners where there were none. We are 

increasing exports to existing trade partners. And we are 

working to increase productivity in agriculture, in the industry, 

in mining right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

How is the government going to double exports by 2020? I 

think it sums it up in the growth plan, and I like it. It says: 

 

Saskatchewan’s . . . [internal] export, trade and 

engagement strategy will focus on Saskatchewan’s natural 

resource and agricultural strengths [strengths we already 

have] and their associated value-chains, including 

processing, manufacturing and innovation. Saskatchewan 

will seek international investment in greenfield projects 

and expansions that contribute to the growth of 

Saskatchewan’s natural resource sector. 

 

What is really great about that statement is that we are 

accountable. We have set the bar very, very high, and this 

government has and will succeed when the last government 

failed the people of Saskatchewan so badly. 

 

In agriculture our stated goal is to increase crop production by 

10 million tonnes, increase exports of agriculture and food 

products by 50 per cent. This would mean an increase from $10 

billion in 2011 to 15 billion in 2020. Think what that would 

mean to the hungry world. 

 

And there is more. There is more growth and more goals for all 

of Saskatchewan residents in education, in population, in the 

environment, in health care, in innovation, in our residents’ 

day-to-day lives. It’s a plan. It’s a vision. But more than 

anything, it is the way to make Saskatchewan the best place to 

live, to work, and to raise a family. And for all these reasons 

and many, many more, I will be supporting the Throne Speech 

motion. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. This year’s 

Throne Speech outlines the government’s growth plan with key 

investments in infrastructure, addressing the skilled labour 

shortage, and ensuring Saskatchewan remains competitive 

while maintaining fiscal discipline and a balanced budget. 

 

We don’t seek growth for the sake of growth but for what it 

allows us to do. Mr. Deputy Speaker, from July 2007 to July 

2012, Saskatchewan’s population increased by nearly 80,000 

people. In the last year alone, Saskatchewan grew by more than 

22,000 people, the most growth in any year since 1921. Every 

Saskatchewan city and nearly 80 per cent of Saskatchewan’s 

towns saw their population increase during the most recent 

census period. It is because of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 

must a have a pragmatic and effective plan for growth. 

 

As we reflect on what growth offers our province, I think of 

how important it is for everyone, but especially the next 

generation. I think about how important a vision and a plan for 

growth is for the young people in our province currently in 

elementary and high school. Mr. Speaker, when I was a 

teenager growing up in the ’90s, I was told, get an education 

that would be useful in the economy, but not in our economy. 

Growth and opportunity back then was not to be found in 

Saskatchewan. Today Saskatchewan is growing, and with that it 

offers opportunity for all. It allows us to invest in what’s 

important. We must ensure the growth continues for all 

generations but especially for the next generation. 

 

We must have the infrastructure needed to deal with the 

challenges of growth. That is why we are creating SaskBuilds 

and a new 150 million SaskBuilds fund to deliver infrastructure 

financing, design, and delivery. Innovative approach ensures 

that the much needed infrastructure will be built in time to deal 

with the challenges of growth. It was the old and tired practices 

of the previous government that led to the stagnation of 

population and of the economy. We on this side of the House 

seek out innovative solutions in order to tackle the challenges of 

growth. 

 

Dividends of growth allows us to help the ones in need the most 

by continuing efforts to add 12,600 new low-income housing 

units by 2016. Our government is taking initiatives to ensure 

that no one will be left behind during our province’s growth. 

We need to give the next generation the opportunity to receive 

the skills needed for today’s economy, and that is why we are 

developing 300 more apprenticeship spaces. A growing 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

Saskatchewan needs the skilled labour that these 300 more 

spaces will provide. A growing Saskatchewan means more 

opportunity for the youth to stay in our province for education 

and work. 

 

We need to compete for new investment and high-paying jobs 

from the private sector. That is why our government will be 

lowering the business tax with a goal of reducing it from 12 to 

10 per cent by 2015, which will bring Saskatchewan in line 

with Alberta and BC. 

 

In our first term, we lowered the small-business tax and 

removed 114,000 low-income seniors or earners off the 

provincial income tax roll. We did this because Saskatchewan is 

competing with Alberta and BC and growth dividends afford us 

this ability. By lowering the business tax to the same level as 

our neighbours, this will ensure that Saskatchewan will no 

longer be at a competitive disadvantage with our neighbours. 

Now Saskatchewan, more than ever, will be attracting 

investment. This investment will create more jobs, increase the 

take-home pay, and a better Saskatchewan. One only has to 

look at the uncertainty in the world economy and realize that if 

we are going to compete for much needed investment, that now 

more than ever we can’t be at a disadvantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a moral obligation to the world to 

improve food security. This is why we are establishing the 

Global Institute for Food Security. 

 

As we make record investment in infrastructure, we cannot be 

putting our men and women in unsafe environments. That is 

why we will be introducing new measures to improve work 

safety in highway construction zones, including increasing 

speeding penalties to triple the normal amount, and use photo 

radar in orange zones. These changes will safeguard our 

construction zones and hopefully reduce injuries and loss of 

lives. We must grow in a safe environment. 

 

Education is key to a growing Saskatchewan. A growing 

Saskatchewan plans for this with the creation of the 

Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings, which 

will help families who are saving for the children’s 

post-secondary education by providing up to $250 per year per 

child. This grant will help families save for education and 

ensure that we have the skilled and educated workforce for 

future growth. This program is paid for with the dividends of 

growth. We must ensure the best education possible in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We will be introducing a new student achievement initiative 

and an introduction of a provincial assessment for every student 

in the pre-K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system. Our 

government will support schools as they prepare students for 

post-secondary studies through the new student achievement 

initiative. With competition in the world increasing daily, we 

must ensure we have the best educational system possible to 

give our young ones the chance for success. 

 

The First Nations and Métis education employment gap must be 

closed in Saskatchewan. Closing this gap is an important step to 

ensure growth continues. We will be continuing to make 

progress in the First Nations and Métis education and 

employment joint task force. For far too long the previous 

government had let this gap grow. We have a skilled labour 

shortage and a high unemployment with First Nations and 

Métis. This could be the best time ever to make real changes 

and ensure everyone is benefiting from growth. Education 

resulting in employment can be a game changer. Everyone can 

remember what it felt like to get their first job. Work means 

responsibility. It means personal respect, the end of 

dependency, and it means financial freedom. Society as a whole 

will improve as we make improvements to job opportunities for 

First Nations and Métis. Employment for First Nations will help 

Saskatchewan grow as a province and meet its true potential. 

 

Growing Saskatchewan, we need more of everyone, including 

highly skilled doctors. This government will increase efforts to 

retain Saskatchewan-trained physicians and to attract more 

international medical students through the Saskatchewan 

international physician assessment. We need to retain more of 

our locally trained doctors and attract more international 

graduates. The previous government cut training seats. We 

expanded seats. They limited where doctors could be recruited 

from. We expanded the list. This government will improve 

health care by looking at best case practices used successfully 

in other parts of the country. That is why we’ll be introducing 

the new team-based approach to providing primary and 

emergency care in rural and remote communities modelled after 

Nova Scotia’s collaborative emergency standards. The previous 

government neglected rural health; this government is 

improving it. 

 

[16:00] 

 

One of the ways we plan on improving rural health care is by 

providing student loan forgiveness for new doctors, nurses, 

nurse practitioners who work in rural and remote communities. 

This program will help recruit health professionals we need in 

rural Saskatchewan. This is what growth affords us. 

 

Past governments had unbalanced labour laws that 

disadvantaged the province and drove jobs away. We will be 

introducing a new Saskatchewan employment Act that will give 

Saskatchewan the most modern, competitive, fair, and balanced 

labour and employment environment in Canada and help grow 

Saskatchewan. As a growing Saskatchewan means more jobs 

and higher take-home pay for all, this is what Saskatchewan 

looks like. 

 

This Throne Speech focused our attention and action on growth 

because with the dividends of growth we will improve our 

social safety nets, improve our health care, invest in 

infrastructure, reduce taxes, and improve the quality of life for 

all of Saskatchewan. 

 

To appreciate my view of the importance of this Throne Speech 

I need to take you back to my youth. I will tell how a 

completely different approach has shaped me and my 

generation. Past throne speeches from my childhood offered a 

very different version of Saskatchewan — a province in decline, 

a government that did not want change and feared growth. 

 

Get an education that would be useful in the economy, but not 

our economy. That is what I was told growing up in the ’90s. 

When I was a teenager, like many others I sat down with a 

guidance counsellor to look at post-secondary education and 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

career paths. I remember reviewing the list of opportunities in 

Saskatchewan. It was limited. Then we reviewed the list of 

opportunities for outside the province. It was endless. 

Opportunity was not to be found here. As a teenager in 

Saskatchewan, I started to be aware of my community, 

province, and country. As most teenagers, you start questioning 

things. You question authority, parents, teachers. I was asking 

why. I started to ask why my province wasn’t like the others. I 

was asking why our population was dropping, why a province 

with so much potential was performing so poorly. Every day 

reading the Leader-Post I would hear the news out of Regina, 

and it wasn’t good. Deficits, loss of population, scandals, the 

economy tanking, and the Riders missing the playoffs again. 

 

There was always hope and a promise that next year will be 

better. I wanted to know why we were failing. I was asking. 

There has to be a better way. Status quo would only bring more 

of the same. I was asking why so many people said my future 

wasn’t to be found here. Growing up in the ’90s should have 

been better but it taught a valuable lesson that has shaped my 

generation. My generation was told Saskatchewan was always 

going to be a small, wee place. We were told that in 

Saskatchewan that you didn’t have to worry because 

government will always provide for you. The government 

knows best. The government could provide you with everything 

you want. Even at a young age I knew something was very 

wrong. 

 

What was wrong was the government of the day planning for 

failure. Instead of fixing the climate for the economy, they 

decided to manage the decline. The government of the day 

failed my generation. Their policies made a tough situation 

worse. It was a failed mindset that produced failing results. 

Infrastructure was neglected. They let our province’s once 

proud and innovative health care system become the worst in 

the nation. That failed government scared away investment and 

jobs we badly needed back then. That was the environment I 

grew up in. 

 

My generation did not know growth or opportunity in 

Saskatchewan. Some of my generation has been able to return 

home and that is why growth is so important to me. Growth and 

opportunity means our next generation staying and succeeding 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan we plan for growth. It’s a different 

attitude that helps our province grow. We know that our growth 

means challenges but it also gives us the tools necessary to 

tackle these issues. In the Throne Speech our government is 

making significant investment in ensuring this province is ready 

to become what it was destined to be. 

 

Growth offers us a better quality of life. Growth has allowed us 

to pay down 44 per cent of the provincial debt. Growth has paid 

for a children’s hospital for the province. It’s what growth 

brings that is important. With a broadening tax base and 

increased financial ability, Saskatchewan will continue to grow. 

 

Opportunity for far too long was found in other places. 

Opportunity today is found everywhere and for everyone in 

Saskatchewan. Growth brings opportunity and opportunity 

brings growth. This opportunity is being encouraged and 

embraced, Mr. Speaker. Our government’s Throne Speech will 

ensure no future generation will be told to look for opportunity 

elsewhere. Growth has a new home. Opportunity is now 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I will be supporting the 

Speech from the Throne and opposing the amendments. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — It’s my pleasure to rise today to reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, and in particular to support the 

amendment that was made by the Leader of the Opposition to 

the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I guess first off I want to make a few comments about the past 

year and the experiences that I’ve had as the new MLA for 

Saskatoon Nutana. I want to thank the people from Saskatoon 

Nutana for their support. And in particular, I want to thank my 

staff and my friends and family, my sons, for supporting me, 

and certainly my good friends for being there for me when I 

need their support and help. 

 

Over the past year, it’s been a wonderful, wonderful 

opportunity to be an MLA and member of this Legislative 

Assembly, and to speak to and meet with all kinds of people in 

all kinds of groups and organizations — people that are 

working really hard to make our constituency a better place to 

live and our province a better place to live and indeed the world 

itself. There’s a lot of hard-working, dedicated NGOs 

[non-governmental organizations] out there and 

community-based organizations that are doing incredible work 

in our province for the people of this province. And I’m very 

proud to say that a lot of the good folks from Saskatoon Nutana 

are doing that kind of work, and I’m very proud to be able to 

represent them here in this Assembly. 

 

All is not well in Saskatoon Nutana. We are enjoying good 

times, to be sure, but it’s not something that’s being enjoyed by 

everyone. In particular I’m thinking of some people I know who 

are having a lot of difficulty with housing, and particularly 

rental housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My constituency is near 

the University of Saskatchewan. There are a lot of students who 

would like to be able to live in my riding. Unfortunately the 

rental rates and the increasing rental rates are causing them to 

have to seek . . . move often and always be seeking lesser 

quality rental spaces because they simply cannot afford the 

incredible rent increases that they’re suffering. 

 

This is a tale that’s hard to tell and certainly it’s hard for people 

who are struggling with all sorts of other issues to be able to 

focus and organize around these unfair rent increases, but it’s 

something that is probably the most prevalent problem. I’ve 

heard it from my constituents. And this isn’t just students, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker; it’s also senior citizens. And again there’s a lot 

of people on fixed incomes, seniors in my riding, who are really 

struggling with having a quality, affordable place to live. 

 

So when it comes to this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I just 

don’t, I don’t hear anything in there that’s helping renters, 

people who are having to move and having to change their 

domicile because they simply can’t afford where they are and 

their income isn’t going up, some on fixed incomes or they’re 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

students and then they’re having difficulty making ends meet. 

And the quality of rental space is simply becoming more and 

more difficult and incredibly expensive. 

 

I have a senior citizen who had to move out of my riding 

because she couldn’t find affordable housing. She was fortunate 

to find, I have to say, co-op housing that was built by the 

Knights of Columbus in another riding. And it’s good to see 

that the churches are taking up the challenge of providing 

affordable housing for people like her. Sad to see that, or sad to 

not see our government doing anything in that regard. And it’s a 

disappointment that there’s not more in this particular Throne 

Speech for those people who are struggling like that. 

 

Another area, one of my colleagues mentioned earlier, that we 

don’t see anything about is the Housing First initiative, and 

that’s a proven initiative that helps and supports homeless 

people in our urban areas. And as we know, that problem is 

growing. Recently in Saskatoon there was a count done, and 

this has been done before, and it indicates that the number of 

homeless is actually growing. So when we talk about growth 

and the growth agenda, that’s certainly one thing that should be 

of more concern to this government, is the growth in 

homelessness. And sadly, although there’s much, many words 

in the speech, we don’t see anything from the throne in regard 

to homelessness. 

 

Another thing that I’ve been hearing from constituency, and 

particularly teachers and people involved in the education 

system, is the impact of growth on our classrooms. And what 

we’re seeing is . . . Particularly one teacher I talked to recently. 

She teaches English as an additional language. She has over 40 

students in one classroom. Many of them don’t speak a word of 

English and they’re being expected to function within the 

school stream and perform at a grade 5 level, and she is 

heartbroken at the fact that she can’t help them any more than 

she can because she’s just so limited in what she can do. So she 

is very, very concerned about the status of that program in her 

school, and I’m hearing that from other teachers as well, that 

the crowding itself in our city of Saskatoon is untenable and I 

think it’s not just. We have to ensure that these students are 

getting a quality education. When we have all of this boom 

happening, it’s certainly not happening for the kids that have to 

go through that. We’re inviting newcomers to come to 

Saskatchewan — we need a workforce; we need people to come 

and work — but we’re not . . . we’re very ill-equipped to deal 

with the consequences of their arrival. And the people that are 

suffering, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the children that are going 

through these programs. 

 

The other issue we’re hearing about — and I had a visitor to my 

office not too long ago, happens to be the president of the 

University of Saskatchewan — they’re very concerned about 

the University of Saskatchewan’s reputation nationally because 

of the constraints that they’re under in terms of funding. And 

we’re talking about serious job loss in the next couple of years 

if this government holds the line, if this Treasury Board holds 

the line on the position they’re taking in relation to funding for 

our university. University of Saskatchewan has recently become 

a leading research university. It’s in an elite group of research 

universities in the country, and they’re about . . . They’re fearful 

of losing that status if this government continues to hold back 

and not ensure that they’re funded properly on the research 

agenda. That’s of concern. And these are people that are just 

coming and voicing their concerns to me as member of the 

official opposition. 

 

I’m getting concerns from citizens about municipal spending on 

advertising campaigns to support the provincial government. 

And they think that’s inappropriate spending of taxpayers’ 

dollars . And those are things that we’re going to be ensuring 

that the SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] are hearing from. So that’s something that’s of 

concern. 

 

I’m also concerned about some of the things in the auditor’s 

report. And we’ll be talking about that more in the days to 

come, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in particular the chapter on 

pipelines. What we’re hearing is that this government is not 

following the law when it comes to monitoring the pipelines 

that are in place. And as you know, with an active oil patch, 

there’s a lot more pipelines that are being put in, they’re being 

licensed, and they’re not being followed up. So that’s another 

issue that we heard nothing about in this Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

We’ve heard about a new organization that’s going to be 

created called SaskBuilds, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And apparently 

this organization’s going to receive a lot of money to develop 

partnerships. And that sounds like something that’s been tried 

in the past and hasn’t worked out well. So we’ll be watching 

carefully to see whether this particular organization will 

actually be able to develop the partnerships that this 

government hasn’t been able to do with its previous 

incarnations of P3-type organizations. 

 

We’re also hearing about a promise of a food security bill. 

When I look at the food security description that we see in this 

Speech from the Throne, it’s talking about crop production, so 

increasing volumes of production in order to feed a growing 

population in the world. Food security can mean a lot of things 

to different people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what I’m hearing 

about, when I go to places like Station 20 West and when they 

opened a grocery store in an area in Saskatoon where finally 

people are able to access healthy food, food security for a lot of 

people is just being able to access healthy sources of food. 

 

And that’s something that is more and more of an issue in urban 

centres where it’s difficult to find local grocery stores that are 

going to actually provide healthy food. We have programs like 

CHEP, the child hunger and education program, and the new 

grocery store at Station 20 West which was done through the 

will of the community and a bunch of NGOs who worked really 

hard to ensure that people have access to this type of food. 

 

Food security can also be of great importance to people with 

diabetes, and having recently been contracted . . . understand 

that I’ve contracted this ailment, I am starting to understand the 

seriousness of it for people who are not as fortunate as I am, 

people who don’t have health plans, people who don’t have 

access to the medications they need and the food they need to 

eat properly and look after their health. 

 

One of the things I’ve recently discovered, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is that in order for people to access medication, insulin that will 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

not cause weight gain, they have to be on a health plan. So most 

of the people who have diabetes who don’t have access to a 

health plan are having to use insulin that actually causes weight 

gain. And to me, that’s just wrong. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I’m fortunate enough that through the health plan that we have 

as members I am able to cover off the cost to have the proper 

kind of insulin to look after myself, and these people just don’t 

have access to that. That’s about food security. That’s about 

health security. And I don’t see any plan in this speech to help 

people be healthier and be safer with the growing numbers of 

people that are contracting this disease. 

 

It’s been a real education for me, and I’m starting to appreciate 

the danger that a lot of people are in when they don’t have 

access to insulin itself. And it’s a slow killer, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and it’s something that I think is silently creeping up 

on us as a society. And I really hoped to see more from that in 

the Speech from the Throne, but sadly it’s not there. 

 

Another area that we’re hearing about now is the changes to 

water security. We’re hearing about food security; we’re also 

hearing about water security. And now this government has 

seen fit to change a name. It used to be the Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority. It will soon be the Water Security 

Agency. And a 25-year plan was introduced recently. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and Mr. Speaker, since 

you’re both standing there, I don’t see anything in that water 

security plan that’s going to help with the critical issue of illegal 

drainage in this province. This government’s response has been 

to educate people about the effects of illegal drainage. That 

simply isn’t enough, Mr. Speaker. The farmers that are doing 

drainage illegally already know that they’re illegally draining, 

so by telling them that they should educate themselves, it just 

shouldn’t happen that way, Mr. Speaker. Those farmers and 

those agricultural producers, I think need to have a water 

security agency that will have enforcement measures to ensure 

that the law is being upheld and that other people aren’t 

suffering because of their callous actions. 

 

Another issue I think that we are seeing, and this is in the Quill 

Lakes area and I’ve been receiving calls from citizens about 

that, is flooding. And what’s happening in the Quill Lakes area 

near Dafoe . . . I was just driving back from Tuffnell on the 

weekend and the water levels in the Quill Lakes basin are 

becoming dangerously high. We may, if they go much higher, 

we will see highways that are actually flooded permanently by 

the water. And the action and the planning in terms of that is 

only to provide PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] 

funding to people that have actually seeded hay lands, but 

people with flooded pastures aren’t receiving any assistance at 

all. So that’s something else that I don’t see any solution for in 

this Speech from the Throne. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about this government. One of the 

previous speakers indicated that this government is doing what 

we said we were going to do. And in fact they’re doing a lot 

more than what they said they were going to do, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re hearing about three more MLAs. We’re hearing about 

privatization of some Crowns, and those are things that the 

people didn’t hear about. They didn’t hear about it on the 

doorstep, and they certainly didn’t hear about it in this Speech 

from the Throne. But we are hearing about thoughts of 

privatization, liquor stores we’re hearing about. 

 

And in particular one thing I’d like to talk a little bit about is the 

possible privatization of Information Services Corporation. And 

we heard from the minister responsible the other day that this is 

not a well-known Crown corporation, and in fact a lot of people 

don’t really know what it does. I had the good fortune of 

actually working for that particular Crown for a few months in 

2003 where I provided services as a Crown land expert in terms 

of converting the registry of lands to electronic format. 

Information Services Corporation is an agency that runs 

registries. So we have several registries that it’s responsible for. 

First and foremost, and most people are familiar with this one, 

is the land titles registry. 

 

So this is a registry that has all the information historically since 

the lands were broken, since they were first granted. And it 

would be my grandpa’s homestead patent is there and his first 

land grant, everyone who was granted land under the Dominion 

Lands Act, all the Hudson’s Bay Company lands, all the railway 

lands. And in fact if you go over to Information Services 

Corporation’s headquarters in northern Regina here, you will 

see some of the original grants that are actually framed and on 

display. And one is the grant for Gabriel Dumont’s original 

homestead, which was 160 acres but it was along the river, so it 

was a long, narrow piece of land. And you can see in Batoche 

and St. Laurent settlements where those were the style of land 

grants in those days because access to water was so important 

for those farmers. 

 

So there’s a huge history in our land titles registry of every 

transaction that’s happened in relation to patented land or land 

that was granted until now. And so there’s a wealth of history 

and a warehouse of history just sitting there and slowly being 

converted to electronic records. 

 

When you need to buy land, when you want to mortgage land, 

and you want to register a lien against land, if you want to find 

out who owns the land, that’s where you would go, is to the 

land titles registry. It’s very personal, and it’s very part of our 

history. And in fact the Torrens system itself of land surveys is 

known throughout the world as one that’s very effective. 

 

And one of the things that’s really important about our land 

registry is the guarantee that our government provides. 

Whenever someone buys land and they get a title in their name, 

that title is guaranteed. Other jurisdictions don’t have that 

support and they don’t have that guarantee, and so you will hear 

about title insurance. There’s a lot of people who have to buy 

insurance on their title. We don’t have to do that here, Mr. 

Speaker. So that’s something I think that’s very important and I 

want to . . . I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan would agree 

that we want to ensure that the integrity of that guarantee is 

maintained and that privatization of a land registry, it may not 

be the way to go. 

 

ISC [Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] is also 

responsible for a number of other registries. And one is the land 

survey registry which again, for our history buffs, is a fount of 

information for people who are interested in the development of 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

Saskatchewan. One of the areas I had to do a lot of research in 

was mineral titles in the city of Prince Albert, which again is 

very interesting because it was also originally the long, narrow 

strips of land grants. And in those days, of course, the mineral 

rights were not helped, backed by the Crown, but they were 

granted to the individuals. As the city of Prince Albert 

developed, you see the subdivision layers on the top. But the 

mineral layers developed at a different way, and so there’s a 

whole interesting world of land surveys and title information 

that’s related to that as well. 

 

The beauty of ISC is what they did is they modernized the 

registry by tying the geo data, so the land survey data that all 

became electronic data, and they actually tied it to the land title 

itself. And that was the glory and, I think, the real innovative 

progress that was made by ISC when it was first formed as a 

Crown corporation. 

 

Since then they’ve taken on some other registries as well. 

There’s the personal property security registry. So if you buy a 

vehicle maybe, Mr. Speaker, if you buy a new Mercedes or 

some four-by-four, you know that you can go in and register it 

and the bank will have assurance that its mortgage or its lien on 

your property is first and foremost, and so that’s why you’re 

getting a cheaper interest rate. You’re able to offer security, and 

there’s a registry there that will look after the claims to that 

property. 

 

Another registry of course, and you heard the minister speak 

about it the other day, is the vital statistics registry That’s a 

newer registry that Information Services Corporation has taken 

over, and it’s one that serves a very important public function as 

well. And since then too, they’ve also taken on the corporations 

branch, so all registrations of corporations are now handled by 

Information Services Corporation. It used to be a function of the 

Department of Justice. So I think if people really take a look at 

the work that ISC is doing, it’s important for them to 

understand that this is perfectly fine for a government to handle. 

And in fact, ISC has had expressions of interest from other 

governments in terms of using some of those services. 

 

The other thing about ISC is that it actually is kind of a bit old 

now, when you look at it. It was formed in 2000. The concept 

and the computing systems that were designed then are now 12 

years old, and so it hasn’t gone through a lot of renewal since 

then. And so in terms of what we’re hearing from the minister 

and the CEO of the corporation, we’ll certainly be following 

very closely their comments because they may not be in sync 

with the reality that is out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to make a couple of comments about community 

pastures. This is one issue that is something that I’ve been 

hearing a lot about. Recently I’ve received over 300 letters from 

people — letters to the Premier and I’ve been copied on them 

— and there are a lot of people concerned about what the plan 

is for these community pastures. I just want to share some 

messages with you about these pastures and something that I 

wish this government would think about. We certainly didn’t 

hear anything about it in the Throne Speech. 

 

Ottawa’s decision to abandon environmental and conservation 

stewardship of a unique grassland ecosystem in the heart of the 

Canadian prairies has been made hastily and without full 

understanding of the potentially devastating consequences. At a 

minimum this plan should be put on hold, maybe for a year or 

longer, to allow a workable means of protecting this significant 

national asset to be developed. If this federal plan goes ahead, 

environmental protections and conservation goals, including 

sustainable agriculture and several at-risk species, may all be 

lost. This move will set the stage for these iconic lands to be 

sold to the highest bidder and for the destruction of this unique 

ecosystem which supports the burrowing owl, the black-tailed 

prairie dog, and the swift fox, among other endangered species. 

 

Now we’re talking here, Mr. Speaker, about almost 2.5 million 

acres. This is more than 10 per cent of the protected regional 

networks that have been set up in the province, which is way 

below the national standard, by the way. Anyways these 2.5 

million acres are some of the largest contiguous blocks of 

native prairie grasslands, and their future’s at stake. Canada’s 

contribution to international agreements on biodiversity, climate 

change, and protected areas are at risk of being undermined. 

 

For decades the federal government managed the lands and 

protected them for future generations. And now today you will 

see carefully managed cattle grazing on the protected lands. 

And they recreate natural conditions when giant herds of 

buffalo roamed the open prairie, while delivering an important 

economic benefit to local community of cattle ranchers. The 

federal management has ensured that balanced land use that has 

successfully rehabilitated these fragile and historic lands from 

near-desert conditions to natural grassland, a landscape with 

huge heritage and cultural significance for many Canadians. 

And this fine balance could be thrown to the prairie winds if the 

federal government walks away. These lands are also under 

intense exploration for oil and gas reserves. 

 

The Saskatchewan government’s plan to sell this invaluable 

Crown land is ill-advised and irresponsible, and this 

government is misleading Canadians about protecting it. These 

promised conservation easements to prevent ploughing or 

draining of the land can easily be broken, and there’s no 

enforcement of the easements even if they are in place. Many 

ranchers are only one bad year away from financial distress, and 

we see this with the recent problems at the XL plant in Brooks, 

Alberta. Selling the land to ranchers for grazing cattle is no 

guarantee that it will not be resold and broken up. 

 

And I think one of the most significant pieces of the pasture 

program that is not understood by the general public is that 

there are experienced pasture staff out there. Those staff are 

supported by the best expert advice on pastures managed under 

the program and, as a result, the pasture land has reached a 

much higher standard of sustainability, conservation, 

environmental protection, and balanced views than pastures that 

are being managed by others. 

 

We also heard the minister speak about how Species at Risk Act 

would still be available if these lands were privatized. Actually 

that law really only applies to federal land or federal leased 

land, and although there’s a wee provision in SARA [Species at 

Risk Act] where it could be used to apply to private land, that it 

would take action on the part of the government to do so. The 

other thing that needs to be noted is that this government has 

not met its obligations under the Species at Risk Act 

expectations when that Act was brought in. And The Wildlife 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

Habitat Protection Act and The Wildlife Act of Saskatchewan do 

not meet the national standards for those types of legislation. 

Again nothing in the Throne Speech talking about that. 

 

Once these lands, which are much of the last remaining native 

prairie on the planet, are sold, they will be gone forever, and the 

government will have no say in their protection. And that’s why 

it’s critical that ironclad conservation and environmental 

protections be put in place now. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of things that need to be done 

with the community pastures program. What we’re going to 

urge this government to do is slow down. Ten pastures have 

been announced. There’s still time to sit down with people that 

are concerned about this. What I’m hearing is that, although the 

minister’s saying he consulted with patrons, what I’m hearing is 

that he actually just got the patrons, presidents of the patrons’ 

groups and the managers together and told them what was 

going to happen. There’s been no consultation with the patrons, 

and in fact we haven’t heard anything from the patrons on what 

their views are in terms of the disposition of these. 

 

I think it’s a perfect opportunity for this government. There’s a 

chance to be innovative here. There’s a chance to make 

something happen, with a gift from the federal government 

really, that could continue these iconic lands into the future and 

be something that we can be proud of and support as a 

government and as a citizenry. 

 

[16:30] 

 

A couple of other things I didn’t see in this Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, is comments about the effect of the public service cuts. 

And again, I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again, I was a proud 

member of the public service for 17 years before I came into 

this position. And the notion that a government would 

arbitrarily pick the number 15 . . . We’re just going to pick a 

number, okay, 15 per cent. Because we just think we can cut the 

public service by 15 per cent. That’s arbitrary. It’s ideological, 

and it’s not helping the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The services that are provided by these people are invaluable to 

the citizenship of Saskatchewan. And just by arbitrarily making 

those cuts and then using the lean, capital lean technology to 

justify this ideological decision I think is a real disservice to the 

people of Saskatchewan, particularly in times where our 

revenues are significant and we can continue to provide better 

services to people, rather than cutting them. 

 

I guess the last comment I want to make before I move into 

some other areas is my concern that the Throne Speech, in our 

history, is the first kick at this. This is where the government 

tells us, through the Lieutenant Governor, what is important for 

this government and the people of Saskatchewan. And the fact 

that our Premier actually scooped that by making his 

announcement at the chamber of commerce sends a very chilly 

message, I think, to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s that the people at the chamber of commerce are more 

important than the citizenship of Saskatchewan. That’s a bad 

message to be sending out, and I think it’s one that the people 

of Saskatchewan can feel the cold winds blowing. 

 

We know now where this Premier’s priorities lie. And that’s 

really chilly, especially when there’s $100 a ticket that people 

have to pay in order to gain attendance whereas, in this case, 

it’s free to get into the gallery. And even if it was online, I think 

the message that it sends is very chilly. And in fact the volume 

that is coming from the other side tells me that there is a 

sensitive spot here, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve hit a nerve on that. 

I think 50 people watched it online, Mr. Speaker, and that’s . . . 

The idea of charging is distasteful, Mr. Speaker, and obviously 

it’s distasteful to this side as well. 

 

In the campaign promises, again I’m just going to mention one 

more time that there are promises that were made in the 

campaign that we haven’t heard about. We’re hearing 

announcements of the same thing eight times in a row, and yet 

we’re not hearing about things like the agenda to privatize. So 

there seems to be an agenda going on here that the Premier has 

that he isn’t disclosing to the people of Saskatchewan. And I 

think the people need be worried about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just a couple more things to mention before I finish today. 

What we didn’t hear in this Throne Speech — and there’s a lot 

we didn’t hear — we didn’t hear anything about mental health. 

We haven’t heard anything about long-term care. We haven’t 

heard anything about the HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] 

epidemic or Alzheimer’s disease. 

 

We didn’t hear a whole lot about plans for labour, Mr. Speaker, 

and yet we know that this government is about to introduce 

some sort of omnibus legislation that’s going to radically 

impact the labour relations in this province. Two lines, I think, 

it got in the Throne Speech. That’s of concern, because we 

know the agenda’s there and yet this Speech from the Throne 

gives us no indication of what to expect. And what’s also 

missing is the fact that the essential services Act, which was 

ruled unconstitutional by the courts, hasn’t been fixed yet. So 

we can see where the priorities are as far as labour, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Education, we don’t see any real plan to deal with 

overcrowding, with the impact on English as an alternate 

language, on support for refugee students. We didn’t hear any 

of that in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. Of course there 

were the surprises I mentioned earlier that we again don’t see in 

the Throne Speech — the introduction of three new MLAs, 

attacking the film industry, the privatization of ISC. This is 

untrustworthy language, Mr. Speaker, from an unpredictable 

government. We’re just not sure what the role of the Throne 

Speech is anymore because we’re not hearing what the real 

agenda is, it appears. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think that pretty much wraps up 

the comments that I’d like to make in reply to the Speech from 

the Throne. Again it’s a disappointment that it was scooped by 

the Premier in his Growing Forward announcements ahead of 

the Speech from the Throne. I think the proper place for this 

announcement is in this Assembly, which has been the role of 

the Assembly and the role of the Lieutenant-Governor, and to 

change that is unfortunate and I think it’s disrespectful to the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So having said all that, I think at this point I would like to make 

my support of the amendment introduced by our leader. I would 

support the amendment that was raised and I’m not going to be 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

in favour of the Speech from the Throne. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the lead up to our 

return to this beautiful Assembly for our second session of the 

twenty-seventh legislature, I couldn’t help but reflect on the 

past year. I took some time to reflect on the learning curve that 

many of us new MLAs had over the past year. And I would like 

to take a moment at the outset to acknowledge the more 

experienced people in the building, colleagues and whatnot, that 

have taken a little time to show us the ropes around this place. 

This is appreciated by many, and I can say a very sincere thank 

you to each of you for your advice, your patience, and your 

time. 

 

I have been looking forward to returning here. Our return 

coincides with late fall or early winter — it depends on where 

you live in this diverse province of ours. As many know, 

northwest of Saskatoon experienced quite a snowfall last week 

and it looks like it’s going to be here for the duration. 

 

I would like to begin by adding to some comments that were 

made by our colleague from The Battlefords last week 

regarding the marvel of this building. I, too, feel honoured when 

I climb the steps to this great Assembly, and each time I think 

of and I thank all of the constituents of Rosthern-Shellbrook 

that I am here to represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to have some time to enter my 

comments here to the Throne Speech delivered by Her Honour 

last week. This Throne Speech this year displays the 

Saskatchewan plan for growth, a vision by Saskatchewan 

people for Saskatchewan people. If I could first outline the first 

six core growth activities that our provincial government will 

work towards, first we will be investing in infrastructure that is 

required for growth. Second, we need to educate and train a 

skilled work force. Third, we will work to ensure ongoing 

competitiveness of Saskatchewan’s economy. And fourth, we 

will partake in international engagement to support increased 

trade, investment, and exports. We will take steps to advance 

our natural resource strength to build the next economy. And 

sixth and most importantly, all of this will take place within 

fiscal responsibility. These points summarize the direction that 

our government will take as we foster our Saskatchewan 

economy to the benefit of all the people that live here. 

 

As a new MLA to this Assembly and to this government, it 

pleases me to no end to think of how this plan was formed. Mr. 

Speaker, it was not formed by the government guessing and 

deciding what direction should be taken. That would be a 

booklet. The Saskatchewan plan for growth was formed by 

something quite the opposite. This past summer, as mentioned 

in the Throne Speech, government MLAs went out consulting 

with the people of the province in our constituencies and 

around. In our constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook, we met 

with many, many individuals, numerous stakeholder groups, 

and over 25 local governing bodies. The Saskatchewan Plan for 

Growth: Vision 2020 and Beyond is a result of input from 

people in communities that I represent and people in our 

province. Saskatchewan people were consulted and they have 

guided this government with this vision, their vision. 

One challenge that arose at each local government interaction 

was the need for a long-term sustainable infrastructure plan. 

Local governments are faced with similar challenges that we are 

faced with at the provincial level. An infrastructure deficit from 

years past compiled with recent growth is very challenging for 

our local government resources. Frequent and fond mention was 

made of the recent municipal revenue sharing program that 

shares one full point of the PST [provincial sales tax] revenue 

with local governing municipalities. This was asked for by 

Saskatchewan people, and it was delivered by this government. 

This results in our municipalities receiving over $237 million 

this year, an 87 per cent increase over 2007 levels. This funding 

is also predictable as municipalities already know their level for 

the 2013-14 year will grow to $264 million. 

 

The result of this is in a town such as Hafford, which had a 

decline in population from 2001 to 2006 at a rate of over 

negative 10 per cent. That same community from ’07 to ’11 is 

now recording growth of positive 10 per cent. With this came 

the increase in the municipal revenue sharing of 111 per cent. 

Rosthern over the same time period is negative 8 per cent. From 

’07 to ’11, positive 13 per cent population growth with 114 per 

cent increase in their revenue sharing. In my hometown of 

Shellbrook from the time measured, 2006 to five years 

previous, was negative 4.8 per cent growth, Mr. Speaker. And 

in 2011, last year, it was recorded at 16 and a half per cent 

growth, positive population growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All of the towns in our constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook 

experienced growth in the last census, and this is indicative of a 

province-wide trend. Mr. Speaker, over 80 per cent of our 

towns in Saskatchewan are now experiencing growth, and this 

is in stark contrast to only a few years ago. These infrastructure 

needs are beginning to be approached in our constituency with a 

provincial grant for a water treatment plant upgrade in 

Spiritwood, a sewage plant in Shellbrook, and replacement of 

an access road in Laird. 

 

And I would like to speak to the benefit to the community of 

Rosthern with the twinning of Highway No. 11 between 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert. Infrastructure needs in our 

communities were voiced by those elected locally, Mr. Speaker, 

and our Saskatchewan government will commit two and a half 

billion dollars over the next three provincial budgets to 

infrastructure. We will coordinate and plan at the provincial, 

regional, and municipal levels, and this will ensure that this 

investment will assist municipalities with infrastructure 

investment that is aligned, efficient, and strategic with future 

population growth and private sector economic growth, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In addition, new and innovative solutions need to be looked at. 

SaskBuilds will look at new and innovative methods of 

infrastructure financing, design, and delivery. This government 

is listening, consulting, and will continue to work with 

stakeholder groups at the regional and municipal levels to 

address infrastructure needs as stated in the Saskatchewan plan 

for growth. 

 

As we grow our Saskatchewan economy and population, it is 

imperative that we continue to focus on education and skills 

training for people that live and want to have careers here. Mr. 

Speaker, a multi-pronged approach is necessary, including 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

training and retention of these individuals, immigration, and 

increasing employment of our First Nations and Métis people in 

Saskatchewan. If we are to grow to 1.2 million people by 2020, 

we will require 60,000 additional workers. Initiatives such as 

the elimination of the wait-list for adult education and reducing 

the grade 12 graduation disparity of our Aboriginal students are 

necessary to allow people the opportunity to train for their 

career here in Saskatchewan. 

 

For myself representing the rural constituency of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, I have the opportunity to discuss 

agri-food production with constituents each and every day. 

Agri-food production and ag-related industries are part of the 

spinal cord of our Saskatchewan economy. Our ag producers 

have provided Saskatchewan with the honour of being Canada’s 

top agri-food exporting province, with more than $10 billion in 

exports in 2011. This is a result of our province’s farm families’ 

hard work, their embracement of technology, and at times their 

perseverance in the industry. Moving forward, the government 

will establish the Global Institute for Food Security at the U of 

S [University of Saskatchewan]. This institute will encourage 

research and innovation in the biosciences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consultation and collaboration with ag industry 

groups will be key in developing a crop strategy and continuing 

to develop business-friendly policies to encourage investment in 

the biotech and value-added industries. We will also closely 

consult with these groups to advocate Saskatchewan’s 

agricultural interests in trade negotiations. 

 

Our ag industry always has and always will be experiencing 

vast amounts of change, Mr. Speaker. Our access to present and 

future technologies as well as research and trade opportunities 

are key to our success in years to come. Our government’s goal 

is to work closely with agriculture industry to increase exports 

to $15 billion by the year 2020. Rosthern-Shellbrook has many 

of these industry partners and I’m fortunate to have the 

opportunity to talk to them frequently. We have numerous 

agri-businesses operating in various sectors of the industries. 

We have producers involved in the cow-calf industry. We have 

numerous large, thriving, state-of-the-art grain farms that 

employ many people in our towns and villages. We are home to 

an organic processing plant, a pet food plant, as well as one of 

Saskatchewan’s largest independently owned ag transport 

companies originated here. 

 

Operating in our area we have one of the province’s largest 

honey producers that also employ and train many people in our 

towns and villages. Rosthern-Shellbrook is home to one of 

Canada’s largest supplier of pig genetics. A worldwide supplier 

of pig genetics, Mr. Speaker. This supplier has offices in 

Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, the United States, 

as well as they have operating production facilities and sales in 

China. 

 

On October 6th in my neighbouring constituency of 

Martensville, I was pleased to join colleagues and producers in 

observing an event that was as large as it was generous. This 

was the day that 249 combines joined together for the event 

known as Harvest for Kids. They set a Guinness world record 

that day, Mr. Speaker, and what a true display of the scope of 

Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry and the generosity of those 

involved. 

[16:45] 

 

To quote Andrew Ross Sorkin’s quotation that is in the Throne 

Speech that was delivered last week: 

 

If you care at all about the future of the world’s food 

supply, you care — whether you know it or not — about 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And how true this is here. 

 

Our province has moved from being a have not province to a 

have province. This is in a large part due to the hard-working 

and generous people that reside and work here. We no longer 

have the vicious cycle of low economic growth and stagnant 

employment numbers although people are still voting with their 

feet — as a matter of fact 80,000 of them in the last five years. 

With proper planning and commitment to fiscal responsibility, 

we can continue the more recent virtuous circle of growth that 

we have in Saskatchewan. Our strong economy can drive 

population which will provide resources so that we may retain 

the Saskatchewan advantage. Mr. Speaker, together we will 

continue to make Saskatchewan the best place to live, to work, 

and to raise a family. 

 

This government’s consultation with Saskatchewan people to 

develop a plan of growth for our province is the reason why I, 

on behalf of the constituents of Rosthern-Shellbrook, will not 

be supporting the amendment and I will be supporting the 

Throne Speech. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Hello, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be here, 

and thank you. So thank you for giving me the opportunity to 

talk about some things happening back home in the 

constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers, but also to address the 

topics that have been featured in this particular Throne Speech. 

This is a good report on the condition of the province and the 

direction we’re going into the future. We can also discuss our 

government agenda for the coming session and plan for positive 

growth. 

 

But first of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the constituents I 

represent for putting their faith in me to be their voice. The 

people that surround me are very amazing individuals as well 

— the staff in my office that take all the phone calls and are the 

friendly faces to individuals and constituents in stress. Marcus, 

Cora, and Joan work in my main office near Prince Albert, and 

I opened up a satellite office in Big River. I have another 

hard-working young man by the name of Jason Beebe who 

works there and I appreciate him as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a very exciting year for me personally for, 

right after the provincial election on Remembrance Day, our 

daughter and son-in-law had a baby girl, Ella, named for my 

mother. She was born on the 11th hour of the 11th day of 2011. 

So Ella will celebrate her first birthday this year and we’re 

looking very much forward to that. The day she was born, I was 

at a Remembrance Day service in Candle Lake honouring the 

fallen soldiers who gave us freedom. 

 



October 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

This summer I was also honoured to attend the Wounded 

Warriors Weekend gala in Nipawin. It was an incredible 

military service with veterans who we welcomed and 

recognized, and I thank the many organizers and volunteers for 

their hard work and dedication on this momentous event. Mr. 

Speaker, our standard of living and our rights and freedoms are 

possible because of all these courageous men and women who 

serve in our Armed Forces. 

 

Another highlight of this year was the birth of our twin 

granddaughters in June. Laura and Hanna make wonderful 

additions to our family, which makes five grandchildren in 

three and a half years. Fortunately they live nearby our farm so 

I do get to see them grow. 

 

Our ranch has been home to five generations since 1926. The 

last five years have been a period of remarkable growth for our 

family as the last five years have been a period of remarkable 

growth in our province. Mr. Speaker, our most precious 

resource is our children, and our greatest achievement in 

Saskatchewan is our growing resource of people. Our Speech 

from the Throne highlights our increasing population of nearly 

80,000 more people, and every Saskatchewan city and nearly 80 

per cent of Saskatchewan towns saw their population increase 

during the most recent census period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth has been good for our province. Our 

government has been planning for this future growth as well, 

committed to funding a minimum of 2.5 billion in infrastructure 

investments over the next three years. Meeting the needs of 

growth will be the focus of this fall session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Dave Marit, president of SARM, stated in a 

recent SARM news release: 

 

The plan reaffirms the government’s dedication to help 

fund the infrastructure needed to foster continued 

economic growth. This commitment is important to rural 

Saskatchewan because the growth of the industries driving 

this province’s economy are located in rural 

municipalities. 

 

He also stated: 

 

SARM is eager to work with the Province to move their 

plan forward to support economic growth in 

Saskatchewan. In particular, SARM is encouraged to see 

increased funding for municipal infrastructure, a 

provincial water strategy, a plan to improve rural 

healthcare and a continued commitment to support 

SARM’s Municipal Roads for the Economy Program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government will work with our municipal 

partners to develop a new cost-shared municipal infrastructure 

program through SaskBuilds to look at innovative ways to fund 

building schools, roads, and hospitals. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank all the candidates who 

put their names forward on a municipal ballot in last week’s 

election. The act of voting is in itself the defining moment of 

democracy. Congratulations to the incoming officials, and I 

look forward to working with you. And thank you to all the 

outgoing officials. We appreciated your public service. 

This fall, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of touring Prince 

Albert’s FMA [forest management agreement] forest product 

facilities along with some other colleagues from the region. We 

had a busy but educational couple of days talking to the 

industry players. The forest industry is a significant contributor 

to the Saskatchewan economy, and I believe it’s a very 

important source of employment in the North. 

 

Working in partnership with northern communities, our 

government will support the re-emergence of the forest industry 

by fostering innovation and new product development and 

providing a stable and efficient environment for this forest 

industry. Sakâw represents many major forest industry facilities 

in our province such as Carrier Lumber in the RM of Buckland 

of Saskatchewan Rivers where I represent. And one area I 

found interesting, Mr. Speaker, that was very interesting on our 

tour, was the cogenerated green energy power production that 

will provide between 100 and 130 megawatts of green power. 

 

Also this fall, Mr. Speaker, actually it was September 20th, I 

was honoured to attend and speak at the opening of the Centre 

of Excellence for Education and Business Development at the 

Big River’s First Nation. This beautiful facility will assist local 

people to develop and improve their skills. The members of this 

community will be trained through computer labs and on-site 

classrooms to contribute to the local economy and help them 

seize the opportunity available in our growing province. Of the 

people employed there during construction, 95 per cent were 

residents of the Big River First Nation. I remember Chief Bruce 

Morin talking to me and saying, this is great for the community 

and great for the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s goal as stated in the Throne 

Speech growth plan is to have the province lead the country in 

high school grad rates by 2020, and during the past five years 

we have invested 3.5 billion in the province’s post-secondary 

education system. Mr. Speaker, ordinary people can do amazing 

things under the guidance of great leadership. 

 

And one of the things I like about the Throne Speech is its 

positive tone which in turn I try to live by. I’m an optimistic 

person. Keeping thoughts positive because thoughts become 

your words, words become your behaviour, positive behaviour 

becomes habits, positive habits become your values. As one 

wise old elder told me, keep your values positive as values 

become destiny. And I believe this province is destined to 

become an even better place to live, work, and raise your 

family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is planning for growth in many 

directions to help its citizens. This government is investing over 

$7.5 million into targeted autism services and supports this 

year. That is an increase of $1 million in additional funding 

over 2011-2012. Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes our 

role and the importance of building a comprehensive service 

system for individuals affected by autism and their families. I 

was very humbled when a neighbour woman pulled me aside 

recently at a function that we were both attending. She took my 

hand, Mr. Speaker, and expressed her gratitude over our 

government’s empathy towards these children, as her grandson 

has autism spectrum disorder. This is what growth means to me: 

support for our citizens and more opportunities for our families’ 

needs. 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, this summer I was also welcoming our Minister of 

Rural and Remote Health to Shellbrook and Big River, where 

we met with local community leaders to discuss health services. 

Our government takes very seriously the benefits of growth to 

improve the quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. And 

this fall, Mr. Speaker, 24 international medical graduates 

entered the Saskatchewan international physician practice 

assessment. The Speech from the Throne expands on our 

government continuing to fulfill its 2011 commitment to 

alleviate the shortage of health care workers in rural 

Saskatchewan and will implement a new team-based approach 

to providing primary and emergency care in rural and remote 

settings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our internationally known Agribition is about to 

begin this November in Regina, I must mention our agriculture 

producers. Thanks to our ranching and farming families, 

Saskatchewan is now Canada’s top agri-food exporting 

province with more than 10 billion worth of exports in 2011. I 

am very proud of all my neighbouring farm friends and will 

continue to support them any way I can. The hours and 

dedication put forth into raising and growing their products 

demonstrates the grit and tenacity of its Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about duty, responsibility, and 

public service. This is a quote from Albert Einstein: “Only a life 

lived for others is a life worthwhile.” And I hope everyone in 

this House remembers it — on both sides, government and 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to support the motion put 

forward by my friend and colleague from The Battlefords. And 

I’m also very pleased to support, second . . . seconded by my 

friend and colleague from Regina Coronation Park. However, 

Mr. Speaker, I feel I have to say I will not be supporting the 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed till 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1598 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Persons Day 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 

 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 

 Ânskohk Aboriginal Literature Festival 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1599 

 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1599 

 Foundation Donates to Saskatoon Art Gallery 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1599 

 International Year of the Co-operative 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1599 

 Canadian Patient Safety Week 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1600 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Influenza Immunization 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1600 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1600 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1601 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1601 

 Immigration Issue 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1602 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1603 

 Support for First Nations Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1603 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1603 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Extension of Degree-Granting Authority 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1605 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1605 

POINT OF ORDER 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1605 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1605 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1605 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1606 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1607 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1609 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1613 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1615 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1617 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1618 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1620 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1625 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1626 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




