




















































Hansard: March 21, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 19A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 21, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 687 

 March 21, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Yesterday the Opposition House Leader 

raised a point of order concerning the accuracy of a statement 

by the Minister of Health made during question period. The 

comment is in regard to the New Democratic Party’s election 

platform. I have now had an opportunity to review the record, 

and I am prepared to rule on the point of order. 

 

Essentially this is a dispute about the accuracy of statements 

made by a member. The Speaker has always maintained that the 

accuracy of statements is a matter of debate and has consistently 

ruled as such. I find the point of order not well taken. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan — and I’m sure 

I’ll be joined by the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition 

in a moment — I just want to say to all of our guests who are 

here for some reason today, that we want to welcome each and 

every one of them to their Legislative Assembly. Obviously 

today’s an important day in the life of this province when the 

budget’s brought down. And there are many groups here who 

work hard in their own respective communities, represent other 

associations that are impacted, obviously, by the budget. We 

welcome them here today to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, and we trust they’ll enjoy the proceedings. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I would also like to greet all of the 

visitors who are here today. And I especially want to thank each 

and every one of you for the role you provide as leaders within 

the province of Saskatchewan. There’s no question that the 

budget day today is important for all of the people of 

Saskatchewan, but it’s especially important for you as leaders 

because you have to work with the resources that are available 

for you. So it’s very nice to have you here today, and I thank all 

of you for your good work. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to join with the Premier and the 

Leader of the Opposition and welcome all the guests here today. 

And please remember not to participate in proceedings in the 

House, and that includes applause. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. We know in 

the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe 

was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was working 

at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. 

 

But we also know that there are positive statistics that show 

convenience store and gas station robberies are down by 

one-third since 1999, largely due to increased safety practices, 

including two people working together on late-night shifts. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

The people signing this petition come from Grayson, Yorkton, 

Big River, Ituna, and Regina, Prince Albert, and Spruce Home. 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In light of the 

government’s poor handling of the situation at St. Mary’s Villa 

in Humboldt, I have a petition calling on the government to 

support the seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern to our 

traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2012 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It’s signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Support for People with Disabilities 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Government 

of Saskatchewan has been working to make Saskatchewan the 

best place in Canada for people with disabilities to live. Over 

the last four years, 76.9 million has been invested in reducing 

patient wait-lists for people with intellectual disabilities; the 

Saskatchewan assured disability program, SAID [Saskatchewan 

assured income for disability], was introduced; and 40 million 

was spent for 353 housing units for people with disabilities. 

 

Today we have taken additional steps towards improving the 

quality of life for between 8 and 10,000 people with disabilities 

in Saskatchewan. The improved benefits that result from the 

expansion of the SAID program are welcome developments for 

our 38 member organizations. Two hundred dollars a month 

more will go into the pockets of single disabled people who live 

independently, and an additional $100 will go to those living in 

residential care. 

 

The SAID program was initially launched in 2009 as a 

mechanism that provides money to people with disabilities. 

SAID is different than social assistance and is involved in 

collaborative partnership between government and community 

in all aspects of design and implementation. 

 

People with disabilities contribute greatly to our society. 

They’re excellent, dependable members of the labour force and 

caring members of our families and communities. Please join 

me in applauding the contributions of disabled people in our 

communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to recognize the UN’s [United Nations] International Day 

for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Many events and 

activities are planned worldwide on March 21st each year. 

 

This day aims to remind people of racial discrimination’s 

negative consequences. It also encourages people to remember 

their obligation and determination to combat racial 

discrimination. Canada is home to an amazing source of 

diversity. With people representing all corners of the world, we 

are a role model for other countries, an example of successfully 

welcoming all Canadian citizens into Canadian society. 

 

However, life in Canada is not easy. We recognize that there’s a 

long road ahead for many and a greater effort needs to be made 

by all to end racism. As a country and as citizens, we must keep 

striving and join the international effort to eliminate all forms of 

discrimination. I urge all the people of Saskatchewan to 

participate in community activities and get involved to learn 

more about each other. On behalf of the New Democrats and 

our members, I hope one day we can live in a world where 

racism and discrimination no longer exist. For me, former 

Premier Tommy Douglas summed it best when he said, courage 

my friends, ’tis not too late to build a better world. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we recognize 

the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination, which is observed annually on the 21st of 

March. On that day in 1960, a peaceful demonstration in 

Sharpeville, South Africa, against the apartheid pass laws ended 

in tragedy. 

 

In 1966 the United Nations recognized those atrocious events 

by declaring March 21st an International Day for the 

Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Proudly, Canada was one 

of the first countries to recognize the proclamation. Since then 

the apartheid system in South Africa has been dismantled. 

Racist laws and practices have been abolished in many 

countries worldwide. An international framework for fighting 

racism has been created, guided by the international convention 

on the elimination of racial discrimination. 

 

We must learn from the tragedies of the past and together move 

forward to create a brighter tomorrow. The first article of the 

Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms that “All 

human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.” 

The International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination reminds us of our collective responsibility for 

promoting and protecting this principle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us honour the memory of those who died in 

Sharpeville and other racist incidents by redoubling our efforts 

to eradicate all forms of racism and racial discrimination. And 

above all, Mr. Speaker, we should cherish the rich diversity of 

humankind and respect the inherent dignity and equality of 

every human being. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Film Company Benefits City and Province 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Karma Film annually produces 

four and a half million dollars in film and television projects in 

Saskatoon and area, creating over 125 jobs in a variety of 

positions in this cultural industry. Karma Film is a Gemini 

award winning production company based in Saskatoon and is 

well known for projects like the TV series, Wapos Bay. 

 

Saskatoon Nutana resident and company founder, Anand 

Ramayya, is dedicated to supporting original voices and 

original film for the international marketplace. In the last three 



March 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

months, Karma has wrapped up the filming of two feature 

productions in and around Saskatoon. Recently I had the 

opportunity to visit the set of their film, Rufus, starring David 

James Elliott who is best known for his role on the television 

show, Jag. It will be released this fall, and they are expecting 

recognition at Sundance and international film festivals in 

Toronto and Berlin. 

 

The film industry in the province has faced challenges in the 10 

years Karma Film has been operating. When asked what the one 

thing he would like to see happen to encourage growth and 

development, Ramayya says: 

 

I would say we need to do as much as we can to support 

the development of filmmakers and storytellers from here. 

If you do that, everything else will follow. They’ll start 

making more and more projects happen. 

 

Anand Ramayya’s leadership, vision, and hard work are 

inspiring. In just 22 days, Rufus brought $150,000 into 

Saskatoon in accommodations alone. This is just one small 

example of how a production can directly benefit the city and 

the province. Cultural industries are surviving in Saskatchewan 

and could thrive with more support from our government. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Province Experiences Positive Growth 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 

this opportunity to highlight the positive growth our province 

continues to experience. Saskatchewan’s population growth 

continues to be among the country’s leaders, with our 

province’s current population estimated at 1,067,612, growing 

by over 17,000 people in the last year alone. 

 

Two of the top six Canadian communities that have experienced 

the biggest population increases are located in my home 

constituency of Martensville. The city of Martensville and the 

town of Warman continue to be recognized as two of 

Saskatchewan’s and Canada’s fastest growing communities, 

with populations of 7,716 and 7,084 respectively. Combined 

they have an average population growth of 52 per cent since 

2006. 

 

And why are more people returning to our province or choosing 

it as a first-time home? I believe it’s for a number of reasons: a 

growing economy, employment opportunities, and of course, 

Mr. Speaker, strong, stable, and positive political leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has always been a welcoming 

province and a great place to raise a family. Our government 

will continue to ensure that the rest of the world knows that the 

Saskatchewan advantage is here to stay. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Aboriginal Police Preparation Program Graduation 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Friday my colleague from Wood River had the honour of 

attending the Aboriginal police preparation 2011-12 graduation 

and banquet. 

 

The Aboriginal police preparation program was developed by 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] and the Saskatchewan police Aboriginal 

recruitment committee to assist and engage Aboriginal recruits 

as well as other candidates to successfully gain entrance into 

policing careers. The course provides individuals with a wealth 

of information from criminal law to ethics and history of 

policing. The 40-hour security guard training that is required by 

the province to work in the field of security is now part of the 

program, allowing students to be licensed upon completion of 

the course, and employed immediately. 

 

The achievements of each member of the Aboriginal police 

preparation program were celebrated during this graduation. 

Twelve men and 10 women, joined by family and friends, were 

recognized for their hard work, dedication, and commitment. 

This program has been running in Regina for five years and has 

seen a total of 101 students graduate. Mr. Speaker, this program 

and its graduates showcase the positive steps being taken to 

address the issue of crime in our province. 

 

We want each graduate to know that we are proud of their 

accomplishment and that we are extremely grateful for the steps 

they have taken to make this province a great place to live. 

Congratulations, graduates. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Fundraiser for New Long-Term Care Facility in Biggar 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On February 11th, 

2012, the Friends of the Lodge Valentine Dine, Dance, and 

Auction fundraiser was held for the new long-term care facility 

at the Biggar Community Hall. To date the Friends of the 

Lodge have raised over $325,000, which will go against the 

$550,000 fundraising goal to replace furnishings and equipment 

for the long-term care project slated to replace the Biggar 

Diamond Lodge. 

 

A week before the event, tickets sold out, making the event the 

hottest ticket in town. The real success was reflected in the rave 

reviews the event elicited in the following days. People are 

already making plans for next year’s events. Jo Angelopoulos, 

Chair of the Friends of the Lodge stated, “I’m really proud of 

the Biggar and surrounding people. We’ve already booked the 

date and the hall for next year.” 

 

The success of the event was due in no small part to the 

countless volunteers who donated their time and effort, products 

for the auction, and items used for the evening. These 

individuals realize the importance of the Diamond Lodge 

replacement and the vitality of the community of Biggar and the 

surrounding area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the organizers of this event for their great work. 

Thank you. 

 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2012 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Provincial Budget 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier spent the last couple 

of weeks talking out of both sides of his mouth. In one 

sentence, he talks about prosperity and growth. In the next 

sentence, he talks about Saskatchewan families having to brace 

themselves for budget pain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families want to know the truth. 

They want a straight answer from the Premier. Will the Premier 

be straight with Saskatchewan families and tell them if this is a 

time of prosperity or a time of austerity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

prosperity and austerity are not just words that rhyme. They’re 

inextricably linked, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I remember growing up in Swift Current in the home of 

someone that was involved in small business since, well since 

my dad was about 15 years old. And his lessons were pretty 

clear. If things are going pretty well, that’s one thing. But 

you’ve got to plan to sustain that growth. There is never a time 

where you don’t want to see some fiscal discipline in the life of 

a province, in the life of an organization, in the life of a 

business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know the best way to sustain the prosperity of 

the province of Saskatchewan is to maintain the unique 

advantage today in the province of Saskatchewan. That 

advantage is being built on balanced budgets, less debt, lower 

taxes. Austerity links with prosperity. The province understands 

it. The NDP [New Democratic Party] do not. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s telling families that 

he had to make some tough decisions in preparation for the 

budget we’re going to see today. He said that when it comes to 

cuts, nothing is off the table. The Premier said jobs will be cut, 

that these are the jobs of people who provide services to 

Saskatchewan families. While the Premier’s telling everyone to 

brace for budget cuts, he announces he has millions of dollars 

for three more politicians. Can the Premier explain how he can 

afford millions of dollars for three more politicians when he’s 

cutting services to Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, first of all let’s have a little bit 

of a fact check here. The budget for the additional MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] is going to be about 

$750,000. And by the way, our commitment is that the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly budget will not increase at 

all. We will find the efficiencies and we’ll balance better 

representation. Which is why, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s why 

when the Justice minister stood in his place to lay out this plan 

for electoral map reform, he had some support. Because the 

next speaker in this legislature that supported those three more 

MLAs was the Deputy Leader of the New Democratic Party of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, budgeting is about 

priorities. Pushing ahead to spend millions of dollars on three 

more politicians while warning the public and people to brace 

for cuts to programs and services and prepare for job loss is 

simply wrong. 

 

The Premier’s mixed messaging over the last few weeks is 

inconsistent with his song sheet of record prosperity and 

growth. Spending increased by more than 30 per cent under the 

first term of this government, and now the Premier is signalling 

that he needs to cut. If under his management we’re heading 

into rough waters, why didn’t the Premier tell Saskatchewan 

people sooner? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 

for the question because it underscores the challenges that we 

faced on this side of the House in 2007 after the last election. 

After that election. Mr. Speaker, we found, as the CAA 

[Canadian Automobile Association] put it, a $1 billion 

infrastructure pothole deficit in our highways. We found 

infrastructure deficits in health care facilities in this province. 

We found infrastructure deficits in educational facilities in this 

province that hadn’t received block funding in probably over a 

decade. It was years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we made those investments, record investments in the 

infrastructure of this province, that we would be ready for 

growth. Mr. Speaker, you’re going to see later this day, I think, 

probably some continued infrastructure investment, maybe. 

We’ll find out that in a moment, Mr. Speaker, and so will the 

Finance critic, Mr. Speaker. The only group of women and men 

that do not understand that you have to have fiscal discipline — 

a strong fiscal base to ensure long-term sustainability, long-term 

prosperity to protect the Saskatchewan advantage — the only 

people that don’t get it are sitting right over there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s as if the Premier 

continues to repeat that message enough that it might become 

true. But of course he’ll be judged by his record. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan deserve the true state of our 

finances, and they deserve nothing less. Every year on budget 

day, the Finance minister and the Premier stand up in this 

House and suggest that they have a balanced budget. Of course, 

Mr. Speaker, the record is something different: as validated by 

the auditor, three consecutive deficit budgets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That Sask Party record includes overly optimistic revenue 

projections, expenditures that increase throughout the year, and 

accounting tricks to try and manufacture artificially balanced 

budgets. If the minister once again tries to stand in the 

Assembly here today and present what he suggests is a balanced 

budget, why should Saskatchewan people trust him here today? 



March 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they should trust him 

because he’s a really great guy for starters. They should also 

trust him I think, Mr. Speaker, when they take a look at the 

record of the government. 

 

When we look at the definition, the same definition that the 

NDP used, that the Leader of the Opposition used when he was 

on this side of the aisle, in terms of a balanced budget, that 

Finance critic will have to admit that this government has 

introduced balanced budget after balanced budget after 

balanced budget, while making record infrastructure 

investments, while making record tax reductions, and while 

paying off over 40 per cent of the province’s debt left behind by 

the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Skills training is 

absolutely essential for the next generation of Saskatchewan 

workers. But instead of investing in training education and 

making it more affordable, it appears that members opposite are 

more concerned with creating more spaces for politicians in the 

province. 

 

To the minister: Saskatchewan people do not want more 

politicians in Saskatchewan. What they do want are more 

spaces, more affordable spaces in our universities, our colleges, 

and in our trades institutes, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 

minister: why does he not recognize this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to tell the people of this province about the track 

record of this government. We’ve made record investments in 

post-secondary education — $2.8 billion, Mr. Speaker, an 

all-time record, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done things like increase 

funding for student housing by 3,000 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 

3,000 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what that means is that students in 

communities like La Ronge and Meadow Lake and Prince 

Albert and Saskatoon and more to come, Mr. Speaker, now 

have opportunities to live in new student residences, making 

sure that they can succeed in their studies and, Mr. Speaker, 

with record population and record employment in the province, 

Mr. Speaker, not just to succeed in their studies but actually 

succeed in their careers right here in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education in this 

province under this minister has become more affordable. Over 

the last budgets, Mr. Speaker, tuitions for students in 

Saskatchewan has steadily climbed, Mr. Speaker. Students are 

having to work more and more, simply to keep pace with the 

rising cost of tuition in the province based over the last budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan post-secondary students want 

affordable education. Members opposite want more politicians 

in the province. My question to the minister: why are his 

priorities so mixed up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, again our track record speaks loudly. Mr. Speaker, in 

2007 we promised, through our campaign, that we would make 

an additional $125 million increase for operating funding over 

four years for post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, that 

increase was actually $274 million, Mr. Speaker, well 

exceeding our track record as far as what our promises were 

going to be. 

 

What we can say about affordability, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the 

member opposite to review these numbers closely, Mr. Speaker, 

because under the NDP, at the University of Saskatchewan 

tuition went up 99 per cent, Mr. Speaker; at the University of 

Regina, 88 per cent; and at SIAST, Mr. Speaker, 260 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, the track record is crystal clear. This government 

puts a priority on affordability for students. The members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, they forgot Saskatchewan students and 

bid them fond farewell as they headed to Alberta. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Sale of Television Network 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in this 

House, when I asked the minister questions, he provided us 

with outdated talking points twice, not answers. We’d like to 

give him another chance. 

 

Bluepoint picked up SCN at a fire sale price of $350,000; 

$350,000 when the Sask Party sold it off. Now Rogers wants to 

buy it for 3 million, but they don’t want to be held to the same 

terms requiring investment in Saskatchewan film and television 

production. This industry has brought to Saskatchewan jobs and 

economic spinoff, not to mention pride and the chance to share 

our stories around the world, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: 

when is he going to stand up for this industry and ensure local 

production is guaranteed in this deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question. And we’d like to provide a bit 

of context to begin the discussion. The people of Saskatchewan 

and our growing economy has created the Saskatchewan 

advantage. And now we have attracted a national company like 

Rogers Communications wanting to make investments in our 

creative sector. 

 

Saskatchewan now has all of the big broadcasters in the 

province, including Global, CTV [Canadian Television 

Network Ltd.], and CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]. 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2012 

This gives our province more profile, more options for viewers, 

more value for advertisers, and a stronger partner for local film 

and video producers. This could be a real game changer for 

Saskatchewan producers as they become associated with a 

robust company like Rogers who can give them national market 

exposure for their creative products. We welcome a large 

company like Rogers in Saskatchewan doing business here and 

understand they have a very positive history of community 

involvement. Mr. Speaker, this is good news for Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 

a government whose priority has been to add three more 

politicians rather than to invest in people. 

 

When I asked the minister yesterday on behalf of the film and 

television industry, he said that the Rogers deal was a good one, 

and he said that again today. The original terms of the sale 

stipulated seven years of investment in local productions last 

year when SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network] was 

sold. That would have been over $19 million funnelled into 

Saskatchewan’s film and television industry. But this Rogers 

deal has no guarantee of local investments. 

 

So to the minister: when will this minister demonstrate 

competence and speak up for Saskatchewan interests? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First things 

first. When we decided it was not appropriate for the province 

to be running a television station, we sought competitive bids 

for SCN and chose the offer from Bluepoint, which was the best 

one for the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Rogers Communications did not present a proposal at that time. 

No one could have predicted when or even if they would be 

interested. Had we decided to wait for Rogers or another 

company to come along, we would have had to continue to 

spend $6.2 million a year for operational costs, plus more 

money for technological upgrading along the way. In the two 

years it took Rogers to come to the table, that figure would 

exceed $12.4 million of public investment. 

 

We made a decision that was in the best interests of the people 

of Saskatchewan with the information that was available to us 

at that time. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, after three years and many 

delays, the government has finally come up with a new 

education funding formula. Unfortunately the government has 

been speaking out of both sides of their mouth. In one sentence, 

they say it’s prosperity and growth and the Premier’s going to 

spend millions of dollars on three more politicians. In the next 

sentence, they say everyday families should brace for cuts. 

 

The mixed messaging has left school boards anxious about 

education funding, fearful that classrooms will be facing cuts. 

Can the minister assure Saskatchewan families that students 

won’t suffer as a result of budget cuts to education funding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s just a few more minutes and that member opposite 

will know that the Government of Saskatchewan puts education 

as a priority. We have for four years and we will continue to do 

so. 

 

We believe it is the huge method of keeping the Saskatchewan 

advantage for the young people in our province. We are very, 

very proud that the young people of our province are now 

staying in our province, not leaving our province as they did in 

the past. We’re very, very happy with our investment in 

schools, instead of letting them crumble as what happened in 

the past, Mr. Speaker. We’ve increased funding for school 

divisions by over 18 per cent in our first term of government. 

Mr. Speaker, we will stay committed to education being a 

priority for our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a time of challenges 

in the education sector. The Sask Party has cut more than 350 

full-time educational assistants and they’re closing public 

schools like Dieppe and Haultain, and potentially rural schools 

like Nokomis and Bjorkdale — the list goes on — which are 

core pillars of their communities.  

 

It’s also a time of opportunities: opportunities to address the 

Aboriginal education gap, to support community schools and all 

students, and to support the many new Canadians that are 

moving to Saskatchewan. My question to the minister: will 

today’s budget address the challenges and grow the 

opportunities, or will the education sector see more cuts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I 

will commit that our government feels that education is a 

priority to keep the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve demonstrated that over our first term of government 

where we have record investment in operating grants for the 

school divisions, as well as record investment in the 

infrastructure for schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to go back to the way that it was. 

And when that member opposite talks about the gaps for First 

Nations education, between 1996 and 2006, the gap between 

Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal high school completion 

increased, it increased, Mr. Speaker, from 17.3 per cent to 21.6 

per cent. The gap in post-secondary completion increased when 

those members were in government. Mr. Speaker, we are going 

to reverse that trend and we’re going to commit to the education 

for our students in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 



March 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on issues like this we need 

more than partisan spin from the minister and from that 

government. When we’re looking at the Aboriginal education 

gap that was referenced right there, this is arguably the biggest 

challenge and greatest opportunity before our province. This is 

laid out by economist Eric Howe of the University of 

Saskatchewan who states that by closing that Aboriginal 

education gap we can gain $80 billion of economic activity in 

this province. That’s more than the total sum of potash ever 

sold in the history of Saskatchewan. Moreover we can save 

ourselves $90 billion of social costs by savings in Health and in 

Justice and Social Services, Mr. Speaker, not to mention the 

incredibly important gains and improvements we can make in 

the individual lives of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The rhetoric is enough. The partisan spin isn’t what we’re 

looking for. Will the minister commit to a plan today that puts 

forward meaningful action to close the Aboriginal education 

gap in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it is 

unfortunate that we had a lost decade, quite frankly, under the 

NDP. But, Mr. Speaker, we have committed funding specific 

for First Nations and Métis education programming. We’re 

working with our school divisions so that the school divisions 

can design unique programming. We dedicated over 4 million 

to those programs, Mr. Speaker, and our school divisions are 

our best partners in order to deliver successful programs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As well, and myself along with the Minister from Advanced 

Education and the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

are striking a task force working with FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and the Métis nation, in order to 

look at successful programs, not only just in Saskatchewan but 

across our nation so that we can duplicate that here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are working towards closing the gap. We have stopped the 

trend that was set by the previous government, Mr. Speaker, 

and we know that there’s work that needs to be done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Health Care Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite have been 

giving mixed signals about this budget, both prosperity and 

austerity. Since health care makes up such a large amount of the 

budget — last year it was 42 per cent — people in 

Saskatchewan are wondering where the austerity shoe is going 

to drop when it comes to health care. 

 

There are so many needs in health care in Saskatchewan. We’ve 

recruitment and retention challenges. We are failing to address 

the social determinants of health. We are not meeting the 

unique needs of health needs in northern Saskatchewan. We 

have the worst HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] epidemic 

in all of Canada. We need to do so much more for mental health 

care, for assisted living, long-term care, and end-of-life care. 

Yet faced with all of these challenges in health care, Mr. 

Speaker, the priority for members opposite is to add more 

politicians in the province. That is where their priority lies. 

 

My question to the minister: will he recognize that the 

challenges are great, the challenges are significant, and what is 

he going to do about it today as opposed to adding more 

politicians to the Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that 

question. It’s a kind of a wide-ranging question. What I will 

say, that when our government came to office we set some 

pretty bold targets, Mr. Speaker, targets that the opposition 

when they were in power certainly wouldn’t have set. In fact I 

remember the Health minister at the time saying, we wouldn’t 

want to set a target for nurse recruitment, for example, because 

we just wouldn’t meet it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in four years we have worked hard to bring the 

health care system up to the system that we should want and 

expect in Saskatchewan. We’ve recruited 900 more nurses, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve recruited 200 more doctors. We’ve increased 

the College of Medicine. We’ve increased the residency 

positions, Mr. Speaker. There is more work to do, absolutely. 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I can tell you is that the patient-first 

movement in this province is alive and well, Mr. Speaker. More 

work to do, and I think we’ll probably hear that in just a few 

more minutes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the one target the member’s been 

very clear on is three more politicians for the province, and that 

is a target that no one in Saskatchewan wants. 

 

If we look at the deficiencies, Mr. Speaker, in the province 

when it comes to health care, there are real concerns, Mr. 

Speaker. There is a kidney transplant program that is not 

running at full capacity that has been suspended under this 

minister. People are staying on dialysis longer at a cost that is 

much greater to the taxpayer. We have caregivers in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, that are asking for more help to keep 

their loved ones at home as opposed to sending them to 

expensive long-term care facilities. We have a helicopter 

ambulance program coming, Mr. Speaker, but members 

opposite forgot to build the helipads so the people could 

actually benefit from the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, faced with all of this, there are many questions. 

With the three new politicians coming, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Assembly, will they be able to do kidney transplants? Will they 

be able to support caregivers? Will they be able to help with 

helipads in the province, Mr. Speaker? And if they are not, Mr. 

Speaker, why are members opposite so determined to be adding 

more politicians to the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, there is more 

work to do, but I want to inform the public that we are working 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2012 

hard to resume the kidney transplant program. We have a 

physician back to take extra training that is now doing the 

procedure here in Saskatchewan. The kidney transplant program 

is functional, Mr. Speaker. We need to do more work, 

absolutely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he kind of again touched on a lot of different 

issues, Mr. Speaker, but what I would say is that they tend to go 

back to the extra three politicians. There are two people that 

have spoke in this House that have supported that motion: the 

Justice minister, Mr. Speaker, and the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’m addressing many issues in 

health care because the issues in health care are great, as 

opposed to the minister, Mr. Speaker, who is focused on adding 

more politicians at a time of need for health care. 

 

Yesterday I raised concerns, Mr. Speaker, about assistance 

being given to caregivers who want to keep their loved ones in 

their homes longer to prevent them from going to long-term 

care. We know this saves up to $75,000 a year when someone 

can stay at home as opposed to going to a long-term care 

facility. 

 

And other provinces have acted on this, Mr. Speaker, because 

they see it as a priority. Manitoba, British Columbia have given 

much more than we have in this area. On the other hand, Mr. 

Speaker, members opposite, their priority has been adding more 

politicians to the province as opposed to dealing with the health 

care challenges that people face. To them, adding more 

politicians is more important than assisting caregivers, working 

on recruitment and retention, addressing northern health 

challenges, addressing the issues of mental health and 

addictions, addressing the worst HIV epidemic in Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a question of priorities, and members are focused 

on the wrong priorities. 

 

My question to the minister: how will adding more politicians 

in the province of Saskatchewan address the many health 

challenges the Saskatchewan people face? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to prejudge 

what will be in the budget, Mr. Speaker. But what I can tell you, 

over the past four years, there has been record amount of money 

go into long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. We inherited 

some long-term care facilities that simply were not adequate. 

That’s why this government has moved on 13 long-term care 

facilities throughout the province as well as one in Saskatoon 

that the opposition has been very critical of, Mr. Speaker. But I 

can tell you that there are 50 residents in there calling that home 

today, Mr. Speaker, something they never would have been able 

to do under the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition critic talks about many different 

priorities. I can tell you one priority this government has had 

once it took office was to reduce the longest wait-lists in 

Canada for surgery, Mr. Speaker, overseen by the NDP. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, under two years of our surgical care initiative, I 

can tell you that people waiting 18 months or longer is down by 

89 per cent. People waiting 12 months or longer is down by 76 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. We’re making a real difference in 

surgical wait times in Saskatchewan. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 

ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to submit 

the estimates and supplementary estimates accompanied by a 

message from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — Would you all please rise for a message from 

the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain sums 

required for the service of the province for the 12 months 

ending March 31st, 2013, and supplementary estimates of 

certain sums required for the service of the province for the 

12 months ending March 31st, 2012, and recommends the 

same to the Legislative Assembly. The Hon. Gordon L. 

Barnhart, Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You may sit. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, colleagues, and visitors, I 

am honoured once again to rise today to deliver my second 

budget, our government’s fifth budget, and the first of our 

second term. 

 

Before I begin, I would like to introduce some friends and 

family who made an effort to come to Regina today for this 

occasion. I want to first of all express my appreciation to all my 

friends who are seated in various points throughout the 

Legislative Assembly, but I do want to introduce five very 

special people in my life. 

 

Seated behind the bar are Helene and Eugene Wiwchar. If they 

would give us a little wave . . . These are friends from the 

Canora-Pelly constituency. I’ve known the Wiwchars for over 

25 years and have been so fortunate to have their support and 

their advice. So thank you very much, Gene and Helene. 

 

The next couple now resides in Lloydminster but were our 

lifelong neighbours and best friends in the Invermay district. 

Ernest and Madeline Robson have been part of much of my life. 

Madeline is a superannuated teacher and Ernie is a retired 

farmer and businessman. In a rural area you work on many 

projects together, and I’ll always remember Ernie for a 

fundraising project to raise money for a new arena in Invermay 

in the early 1980s. Ernie and I participated in a four-day, 

350-mile bike-a-thon from Lloydminster to Invermay. Oh, to be 

young and foolish again. 

 

[14:15] 



March 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

My final introduction is of my spouse, Gail. She is the most 

wonderful person in my life, who is also a superannuated 

teacher, mother to Bryce and Lindsay, a grandmother to Willow 

and Scarlett, and of course my adviser. She has been my 

supporter for everything I have done and continues to stay 

involved. Thank you for all you do, Gail. 

 

It is a pleasure to have all of you here today, because 

Saskatchewan has a great story to tell. Mr. Speaker, this year 

we will celebrate the 100th anniversary of this Legislative 

Building. 

 

A couple of weeks ago I noted the 100th anniversary of the first 

provincial budget read in this legislature. That budget was 

presented at a time of tremendous growth in our province. In 

1912 Saskatchewan’s population surpassed half a million 

people for the first time, and Premier Walter Scott’s 

government introduced a budget of $9 million or about $18 of 

government spending for each of those 500,000 Saskatchewan 

residents. Of course, both the province and the government 

have grown a bit more since then. The 2012 budget also comes 

at a time of tremendous growth in our province. Just this 

morning, we learned that Saskatchewan’s population is now 

1,067,612 people, up 17,064 in the past year. 

 

The 2012 budget will spend $11.2 billion, $10,486 for each one 

of those 1,067,612 people. That is quite a difference from 100 

years ago. Of course today’s government provides many more 

services to its citizens than it did in 1912 when most of the 

money was spent on highways, telephones, and public 

buildings, not health and education. 

 

Our government has a responsibility to provide these important 

services. But we also have a responsibility to live within our 

means, to ensure our programs are sustainable in the long term, 

and to balance the budget. Saskatchewan people understand 

this. Across the world we see the chaos caused by debt crises 

and failing economies as some governments failed to live up to 

their responsibilities. 

 

Last fall we had an election that presented two very different 

visions about government spending. One vision said, our 

economy is doing well in Saskatchewan so now is the time to 

spend. The other vision said, our economy is doing quite well in 

Saskatchewan; to make sure it continues, we need to control 

spending, balance the budget, and keep Saskatchewan moving 

forward. Saskatchewan people made it pretty clear which path 

they chose to follow. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me begin by delivering a message that no 

other provincial Finance minister in Canada has been able to 

deliver this year. This budget is a balanced budget. It is 

balanced in the General Revenue Fund . . . Mr. Speaker, I want 

to repeat. This budget is a balanced budget. It is balanced in the 

General Revenue Fund and it is balanced in the summary 

financial statements. 

 

At a time when so many others continue to struggle with a 

sluggish economy, huge deficits, and growing debt, 

Saskatchewan is now a have province. Our economy is leading 

the nation. Our debt is lower and our provincial finances are 

sound. That’s the Saskatchewan advantage, and the 2012-13 

budget is about keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

Today we are living in a unique time in Saskatchewan’s history. 

I have lived in this province my entire life and I have never 

witnessed the kind of growth that we see today. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to remind you that last year when I stood in this 

Legislative Assembly during my budget address, I made 

reference to the fact that somewhere in Saskatchewan, a mom 

or a dad would receive a telephone call from a son or a daughter 

that would say that they were coming back to the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I was surprised at the large number 

of people that stopped me or phoned me to tell me that I had 

used their story. And indeed, they were pleased with what was 

occurring in this Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our population is growing. Our economy is 

growing. Our communities are growing. We had a strong 

economic performance last year in spite of the challenges 

created by flooding. Crop production in 2011 was up by almost 

18 per cent over 2010. Potash production and sales were up. 

Value of oil sales was up. Retail trade was up. Our international 

exports grew by 25 per cent in 2011. The total value of building 

permits grew by 25 per cent in 2011. 

 

In 2011, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy grew by 3.6 

per cent, second highest in Canada even with the challenges 

caused by excess moisture and flooding. The private forecasters 

expect us to lead the nation with 3.1 per cent growth this year 

and to lead again with 3.3 per cent growth in 2013. 

Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate in the country. 

Our debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratio is the second 

lowest in the country. 

 

With fundamentals like this, it’s no wonder Saskatchewan 

people are feeling optimistic. A recent survey conducted by the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business shows that 70 per 

cent of Saskatchewan small-business operators are optimistic 

about the future, second only to Alberta amongst the provinces. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know some will ask, why does government 

need to restrain spending if the economy is so strong? The 

answer: because that’s what will keep the Saskatchewan 

economy strong. That’s what will keep the Saskatchewan 

advantage. 

 

Saskatchewan continues to be a leader in its management of 

public finance. We will have a balanced budget this year, in fact 

a surplus in the General Revenue Fund of $95 million. We will 

have a surplus in the summary financial statements of $14.8 

million, and we will show a healthy balance of $756.4 million 

in the Growth and Financial Security Fund. So we can be ready 

for any unanticipated events. Balanced budgets, sustainable 

spending, sound provincial finances — that’s keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

A growing economy in a growing province creates challenges 

for Saskatchewan and for our government, but as the Premier 

has said, we would rather face the challenges of growth than the 

challenges of decline. One of the challenges of growth is 

maintaining and improving infrastructure. Since we took office 

in 2007, a great deal of progress has been made. A total of $4.1 

billion has been spent on infrastructure, and we will continue to 

make key investments needed to accommodate growth for 

Saskatchewan residents and Saskatchewan businesses. This 

budget delivers $788 million for capital investments. Funds will 

be allocated to schools, health care facilities, highway and 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2012 

municipal infrastructure. 

 

In our first term, our government delivered a long-awaited 

municipal revenue-sharing system that tied growth in funding to 

growth in our economy. This new formula, coupled with our 

strong and growing economy, has delivered more funding to 

Saskatchewan communities than even the most optimistic could 

have anticipated. In 2011-12, municipalities received $217 

million from the Saskatchewan Party government’s 

revenue-sharing program, a 29.5 per cent increase from the 

previous year. This year’s revenue sharing will provide $237.4 

million, a 9.5 per cent increase from 2011-12. This is an 

increase of $110 million since 2007-08. 

 

All of our major cities have seen revenue sharing more than 

double since 2007, and it will grow even more as the economy 

expands in the years ahead. Total funding to support 

municipalities from across government now amounts to $349 

million, or 60 per cent more than in ’07-08. This year we will 

keep our election promise to help communities make their local 

rinks more affordable by providing a $2,500 grant to offset 

operating costs. Working with Saskatchewan communities is an 

important part in keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over half of the total spending in the 1912 budget, 

$5 million, was dedicated to creating a new provincial highway 

system. Today we continue to place great importance on our 

highway infrastructure, and that is why over the past four years 

we have spent $2.2 billion in this area. That’s 64 per cent more 

than the amount spent by the previous administration in its final 

four years in office. 

 

In the past four years, 770 kilometres of major rural highways 

were rebuilt and another 1,485 kilometres of roads were 

repaved. The twinning of Highway 11 between Saskatoon and 

Prince Albert was accelerated, and $150 million was invested in 

the urban connector program to improve the connections to 

provincial highway systems. Overall, more than 6000 

kilometres of roadways were improved in the last four years. 

This year approximately $581.5 million has been allocated for 

the highway system throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

We will keep our election promise to spend another $2.2 billion 

on our provincial highway system over the next four years. We 

will make a $63 million investment in gateway corridors which 

will provide for continuing work on the Regina west bypass. 

We will finish the twinning of Highway 11 to Prince Albert. 

We will finish the Yorkton truck route, and we will begin 

construction of the Estevan bypass. 

 

This budget also provides $3 million to begin a new passing 

lane initiative. This money will be used to begin design and 

aggregate work on a section of the highway between Balgonie 

and Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

This year we will spend $207.8 million for transportation 

preservation and rehabilitation projects. $18 million will go 

towards fixing roads flooded in 2011. There is $59 million for 

the bridge and culvert strategy, including $20.7 million to 

continue work on the St. Louis bridge. This budget also 

provides $1.4 million to continue with safety reviews of our 

major dams. Maintaining and expanding our infrastructure is a 

key part of keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

Mr. Speaker, just as creating a new highway system was vital to 

the growth of our province in 1912, investing in innovation is 

vital to the growth of our province today. In this budget, we will 

invest $99 million in research and development to help drive 

our economy forward; $20 million for research and technology 

grants in agriculture; $19 million for the Saskatchewan 

Research Council, which includes a 5 per cent increase to help 

one of Canada’s most effective research organizations extend its 

reach. 

 

In recent years, the SRC [Saskatchewan Research Council] has 

become very adept at attracting private contracts in its 

operations. In 2010-11, the economic impact of its activities 

was $527 million. The SRC is becoming increasingly 

well-known internationally and has become a magnet for 

companies from around the world needing its research skills. In 

the past year alone, it has worked with a diverse group of 

companies, from an African potash mining company to a 

Canadian vaccine company now exporting its products to 

Brazil. 

 

[14:30] 

 

We are refocusing the research and development tax credit to 

ensure it also remains sustainable in the future. 

Canadian-controlled private corporations will continue to 

receive a 15 per cent refundable tax credit subject to an annual 

limit of $3 million in qualifying R & D [research and 

development] spending. Other qualifying expenditures will be 

eligible for a 15 per cent non-refundable tax credit. 

 

We also aim to develop more value-added opportunities for our 

natural resources through Innovation Saskatchewan. $7 million 

will be spent to enhance research, including $3.3 million for 

nuclear research and development. At the same time, we are 

doubling our grant to the Canada Excellence Research Chair in 

Water Security at the University of Saskatchewan to $1 million. 

We will spend another million dollars on the second year of the 

boreal water strategy aimed at collecting a base of 

environmental information on our northern lakes to provide 

information for development decisions. $250,000 will begin the 

process of establishing an institute for food security at the 

University of Saskatchewan, and $4.1 million will go towards 

the operation of the Canadian Light Source synchrotron. As 

well, we will provide $2.1 million to help fund the operations of 

InterVac, the research centre devoted to improvements in 

vaccines. The advancements Saskatchewan is making in 

research and development are very exciting. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I was reading about some of the 

traditions of budget day in the British House of Commons. I 

have recently learned the budget speech can be up to four hours 

long — four hours, Mr. Speaker. Also the Chancellor of the 

Exchequer — that is their finance minister — is allowed to 

drink anything he wants while he delivers the speech, including 

alcohol. Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that this is water and that 

this speech is not four hours long. 

 

Our government has always supported Saskatchewan farmers, 

and we will continue to do so. We were there for farmers last 

year when they were affected by the second consecutive year of 

serious flooding. $94 million was put into the excess moisture 

program to help them deal with flooded land and unseeded 



March 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

acreage. We have worked closely with the federal government 

to improve crop insurance this year to provide better coverage 

for excess moisture and flooding. 

 

Overall this budget provides $321.4 million to fully fund crop 

insurance along with AgriStability and AgriInvest. This 

increase includes record funding for crop insurance. Coverage 

levels will increase to a record high average of $174 per acre. 

This is almost double the coverage level offered to producers 

under the previous government in 2007. And producers now 

have the option of purchasing up to $100 per acre of coverage 

for any unseeded acres in the event of more flooding. 

 

The Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, or STEP, has 

played a key role in promoting Saskatchewan exports 

throughout the world and opening up new markets for our 

agricultural products. This budget increases funding to STEP by 

half a million dollars. The Ministry of Agriculture is also 

providing an additional $1 million for international trade and 

market development in this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another one of the challenges of growth is 

affordability. We know that our rapid growth is creating 

challenges for people in finding affordable housing. That’s why 

we have moved to encourage construction of more affordable 

housing. 

 

Last year at this time our government announced a five-point 

housing plan, making it easier for Saskatchewan people with 

modest incomes to purchase new homes. Our goal is to add at 

least 4,600 new housing units over the next five years. So far 

we have experienced significant progress. For example, the 

Headstart on a Home program has proven to be very successful. 

The immigrant investor program, which loans money to 

builders, has sparked the construction of five new condominium 

projects across the province in the last year. This will provide 

homes to low- and moderate-income families. 

 

The most recent project is a 21-unit condominium announced in 

North Battleford. New buildings are also under way in 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and Yorkton. The 

affordable homeownership program provides municipalities 

with a maximum $5,000 per unit matching grant for the 

purchase of a new principal residence. We estimated 40 units 

would be purchased under this program. To date we have 

received 164 qualifying applications. 

 

Under the rental construction in this incentive we introduced 

last year, we estimated developers would build 300 new rental 

housing units. In its first year we have received applications for 

more than 1,000 new units. This budget provides a $2 million 

increase for these two programs for a total investment this year 

of $3.7 million. 

 

We believe this is a good start, but there is more to do. We 

know that part of what is holding back new rental construction 

in the province is high taxes on investment income. As a result, 

we are introducing a corporate income tax rebate to qualifying 

companies to build new rental accommodations. This rebate 

will equal 10 per cent of the amount of the taxable rental 

income earned from new rental housing projects over a 10-year 

eligibility period. We expect this program to build on the 

success of the rental construction incentive and anticipate an 

additional 1,000 rental units will be under construction by the 

end of this year. When combined with existing housing 

incentives, we expect that an additional 10,000 new rental units 

will be built over the life of the program. 

 

We promised the first-time homebuyers tax credit in last fall’s 

election campaign. Beginning this year, a provincial income tax 

credit of up to $1,100 will be provided to individuals and 

families purchasing their first home. Mr. Speaker, there’s more 

to be done, and our government understands that housing 

continues to be a challenge in a growing Saskatchewan. But 

make no mistake, we are moving in the right direction. In the 

past four years, since our government took office, there were 

23,632 housing starts. That’s an average of 5,908 per year. In 

the previous 16 years, there was an average of only 2,932 

housing starts per year. Housing starts have more than doubled 

in the past four years, and we expect that trend to continue. 

 

Of course affordability extends beyond housing. In the fall 

campaign, we also promised to extend the PST [provincial sales 

tax] exemption on children’s clothing to age 17 and under. We 

made good on that promise immediately after the election, 

saving families about $3 million per year. The active families 

tax benefit was also expanded to include all children 17 and 

under beginning in 2012. This benefit provides a refundable tax 

credit of up to $150 per child to help with the cost of positive 

activities such as the arts, music lessons, and sports. 

 

Our government has a strong record of making life more 

affordable for Saskatchewan students. Four years ago, we 

introduced the graduate retention program, the most aggressive 

youth recruitment and retention program in all of Canada. This 

program allows post-secondary graduates who choose to stay in 

Saskatchewan after graduation to receive up to $20,000 of their 

tuition costs back. And it’s working. Since the program began 

in 2008, it has provided over $46 million in tuition rebates to 

more than 30,000 post-secondary graduates. More importantly 

we have stemmed the flow of young people out of our province. 

More young people are choosing to stay — choosing to begin a 

career, start a family, and build a life in Saskatchewan. 

 

Keeping our young people is a significant part of keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage. That’s why last fall we promised to 

take the next step by introducing a new Saskatchewan 

advantage scholarship to help every new high school graduate 

with the cost of post-secondary education. This budget provides 

$4.6 million to keep this promise by providing new high school 

graduates with up to $2,000 over four years to be applied 

toward tuition fees at any Saskatchewan post-secondary 

institution. 

 

Effective January 2013, we are also introducing the 

Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings. This will 

match up to 10 per cent of the annual contribution to a child’s 

Registered Education Savings Plan account up to $250 per 

child. That’s on top of the 20 per cent matching grant already 

provided by the federal government. 

 

This budget also adds $6.7 million for a total of $36.5 million 

for the Student Aid Fund. There is also a special assistance 

program for medical students who face some of the highest 

tuition expenses in university. This budget keeps our promise to 

establish a program to forgive up to $120,000 in student loans 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2012 

for new doctors and up to $20,000 for nurses and nurse 

practitioners who choose to practise in qualifying rural and 

remote communities in Saskatchewan. It also adds five nurse 

practitioner training seats to begin meeting the campaign 

commitment to add 20 new nurse practitioner seats. 

 

Overall this budget provides a $12 million increase or 2 per cent 

more to support operating costs at our post-secondary 

institutions. This should allow them to hold tuition increases to 

approximately 4 per cent for key direct entry programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has a responsibility to ensure that 

these and other important programs and services for 

Saskatchewan people are affordable and sustainable. Some 

governments have allowed well-intentioned but unsustainable 

programs to put them into deficit. In his sweeping report of the 

state of Ontario’s finances, economist Don Drummond said, 

“The time to act is now, before today’s challenges become 

tomorrow’s crisis.” While Saskatchewan’s finances are in far 

better shape than Ontario’s, Mr. Drummond’s advice is sound: 

the time to ensure your spending is sustainable is before it 

becomes a crisis. 

 

Today I am announcing some changes in government spending 

to ensure our programs for people remain affordable and 

sustainable. We are raising the cap on prescription drug fees 

from $15 to $20 under the seniors’ and children’s drug plan. 

This cap has not changed since it was created in 2007. But even 

with these changes, the plan remains one of the best in Canada 

in terms of lowering the price of prescription drugs for seniors. 

 

At the same time, our government will continue to improve 

income benefits to low-income seniors. In our first term, we 

doubled benefits provided to low-income seniors under the 

seniors’ income plan, and we doubled the number of seniors 

who qualified for this benefit. There had been no increase in 

this benefit in the previous 16 years. This year we will deliver 

on our promise to increase this benefit by another $50 a month 

or $600 per year. Over the next four years, this benefit will be 

increased by nearly $1,000 per year, triple what it was when 

this government took office. 

 

[14:45] 

 

We also promised to assist seniors by introducing a new senior 

personal care home benefit. Currently estimated at $278 per 

month, this will rise to $369 per month by the fourth year. 

 

In order to achieve savings, we looked at the effectiveness and 

efficiency of certain tax credit and economic programs. As a 

result, our government will be ending the film employment tax 

credit. There have been many high-quality film and television 

productions as a result of the $100 million invested through this 

tax credit. However the overall decline in industry activity 

combined with the need to increase our commitment in order to 

compete with other jurisdictions has resulted in this decision. 

Productions which have already registered for the credit will 

continue to receive the credit. However new productions will no 

longer qualify. This measure will save Saskatchewan taxpayers 

up to $3 million this year and approximately $8 million per year 

when it is fully wound down. 

 

We believe regional economic priorities should be set locally, 

not provincially. With this in mind, our government will cease 

funding enterprise regions. With the significant increase in 

municipal revenue sharing, we feel this is a role that municipal 

governments should lead if they so choose. This change will 

save Saskatchewan taxpayers approximately $4 million a year. 

The provincial government will remain focused on creating a 

strong economic climate through lower taxes, infrastructure 

enhancement, and labour force development. 

 

Our government continues to look for ways to reduce our own 

overall size and cost. We are currently in the third year of a 

four-year plan to reduce the size of the civil service by 15 per 

cent. We are on track to meet our target and showing that it is 

possible to have a smaller, more efficient government. So far 

this effort has saved Saskatchewan $129 million. 

 

We will continue to work with third party stakeholders to find 

additional savings through efficiencies that don’t negatively 

impact front-line services. Third parties, such as regional health 

authorities, post-secondary institutions, and school divisions are 

all being asked to look for savings within their operations. Mr. 

Speaker, we are making these decisions and taking these actions 

now in order to ensure affordable, sustainable programs for 

people in the future. Balanced budgets and sustainable spending 

now and in the future — it’s a key part of keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these measures will allow us to continue taking 

steps to improve life for people in Saskatchewan. Our 

government is strongly committed to improving the quality and 

dignity of life for persons with disabilities. That’s why we 

promised expanded coverage and additional benefits under the 

Saskatchewan assured income for disability program. This was 

the single largest promise we made in the election campaign, 

and today we are keeping this promise. 

 

We are adding almost $18 million to the SAID program to 

provide greater benefits to a larger number of persons with 

disabilities. With this move, the number of people eligible for 

this program will more than triple to as many as 10,000 adults. 

The available benefits will go up by $200 per month in July of 

2012 and by $350 a month in the fourth year. Our goal is to 

make Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for persons with 

disabilities, and to make that part of the Saskatchewan 

advantage. 

 

At the same time, we recognize that not all children in 

Saskatchewan have the same advantages. Last year we launched 

a new children and youth agenda to improve the prospects of 

some of the most vulnerable members of our society. We have 

ambitious goals. We are trying to transform the child welfare 

system and eliminate gaps in educational and employment 

outcomes. 

 

In last year’s budget, we devoted an additional $34 million to 

programs across government aimed at improving outcomes for 

those challenged by poverty, poor education, and different 

social issues. Our new child and youth agenda has greatly 

improved relationships with First Nations agencies. 

 

This budget will provide an additional $6 million for the child 

and youth agenda. This includes an additional $750,000 for the 

annual cost of more child protection workers. A new approach 



March 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

to conduct home assessments for First Nations children who can 

be placed in the homes of extended family members has been 

designed. Contracts have been signed with several First Nations 

agencies, and we have completed 72 home assessments in this 

fiscal year. This budget will deliver another $750,000 to build 

on that progress. 

 

In education we have created 40 new pre-kindergarten programs 

in 23 communities. This budget adds another 15. This budget 

also provides $2 million in operating funds and $4 million in 

capital for 500 new child care spaces. This will allow us to 

move forward in keeping our promise of 2,000 new child care 

spaces over four years. We also intend to build on our 

educational efforts for disadvantaged young people by 

providing $500,000 for the establishment of 20 literacy camps 

in the summer months. 

 

In the past year, the Regina Community Clinic life skills and 

addictions program helped 45 adults with FASD [fetal alcohol 

spectrum disorder]. Children in the FASD family support 

program in the Saskatoon area have improved their school 

attendance, and none have dropped out. We know that FASD is 

an entirely preventable condition. To continue this good work, 

an additional $600,000 for three storefront projects in our three 

largest cities has been allocated. Our goal is to provide intensive 

prevention programming to pregnant women who could be at 

risk of having a child with FASD. 

 

We have provided the necessary funding for the health regions 

to improve therapy and support workers for those with autism. 

This budget fulfills our campaign promise by providing another 

$1 million for autism programming. 

 

Innovative approaches to community involvement are also 

showing promising results in crime prevention. An operation 

called Community Mobilization Prince Albert brings together 

officials from the police, government agencies, and community 

partners to provide immediate and long-term interventions in 

the lives of at-risk individuals to help keep them on track. We 

believe this initiative has played a role in some very 

encouraging trends in Prince Albert. Between February and 

October of 2011, reported crime was down 15 per cent. 

Emergency room visits were down 10 per cent. The number of 

public prosecutions was down 12 per cent. There was a 9 per 

cent reduction in calls to the police for help. This budget will 

deliver on our campaign promise by providing another 

$450,000 to build on the success of this program. 

 

We are also providing $1.9 million for the first year of our 

campaign commitment to a high-risk, violent crime reduction 

strategy. This initiative will get tough on violent crime and 

make Saskatchewan communities safer by adding new police 

officers and prosecution resources and by using GPS [Global 

Positioning System] to track high-risk, violent offenders. 

 

Three million dollars has been allocated to facilitate expansions 

to the Prince Albert correctional facility, and $9.6 million will 

complete the expansion to the Pine Grove Correctional Centre. 

 

Our government will continue to work to improve the lives of 

our First Nations and Métis citizens through a variety of 

programs. This budget provides almost $172 million for First 

Nations and Métis funding, which includes some of the 

programs I have already mentioned. Additional dollars for First 

Nations and Métis economic and social programs through 

provincial gaming agreements will increase by 3.8 per cent to 

$67 million this year. 

 

We have committed $1.5 million over three years to our 

northern action plan to work with leaders to address issues that 

hinder social and economic progress in the North. Another 

$450,000 will be spent on the First Nations apprenticeship 

program to help promote new careers. 

 

Our efforts to increase the number of Aboriginal people in the 

workforce are also showing progress. There are 5,900 more 

First Nations and Métis people employed to the end of February 

this year over last year. Over the past four years, the number of 

First Nations and Métis apprentices has increased by 24 per 

cent. The number of First Nations and Métis journeyperson 

certifications has doubled from 61 in 2006-07 to 123 in 

2010-11. 

 

Education and training are essential to produce a better quality 

of life for all citizens. High-quality pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to 

12 education is the foundation of our province’s future success. 

Our pre-K to 12 system provides one of the biggest challenges 

but also exciting opportunities for our growing province. Some 

of our schools are overcrowded. Some of our communities are 

underserved. 

 

This budget will provide almost $38 million to begin 

construction of six new school projects in Warman, Swift 

Current, Saskatoon, White City, and Lloydminster. We have 

allocated $50 million to continue building 15 different major 

school capital projects across the province. This budget also 

provides $4 million to start planning for three school projects. 

This will mean a new school for Hudson Bay. It will also mean 

expansions and renovations for the existing high school in 

Martensville and renovations for the school in Leader. 

 

This budget also introduces a new school division funding 

distribution model. You will be hearing more about this from 

the Minister of Education and others. However I will mention 

that the changes included in the new model will be phased in 

over three years. Ten million dollars has been added to allow a 

smooth transition for those divisions that will receive less under 

the new formula. Overall funding for school operating will rise 

by 5.0 per cent. Operating funding will increase by $59 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past four years, one of the key goals of 

our government has been improved access to health care. We 

continue that job today by providing $4.7 billion to 

Saskatchewan Health, an increase of 4.9 per cent over last year. 

There is an additional $98 million, or 3.5 per cent increase, to 

our regional health authorities for health care staff, drugs, 

medical supplies, and other operating costs. 

 

We’re also providing $60.5 million for the Saskatchewan 

surgical initiative, one of the most important tools we have to 

improve access to patient care. We have made significant 

progress on reducing wait times for surgery. The number of 

people waiting longer than 18 months for surgery has dropped 

81 per cent since we launched the initiative in April 2010. The 

number of people waiting more than 12 months has dropped 

significantly by 69 per cent. Ninety-nine per cent of all 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2012 

surgeries are now completed within 18 months of specialist 

referral, and 96 per cent within 12 months. There’s more to be 

done but our government remains on track toward our goal of 

reducing surgical wait times to no more than three months by 

2014. The additional money this year will allow the health 

regions to continue with planning expansions to increase 

surgical capacity in our hospitals and operating rooms. 

 

[15:00] 

 

We have also had great success reducing the wait times for 

cancer patients. The wait-lists for treatment through the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency have dropped from almost 600 

people waiting for treatment to less than 100. This is a huge 

step which has positively impacted people in our province, and 

we will continue to build on this success. This budget provides 

an extra 13.8 per cent, or $16.9 million for the Cancer Agency. 

This funding provides for more than 6,000 new patient referrals, 

almost 30,000 chemotherapy treatments, and 39,000 

mammograms. This year we will provide an extra $4 million to 

expand the screening program for colorectal cancer 

province-wide. This will not only improve early detection but 

will reduce the need for expensive treatments when this type of 

cancer is found in later stages. 

 

Providing long-term care facilities where they are needed is also 

a key component of our health care strategy. This year we will 

move to complete six long-term care facilities currently under 

construction in Radville, Redvers, Rosetown, Shellbrook, 

Tisdale, and Watrous. 

 

Construction of seven additional care homes under a new 

funding model, where the government becomes a shared owner 

with the regional health authorities, will begin. $43 million will 

be allocated to build facilities in Biggar, Kelvington, Kerrobert, 

Kipling, Maple Creek, Meadow Lake, and Prince Albert. As a 

result, many seniors will receive the care they need near their 

homes and families, which is integral to keeping the 

Saskatchewan Advantage. 

 

Primary care is a huge concern to many, and communities are 

working hard to improve that care. This budget is devoting $7 

million to develop new pilot projects in delivering primary care. 

We will also begin the process of building a pool of 20 locums, 

providing coverage for local doctors when they are away. 

 

Emergency medical coverage is another key element of 

improving access. $5.5 million has been allocated to launch the 

STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] emergency 

medical helicopter service across this province. 

 

We will continue moving forward on a replacement for the 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford and have provided 

$5 million to continue planning for that facility. We are also 

moving forward on the new hospital in Moose Jaw, previously 

announced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the advantage, the Saskatchewan advantage is 

real. It has been built by the women and men who live in this 

province, those whose families have lived here for generations 

and those who have just recently arrived to start the next 

chapter of their lives in the new Saskatchewan. This budget is 

about serving every one of those 1,067,612 people, both by 

providing the important government services they need but also 

by being good stewards of the tax dollars they provide and 

making sure that every government service and program is 

affordable and sustainable in the long run. 

 

The Saskatchewan advantage is real. While other provinces 

have massive deficits, we have balanced budgets. While other 

provinces have high unemployment, we have thousands of job 

openings and the lowest unemployment in Canada. While other 

provinces have sluggish economies, our economy is leading the 

nation. We have come so far, from a have-not province to a 

have province, from a declining population to a growing 

population, from a stagnant economy to an economy that leads 

the nation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan advantage is more than 

economic statistics and strong balance sheets. Today it is 

measured in the quiet confidence of our people. You can see it 

in their eyes and hear it in their voices. They know that this 

Saskatchewan, this new Saskatchewan is a great place to be and 

that our best days are still ahead. That’s keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 

seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to respond briefly to the budget put forward here today. And I 

too am joined by incredibly important people in my life, 

powerful, important women in my life: my wife, my mom, and 

my mother-in-law. So thank you for being here today as well. 

 

The budget I’m prepared to respond to is one that I think is a 

great disappointment to the people of our province. A 

government that boasts of the best days of prosperity, apparent 

record growth, and a resource boom, but for everyday families, 

it’s an austerity budget full of cuts that reach directly into the 

pockets of seniors, families, and students. 

 

For many of the province’s classrooms, it’s an austerity budget 

that asks them to make do with less. These cuts will result in 

growing pressures in every household. They mean unmet needs 

in housing and infrastructure. These cuts mean that too many 

people will be left behind. 

 

And while these cuts are being exacted, the government moves 

forward with its plan to add three more politicians. While 

seniors are being asked to reach deep into their pockets for an 

extra $5 for each and every prescription that they need, each 



March 21, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

and every month, costing seniors hundreds of dollars annually, 

the budget manages to find room for a new statue at the 

legislature. And while 500 front-line workers who deliver 

services are cut in this budget, not one job cut is in the 

Premier’s Executive Council offices. It just doesn’t add up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not exactly what voters bargained for and it’s 

not what people expected or were promised. Government 

preached prosperity, but today they’re delivering austerity for 

everyday families. This budget isn’t what people think of when 

they think of prosperity. Saying we can no longer afford five 

members on northern firefighting teams is not what 

Saskatchewan people think of when they think of prosperity. 

Saying that seniors need to dig deeper and peel off a few more 

dollars when they need an ambulance, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

what people think of when they think of prosperity. Telling 

seniors in long-term care that an extra $240 a year needs to 

come out of their pockets for hygiene supplies, that’s not what 

people think of as a prosperous province. Classrooms are facing 

cuts by the Sask Party, and that’s not what people think of when 

they think of prosperity. 

 

The funding formula cuts tens of millions out of a dozen school 

boards, and this budget only promises a one-time $10 million 

backfill top-up. People will be worried about the impacts in 

their neighbourhood: increased class sizes, reduced support, 

school closures. The losses for this year won’t be covered, and 

every teacher, student, parent, and education worker is left to 

wonder, what about next year, not to mention the big tuition 

increases post-secondary students are going to face as a result 

of this budget. 

 

This government is asking everyday families to pay more and 

accept less. The government is telling people that services and 

programs that they rely and depend on are going to disappear. 

And there’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, today’s budget spells out 

clearly that school boards, health regions, and post-secondary 

institutions have been put on notice. They’re being directed to 

finish the government’s slashing and find further cuts. That 

means, Mr. Speaker, that everyday families can expect more 

cuts and impacts to be rolled out throughout the year. 

 

A specific concern for the opposition, Mr. Speaker, is the 

complete abandonment of the film industry, a significant 

economic and cultural contributor to our province. All of this 

will be lost, placing at risk our state-of-the-art sound stage and 

forfeiting jobs and opportunities for creative young people and 

entrepreneurs. 

 

We have grave concerns about the elimination of environmental 

programs, leaving nothing positive for those looking for some 

improvements in the way we treat our beautiful province. 

 

And we have deep concerns that this budget does nothing, 

nothing, Mr. Speaker, to close the gap between First Nations 

and Métis employment and non-Aboriginal employment levels 

as well as nothing to close the education gap between 

Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal students, something so 

important to our province. In fact I’ll share the fact Statistics 

Canada reported that First Nations unemployment rate is 

currently 20.5 per cent, and that’s an increase of 13.9 per cent 

since the end of 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, cuts for our children in their classrooms, cuts in 

health services that we depend on, cuts to policing and public 

safety in our communities, cuts to our institutions of higher 

learning — it doesn’t make sense. It isn’t fair, and it wasn’t 

what was promised. It seems that the interests of politicians are 

put first, ahead of the needs and best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. It seems that a full staff complement in Executive 

Council offices, more politicians, and more for the legislature is 

this government’s priority. Nobody voted for that, Mr. Speaker, 

and it doesn’t have to be this way. 

 

We have a resource boom, and we are growing. We could focus 

our efforts to improve the lives of Saskatchewan people. That’s 

smart growth. That’s sustainable growth. We say there should 

be more for people, more for improvements — improvements 

in the classroom, improvements in health care that we depend 

and rely on, improvements to housing so young families can 

fulfill their dream of owning a home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, budgets are about choices. Budget choices are a 

reflection of a government’s priorities. Our province can do 

better than this. And our government should do better than this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, budgets should also be about balance, especially 

financial balance. This government suggests that today’s budget 

is balanced, a public relations line they’ve stuck with the past 

few years. But the government’s own record suggests 

something else. Verified by the Provincial Auditor, this 

government has struggled to balance its books. They have now 

delivered three consecutive deficit budgets and debt, total debt, 

continues to grow. Today’s budget looks like more of the same, 

and it’s still racking up debt. 

 

As an area of caution, it would seem that this government is 

possibly once again betting too much on a large increase in 

potash revenues. If this rosy prediction does not pan out, this 

budget’s foundation is damaged. 

 

And now unacceptable accounting changes appear to be a 

continuing theme of the Sask Party government. The budget 

pushes $100 million of debt off their books and onto the books 

of universities and makes accounting changes that serve to 

manufacture desired on-paper outcomes. At minimum 

Saskatchewan people deserve the fair and true state of our 

public finances to be reported. It’s about transparency. It’s 

about accountability. 

 

[15:15] 

 

This Assembly is filled today with many respected business and 

community leaders. I would guarantee that not one of them get 

to choose their own accounting policy, nor should government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will continue to join the independent voices like the 

Provincial Auditor in calling for change on this front, Mr. 

Speaker, change that would provide a fair and true state of our 

finances. Saskatchewan people deserve nothing less. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve the straight goods and 

the whole picture. For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, among 

others, we will not be supporting this budget. Mr. Speaker, we 

think people expected better. We think this is not the budget 

that people voted for in November, and we know that 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2012 

Saskatchewan people deserve better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll have more to say on this budget, a more 

detailed analysis and critique in the coming days, but it’s been 

my pleasure and my privilege to join debate here today. And, 

Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I move that debate now be 

adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Monday, March 26th, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Monday, March 26, 2012. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question on adjournment, I 

want to first say thank you to all of our guests who have joined 

us here today and for your cooperation in observing the rules of 

the Assembly. 

 

I would now like to extend an invitation to our guests to join the 

members for tea in the Legislative Library on your right as you 

leave the Assembly and in room 218 to the left. As well I would 

ask that we have an orderly departure from the Assembly, so, 

guests, if you would allow the members to leave by the side 

doors before you depart. 

 

At this time, I will place the question. The Government House 

Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 

a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:18.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 687 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 687 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 687 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 687 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 687 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 687 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 687 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Support for People with Disabilities 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 688 

 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 688 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 688 

 Saskatoon Film Company Benefits City and Province 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 688 

 Province Experiences Positive Growth 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 689 

 Aboriginal Police Preparation Program Graduation 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................... 689 

 Fundraiser for New Long-Term Care Facility in Biggar 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 689 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provincial Budget 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 690 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 690 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 690 

 Funding for Post-Secondary Education 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 691 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 691 

 Sale of Television Network 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 691 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 691 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 692 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 692 

 Health Care Issues 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 693 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 693 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 694 

  The Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 694 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 694 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 700 

 Resumption of Budget Debate 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 702 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


