




















































Hansard: October 25, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 49A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 25, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1557 

 October 25, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — I am advised that Her Honour is here for 

prorogation. 

 

PROROGATION 

 

[At 10:03 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. Her Honour was 

then pleased to deliver the following speech.] 

 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, people of 

Saskatchewan: “Grow old along with me, the best is yet to be.” 

 

I doubt the poet Robert Browning was even dimly aware of 

Canada — never mind Saskatchewan — when he penned these 

words. 

 

Yet the phrase, “the best is yet to be” captures gracefully where 

we are in this province today. And in these waning minutes of 

first session of the twenty-seventh Saskatchewan legislature, 

they seem particularly apt. 

 

Throughout the world, economies continue to struggle. The US 

[United States] economy remains stubbornly slow to recover 

and is having difficulty creating new jobs. Oceans of ink and 

acres of newsprint have been spent in the cause of describing, 

explaining, and attempting to mitigate the impact of economic 

woes seen in Europe. 

 

Other provinces continue to face economic challenges, and in 

some areas, significant levels of public debt and deficits. Yet 

the Saskatchewan advantage remains intact, robust, secure. 

 

RBC [Royal Bank of Canada], Canada’s largest bank, predicted 

in September that Saskatchewan will post 3.6 per cent growth 

this year, then overtake our neighbour to the west next year 

with 4 per cent growth — highest among the provinces. 

 

This means our province is on track to achieve the vision 

outlined in the 2011 Throne Speech: 

 

A vision of a province of over 1.1 million people by 2015; 

 

A province that is steadily eliminating its General 

Revenue Fund debt; 

 

A province where young people get the best in educational 

opportunities; 

 

A place where seniors are treated with dignity and respect; 

and 

 

A place where people with disabilities get the best care 

and support that is available in Canada. 

 

When I spoke to you at the beginning of this session, I quoted 

briefly from my government’s vision for Saskatchewan: 

Simply put, our vision is that Saskatchewan will be the 

best place in Canada — to live, to work, to start a 

business, to get an education, to raise a family and to build 

a life. 

 

In the intervening months, much has been accomplished in this 

Assembly to make this vision a reality. 

 

On May 17th of this year, my government tabled Canada’s only 

balanced provincial budget. 

 

It included a new Saskatchewan advantage scholarship that will 

provide $2,000 over four years to new high school graduates, to 

reduce the cost of post-secondary education. 

 

The budget expanded the active family benefit and exempted 

clothing for children under 18 from the PST [provincial sales 

tax]. 

 

The STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] emergency 

medical service is now a reality. Scarlet-red helicopters, filled 

with up-to-date medical equipment and highly trained staff, are 

now a familiar sight in the skies over Saskatchewan. 

 

$2.2 billion over four years has been committed to repair and 

maintain our highways, with significant work already taking 

place this past summer. 

 

Assistance for low-income seniors under the seniors’ income 

plan has been increased by $600 annually. 

 

A new $10,000 tax credit for first-time homebuyers is now in 

place. 

 

Money for 500 new childcare spaces is now available.  

 

Surgical wait times have grown shorter as Saskatchewan’s 

health care professionals make steady progress toward the goal 

of reducing wait times to no more than three months by 2014. 

 

And assistance under the Saskatchewan income for disability 

program was increased by $2,760 per year for couples and 

$2,400 for individuals — with further increases planned for the 

years ahead. 

 

These are just a few highlights of the current legislative session. 

 

“Grow old along with me, the best is yet to be.” As this session 

of the Saskatchewan legislature grows old, we can, with 

confidence, look forward to the fulfillment of Browning’s 

prediction. 

 

With our Saskatchewan advantage in place and a growing 

province, the best is yet to be. 

 

All that remains is to inform you this morning that it is my duty 

to discharge you from further attendance at this first session of 

the twenty-seventh Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

In relieving you of said further attendance, I also warmly 

congratulate you on the work you have completed and 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2012 

commend you for the conscientious manner in which you have 

approached your duties. 

 

In taking leave of you this morning, I wish you the full 

blessings of providence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the 

legislature, it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until later today, the 25th day of October, 2012 at 2 

p.m. This Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:10.] 

 



 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


