




















































Hansard: November 22, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 17A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2131 

 November 22, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure and an honour to introduce to you 

and to all members of the House . . . Actually I’m going to 

introduce six individuals because I haven’t introduced one of 

the people up there even though she’s been there a few times. 

 

Today visiting us, Mr. Speaker, are three university students 

from Ivano-Frankivsk National Technical University of Oil and 

Gas in Ukraine. They are here in Saskatchewan under the 

Canada-Ukraine science internship program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mariia Zaberko — give us a wave, Mariia — 

Mariia is working at SaskPower in business management. 

Oleksandr Strateychuk is working at SaskPower as an electrical 

engineer, and Andrii Voroniak is working at the petroleum 

technical research centre at the University of Regina as a 

petroleum engineer. 

 

I would also like to welcome Bob Ivanochko who is one of the 

hosts of the students and Ed Lysyk, who I introduced before. Ed 

of course is one of the organizers of this exchange and a past 

president of UCC [Ukrainian Canadian Congress]. Also up 

there, Mr. Speaker, is Natalie Pepper who is my ministerial 

assistant, and I haven’t introduced her. And she has joined my 

staff most recently. 

 

So I’d ask all members to welcome the three university students 

and our other guests here to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join the 

Deputy Premier in welcoming the guests to the legislature 

today. We know that it’s an important day for all Ukrainians, all 

Ukrainian Canadians, and we’re very happy to have you here in 

the legislature. So welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’m very pleased to introduce eight guests seated in 

your gallery. These are medical students from the University of 

Saskatchewan that represent all the medical students at the 

University of Saskatchewan at the College of Medicine. 

They’re in the capital today to meet with MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and to discuss some issues that they 

have, I think, in common with members of the Legislative 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce Colin Ellis, 

David Plemel, Keith Johnstone, Kyle MacDonald, Kylie Riou, 

Margot Klemmer, Melissa Andersen, and Rochelle Jalbert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that they’ve had the opportunity to meet 

with members of the government earlier this morning. I’m 

looking forward to having an opportunity to talk to them after 

question period, and I’d ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming these eight individuals to the 

Assembly today. I know there were supposed to be a few more 

people in attendance, but we’re glad that everyone is safe and 

sound for those who decided not to brave the highways this 

morning. 

 

I was also pleased in meeting with them, Mr. Speaker, this 

morning to learn that all eight of them are from Saskatchewan 

— I think from Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and Moose 

Jaw — so some of Saskatchewan’s finest, the future physicians 

for the province. We look forward to their service in the years 

to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I have 

the honour of introducing some very important guests today 

who are working hard to make a difference in the lives of our 

most vulnerable citizens. 

 

Joining us today are Richard Hazel who is the executive 

director of the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers 

and Glenda Francis from the Ministry of Social Services. These 

fine individuals are with us today to hear the first reading of the 

amendments to The Social Workers Act. The amendments to 

this Act will improve services to our most vulnerable citizens 

by allowing qualified clinical social workers to diagnose mental 

health disorders. I ask all members to help me in joining these 

outstanding citizens to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 

behalf of the opposition to welcome Mr. Hazel and Ms. Francis 

to their legislature today. As a registered social worker myself, 

I’m especially pleased that you’re here today, so welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave of the 

Assembly to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I noted just joining us now in 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

your gallery are some very special guests that I’d like to 

welcome to this Assembly this morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, joining us this morning is Mr. Yu Zheng Ping, the 

owner of Guangzhou South Ocean International Engineering & 

Technology Service or GSO. Mr. Yu’s company is one of the 

world’s largest manufacturers of oilseed crushing equipment. 

GSO has manufactured and installed equipment in processing 

plants in China, in Europe, in Russia, Africa, Southeast Asia, 

and South America. And now Mr. Yu is interested in setting up 

a company right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to welcome Mr. Yu’s interest here. I had 

the opportunity to witness the signing of an MOU 

[memorandum of understanding] when we were in China, 

between Innovation Saskatchewan and GSO. 

 

I’m also pleased to report that Mr. Yu’s daughter, Kozi, has 

recently completed a degree at Simon Fraser University. She is 

also joining us here this morning. She has found an opportunity 

right here in Saskatchewan as well, working with Prairie Tide 

Chemicals in the great city of Saskatoon. They’re accompanied 

today by Jerome Konecsni and Nicole Bletsky, both with 

Innovation Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look forward to meeting with Mr. Yu and we 

welcome his continued interest in the province. We’d ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming him to this Legislative 

Assembly this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 

Premier in welcoming Mr. Yu and his daughter here to the 

legislature but also to Saskatchewan. And we know that the 

sharing of information and technology between our countries, 

as well as the raw materials, has been an important factor in the 

trade between Saskatchewan and China. And we’re very 

pleased that they’re here. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present a petition on behalf of concerned residents as it 

relates to education in our province. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

National Housing Day 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’re all 

familiar with walking briskly to our car in minus 30 degree 

weather, rushing to get inside, and waiting impatiently as it 

warms up. Now imagine if that was where you slept every night 

or if you weren’t sure if you’d been evicted from your 

apartment or if the shelter you had stayed in would be too full. 

You are constantly worried if you’re not going to be able to 

make your rent or mortgage payment this month. 

 

But incredibly, this is a daily reality for 3.2 million individuals, 

and 1.5 million of them are families. This is why CMHC 

[Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation] declares this day, 

November 22nd, National Housing Day. And with the economy 

in rough shape in other parts of the country, it’s easy to see the 

correlation. But what about our own province, Mr. Speaker? 

Despite our current economy, one in five have reported that 

they have either faced or are in danger of facing homelessness. 

 

Shelter is a basic human right, Mr. Speaker. It enables people to 

do well in their lives. It’s a place where people plan for their 

future, escape when they’re leaving an abusive relationship, 

study when they’re improving their education, raise their kids, 

or take care of their aging parents. And most importantly, home 

is the place where people can lay their head at night and feel 

safe, warm, and secure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 

National Housing Day and committing ourselves to find the 

solutions necessary to make sure our province needs to make 

safe, affordable housing a reality for everyone in our province. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

International Holodomor Remembrance Week 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, November 19th to the 25th is International 

Holodomor Remembrance Week. 

 

Holodomor, roughly translated, is murder by starvation. This 

term is used to describe the man-made famine that decimated 

Ukraine in 1932 and 1933. An estimated 7 to 10 million 

Ukrainians became victims of Holodomor under Joseph Stalin’s 

dictatorship. It is estimated that at one point people were dying 

at a rate of 24,000 a day — almost the entire combined 

population of the cities of Weyburn and North Battleford. 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, during that time when Ukrainians suffered 

from unfathomable starvation, the region was actually 

experiencing agricultural prosperity. 

 

I am proud to say that in 2008, this Legislative Assembly 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

became the first province in Canada to recognize this genocide 

with The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) 

Memorial Day Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to properly mark this occasion, a special 

candle lighting ceremony using a memorial candle brought 

from the Holodomor memorial site in Kiev, Ukraine, will take 

place in the rotunda later this afternoon. The candle lighting is a 

symbolic gesture that will take place at commemorations in 

Ukraine and around the world. The candle we will light, Mr. 

Speaker, will remain in the rotunda until November 24th. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members here today to join me 

in the rotunda this afternoon as we honour and remember the 

many people of Ukrainian descent in our province and country 

who lost loved ones during the Holodomor. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Shannen’s Dream Walk and Rally 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Shannen’s Dream 

Walk and Rally that concluded on the steps of the legislature 

was a powerful event. It brought together hundreds of elders, 

students, teachers, board members, and administration from 

Regina Catholic schools as well as Treaty 4 First Nations in a 

call for fairness and a fight for equitable funding for education 

on First Nations. 

 

Along with the members from Regina Elphinstone and 

Saskatoon Riversdale and more than 400 supporters, I was 

proud to participate in the walk and to speak. The walk was 

initiated by students at St. Bernadette, led by their teacher, Ms. 

Karen Goodon, as a social justice project following studying 

the tragic injustice of residential schools and the resulting loss 

of pride, language, culture, and lives. 

 

I am thankful that students included me in this project, a project 

that was supported by the Truth and Reconciliation 

Commission. 

 

Shannen Koostachin’s dream was to have a safe and equally 

funded education for First Nations children. She worked 

tirelessly to try and convince the federal government to improve 

First Nations and children’s education before tragically passing 

away at the age of 15 in 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am humbled by the bravery Shannen displayed, 

and I commend the students, staff, and community that 

organized this project and walk. I share their hope that we will 

remember her dream to make access to quality education a 

reality for everyone, no matter what their cultural background 

or where they live. We have the power to do so. We just have to 

act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Huskie Coach Recognized by Football Canada 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

night in Toronto, Football Canada handed out a very prestigious 

award known as the Gino Fracas Award. It recognizes 

outstanding career service by a volunteer assistant football 

coach. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to tell the Assembly that the 

recipient this year is the defensive coordinator for the 

University of Saskatchewan Huskies and a friend of mine, Ed 

Carleton. 

 

Ed played football for the Huskies for five years up until 1989, 

and after he graduated and began teaching, he started coaching 

high school football. He was a high school football coach at 

Evan Hardy in ’90 and ’91. They won a championship in one of 

those years. In ’92 he began his coaching career with the 

University of Saskatchewan. He’s just finished his 19th year, 

consecutive year, as a coach for the University of Saskatchewan 

Huskies. Mr. Speaker, in that time his defence has helped that 

team win eight Canada West titles and make six appearances in 

the Vanier Cup, winning that cup twice. He’s also served as a 

guest coach for the Saskatchewan Roughriders and the 

Winnipeg Blue Bombers. During the season he puts in between 

25 and 30 hours. Here’s what his head coach said about him. 

He said: 

 

A student of the game, Ed Carleton has been the architect 

of one of the top 10 defences in CIS football for the last 

16 years. His players play aggressive, hard-nosed, 

disciplined football and they have a great time doing it. 

He’s been a loyal, dedicated volunteer coach and has 

contributed a great deal to the success of Huskie football 

for 20 years. 

 

We congratulate Ed on this prestigious award today. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Girl Guides Honours and Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Recently I 

had the opportunity to attend the 2012 Girl Guides Honours and 

Award Luncheon on behalf of the Premier. Mr. Speaker, for 

over 100 years Girl Guides of Canada have been empowering 

girls to meet life’s challenges through skill development, 

dynamic discussions, and enriching cultural experiences. Mr. 

Speaker, life is not easy for many young women growing up in 

the world, but the Girl Guide program prepares leaders with the 

skill set they need to overcome challenges they may face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the annual Girl Guides Honours and Awards 

Luncheon recognizes guiders that have gone above and beyond 

their duty with Girl Guides. For those who were honoured, they 

showed exemplary service to the community and are a fantastic 

example of leadership and commitment. Mr. Speaker, the Girl 

Guides promise says, and I quote, “I promise to do my best, be 

true to myself, my beliefs and Canada. I will take action for a 

better world and respect the Guiding Law.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the example set by the Girl Guides is one we all 

can learn from. I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

the 2012 Girl Guides Honours and Awards winners and to join 

me in thanking them for their outstanding commitment to our 

community. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Youth Action for Prevention Program 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in the House today to tell you about the Youth Action for 

Prevention program that is making a real and positive 

difference for the youth in Saskatchewan. 

 

Youth Action for Prevention is a youth-focused FASD [fetal 

alcohol spectrum disorder] prevention initiative that encourages 

young people to create resources and projects that raise 

awareness of FASD and other alcohol-related harms among 

their peers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve received the opportunity to see the 

photovoice exhibit and speak with some of the young people 

who participated in the creation of Hammered: A Sober Look at 

Youth and Alcohol. The photovoice project was developed as a 

provincial project for participants to work on collaboratively. 

Photovoice helps youth gain new skills through social action 

and conversations and creates opportunities to become involved 

in something meaningful to them. Saskatchewan youth use 

photos and words to communicate the impact alcohol has in 

their lives. 

 

The photovoice exhibit is travelling throughout the province to 

engage youth in meaningful conversations regarding the impact 

alcohol has in their lives. In this way we recognize and witness 

the voice youth have to an important issue that impacts them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking everyone 

involved with Youth Action for prevention for the outstanding 

work they are doing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Kal Tire Distribution Centre 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today and tell the House of an exciting announcement that 

is a natural fit for the Regina area, our province, and our 

economy. Mr. Speaker, Kal Tire’s new distribution facility is 

moving forward in Saskatchewan. The province, the city of 

Regina, and the RM [rural municipality] of Sherwood came 

together to support this important project. The new facility will 

be located just west of the Regina airport and north of Highway 

1 in the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

As a growing company, building a new distribution facility is 

critical to Kal Tire’s continued growth and to its ability to 

service Saskatchewan and Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, Kal Tire 

estimates that over time, this new $25-million facility will 

employ close to 100 people, including the 10 that will move 

from the existing Regina warehouse. 

 

Our government is happy that Kal Tire has chosen to move 

forward in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You know, we’ve heard 

a bit of pessimism and negativity regarding this project. To 

those who said it couldn’t be done, that Saskatchewan is going 

to lose this investment, Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, on this 

side of the House we tend to be a little more optimistic. I ask 

that all members would join me in congratulating Kal Tire on 

the decision to move forward with their new distribution plant 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College of Medicine Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in the 

Assembly we have the honour of having the political action 

committee from the Student Medical Society of the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan]. These men and women, all from 

Saskatchewan, are the future physicians for the province who 

will care for Saskatchewan’s patients. They are committed to 

Saskatchewan. They want to know that the Sask Party 

government is committed to their success in the College of 

Medicine. 

 

I know they met with ministry individuals earlier this morning 

and raised the issue, expressed the concern around having 

enough clinical learning time. They have specifically asked that 

medical residents be provided with an incentive to encourage 

residents to participate in the teaching of medical students. 

 

My question to the minister: will the Sask Party government 

provide an incentive to residents so residents more fully 

participate in the teaching of medical students at the U of S? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 

the member for his question. I also want to, as I said earlier, 

thank the medical students for being here today and meeting 

with members of all sides of the House in discussing the 

proposal that they want to put forward. Mr. Speaker, I think that 

at this time we are going to take some time to study that 

proposal. 

 

Obviously this is in relation as well to the contract negotiation 

that always takes place at the end of the PAIRS [Professional 

Association of Internes and Residents of Saskatchewan] 

contract, as this is a part of that negotiation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I wouldn’t want to say too much further on that, as that needs to 

be negotiated in the proper manner and the proper place, 

certainly not on the floor of the Assembly. But we’ll certainly 

take the position of the medical students into consideration as 

we move forward on this file. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clinical teaching time 

is central to having a strong and vibrant College of Medicine. 

And we’ve actually seen, under the Sask Party’s watch, the 

amount of clinical learning that students receive decrease over 

the past years. In 2007 clinical learning was 8 hours per week in 

groups of two to four. In 2012 clinical learning was 5 hours per 

week in groups of four to eight. 

 

Medical residents are an important part, Mr. Speaker, in 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

providing that clinical learning experience. Other provinces 

recognize this and provide incentives to residents so that they 

participate more fully in the teaching of medical students. At 

the U of A [University of Alberta], residents receive $25 per 

hour for teaching, and at the U of O [University of Ottawa], 

residents receive $75 per hour for teaching. At the U of S, 

residents must volunteer their time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my question to the minister: what incentives is he willing to 

provide to residents so that they more fully participate in the 

teaching of medical students on campus? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly not 

willing to negotiate the contract for the upcoming PAIRS 

contract on the floor of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. That being 

said, we’ll certainly take the policy proposal that is being put 

forward by the medical students under consideration as we look 

at this. Certainly there are other options that have been pursued 

by other medical colleges. But, Mr. Speaker, we need to make 

sure that we’re balancing, first of all, our training seats and our 

residency positions, Mr. Speaker, with that clinical time that is 

so important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government believes in having a strong 

College of Medicine, and that’s why we are going to continue 

to work with agencies like the College of Medicine, like the 

University of Saskatchewan, Advanced Education and other 

government ministries that have a stake in this matter, and 

including, Mr. Speaker, the medical students that are here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Students also raised 

with me their concern about the warning of probation that was 

given to the College of Medicine, completely under the Sask 

Party’s watch. Mr. Speaker, these individuals know that it’s 

important to have the College of Medicine on a sound footing 

in order to have a successful medical education and to ensure 

that the reputation of the U of S is as strong as it needs to be 

and as strong as we want it to be. 

 

There will be a follow-up evaluation of the College of Medicine 

this spring I understand, Mr. Speaker, when a decision will be 

made whether or not the college will actually be put on 

probation. My question to the minister: can he assure the House 

that he is taking the steps necessary that the College of 

Medicine will not be put on probation under the Sask Party’s 

watch? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in August of 2011 we 

learned that the College of Medicine was under what is 

described as warning of probation. At that time, then president 

MacKinnon said that the government had done its part and that 

the U of S was responsible for any outstanding issues. A dean’s 

advisory council was created to present an alternative plan and 

to develop a method of dealing with the outstanding issues. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, there was 10 outstanding issues that needed 

to be dealt with. The university has informed us that nine of 

those issues have been dealt with, and they have a plan and a 

structure in place to deal with the 10th issue that’s outstanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we take this very seriously. We recognize and 

support the university’s autonomy. But it’s something that is 

important to all of the residents of Saskatchewan, and we want 

to ensure that this does get addressed. I have a great deal of 

confidence in both the dean of the college and also in the 

president of the university and expect them to follow through 

on this. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another concern the 

students raised with me was the completion of the A and B 

wings of the Health Sciences Building, Mr. Speaker. This 

project is vital in order to ensure that there is adequate teaching 

space for the College of Medicine and other health disciplines. 

 

Before the election, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party promised to 

pay for this project. After the election, Mr. Speaker, they 

walked away from that promise and forced nearly $100 million 

of debt onto the university’s books. The debt capacity at the 

university now, Mr. Speaker, is maxed out, and the board of 

governors face the question whether or not they can continue, 

Mr. Speaker, with the completion of the project. The university, 

Mr. Speaker, is requesting a cash grant upfront in order to 

ensure the A and B wings can be completed. 

 

To the minister: will the completion of the Health Sciences 

Building be provided through a cash grant upfront? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we fully expect to see the 

completion of the projects that are under way at the university 

right now. We have worked with the university. 

 

I can advise the members opposite and I can advise the House 

that in 2003 the previous government announced its approval of 

the U of S health sciences project. At that time it was estimated 

it should cost $120 million. In fact, Mr. Speaker, construction 

didn’t start on that project until 2008. Mr. Speaker, with the 

amount of money that was spent by the delay, we could have 

built two health sciences buildings. It was because of the delay 

that was caused by the members opposite that the University of 

Saskatchewan chose to go out and finance this through private 

sources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are aware of the issues with the completion of 

C and D wing and also with regard to A and B wings. That will 

be dealt with through the Treasury Board process. I can advise 

the members opposite and I can advise the citizens of 

Saskatoon that this is something of great importance to the 

government, and we will be watching it very carefully. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

Support for Early Learning 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a study released yesterday 

shows a disturbing trend in education readiness in our province. 

Far too many kindergarten-age children simply aren’t ready to 

learn. The statistics are alarming. Saskatchewan exceeds the 

national average, and in the Saskatoon Health Region, the rate 

is an alarming 30 per cent of these children aren’t in a position 

to learn. That’s one in three children. 

 

It’s pretty simple, Mr. Speaker. If a child doesn’t have a safe, 

stable home or food in their belly, learning itself is a 

non-starter. What will the Minister of Education do to address 

this alarming problem in our province and to ensure a bright 

start and a fair shot for all students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

acknowledge the member opposite for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, the effects of poverty are well-known. And I did have 

a quick look at the report, and indeed there are some numbers 

there that are alarming. But they’re alarming not just to the 

education sector, Mr. Speaker; they’re alarming across the 

spectrum. 

 

And I want to say that through the Saskatchewan children and 

youth agenda, we are finding new ways to work together across 

government to mitigate these situations, especially for our most 

vulnerable young children. 

 

Just to mention a few, Mr. Speaker, through Social Services: 

First Nations case management payments of $1.5 million; 

intensive family supports, $2 million; increased child protection 

workers, 30 full-time equivalents; structured decision making 

and outcomes management to almost $3 million, Mr. Speaker. 

Through the Attorney General, Justice: the Aboriginal child 

welfare court worker pilots; northern transportation and safety 

initiatives. 

 

In Education alone, Mr. Speaker, we’ve expanded 

pre-kindergarten programs by 85 per cent; school capital for 

pre-kindergarten programs; First Nations and Métis Education 

Achievement Fund; Mr. Speaker; individual achievement 

accounts and literacy camps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in order to mitigate the effects of 

poverty, we’re working together with . . . 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this statistic is something 

that none of us should be proud of, and reading off a bunch of 

programs like that masks the real challenge and the real trend 

that’s going on in this province. 

 

The reality for far too many in the province is something 

different. Too many families can’t afford housing or access 

child care. Far too many families don’t have access to adequate 

food. Too many families are losing ground and are simply 

being pushed to the margins, and we’re trending in the wrong 

direction on these fronts. 

 

The Saskatoon Health Region has set a target of reducing that 

30 per cent measure to 18 per cent by 2018. They call it their 18 

by 18 approach. Will the minister commit today to work with 

community partners, including the health region, to coordinate 

a plan to make the improvements needed in educational 

readiness in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we recognize that access to high-quality learning opportunities 

ensuring children are ready to learn has a significant impact on 

student achievement, which is a priority of this government. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have targeted our vulnerable 

four-year-olds. And we’ve increased . . . 76 per cent of our 

vulnerable four-year-olds are attending pre-kindergarten 

programs, and 50 per cent of our vulnerable three-year-olds are 

attending kindergarten. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we incorporate . . . With the new student 

achievement initiative, we are using two tools to help identify 

and provide supports to children: the early identification 

instrument targets the children, and then the early years 

evaluation instrument targets the areas where we will be able to 

provide supports and help our students become ready for 

school. Mr. Speaker, student engagement at the early levels will 

pay dividends in the long run. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that minister 

needs to become in tune with what’s going on in those 

pre-kindergarten classrooms he’s speaking about, the lack of 

access and the strain in those rooms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A reality of this government’s education budget is that full-day 

kindergarten no longer exists in Saskatoon, a casualty of this 

government’s budget. The School Boards Association passed a 

resolution last year calling for support of full-day kindergarten 

programs, but the Sask Party didn’t listen. All the evidence 

shows better early learning improves the outcomes that we’re 

speaking about here today, and full-day kindergarten is a real 

example of a program that makes a difference. It just takes 

leadership and support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why does the minister stand by a budget that 

forced the cut of full-day kindergarten in Saskatoon when all 

the evidence supports this program and we know the difference 

that it makes, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, thank 

you for the question. Mr. Speaker, I understand full well the 

importance of early learning opportunities. There is no question 

that full-day kindergarten has some benefits, but the earlier we 

can get to children is what’s going to make the difference in the 

long term. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we are putting our 

efforts into pre-kindergarten, especially for our vulnerable 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

three-year-olds and vulnerable four-year-olds. Research is very 

clear on that, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue down that path. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, these children need a good 

start in life to improve the education outcomes and create a 

stronger future. The reality is that our graduation rate is going 

in the wrong direction, that the gap between non-Aboriginal 

and Aboriginal students’ outcomes is unacceptable. It reflects 

inequality. The access to housing and food is inadequate for far 

too many children, yet this government has chosen to cut 

resources from the classroom, cutting educational assistants, 

cutting full-day kindergarten, and increasing class size — all 

important in supporting vulnerable students. 

 

How can that government boast about moving forward as a 

province when so many students are falling behind? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

education is represented by a $1.72 billion investment in our 

children, our most important resource. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

increased funding to education by over 21 per cent since our 

term in government, and last year a 5 per cent increase in the 

budget alone. 

 

We’ve invested $500 million in capital. We inherited a $1.2 

billion infrastructure deficit as a result of inadequate funding 

from the previous government. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 217 per 

cent increase over previous investments. Publicly funded 

education in our province, Mr. Speaker, is a cornerstone and we 

will stick to that. Our government takes its responsibility very 

seriously, and that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’ve implemented the 

largest education property tax reduction in the province’s 

history, Mr. Speaker: $165.7 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve done more. We’ve increased operating 

funding to school divisions by 21 per cent, and we’ve increased 

our child care spaces by 42 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we will 

continue to invest in our most important resource: the children 

of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Low-Income People 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the 

recent Saskatoon Health Region study, there are several 

Saskatoon neighbourhoods where child poverty rates are as 

high as almost 65 per cent — 65 per cent, Mr. Speaker — and 

there are many more that are in the 30 to 50 per cent range. This 

is simply unacceptable. I represent some of these areas and I 

know, like every child, these children deserve a good start to 

reach their full potential. Living in poverty does not give them 

that good start. 

 

I don’t imagine it’s acceptable to the minister that so many 

young children in Saskatoon are living in poverty. What I’d like 

to know is what her government is going to do to lower these 

numbers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the issue that the member 

opposite is talking about is something that we talk about every 

day. That’s why we made sure that for child welfare we have 

increased the funding by a significant amount. In fact it’s 133 

per cent higher than it was when the members opposite were in 

government. 

 

We’ve done things like have the child and youth agenda where 

we have all ministries working together to determine if there 

are children falling through the cracks, whether it be education 

or social services. We’ve talked about . . . We put more money 

into housing. We’ve ensured that we have more workers for 

child protection. We’ve got historic agreements with the First 

Nations to ensure that we’re working together for children that 

are on- and off-reserve. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got case 

management systems. 

 

And we’ve got something that’s even more unique in our 

province and that’s the Hub, where we have people on the 

ground working with individuals where they have issues and 

make sure we see them and their particular issues. Mr. Speaker, 

we know there’s work to be done in this area, but by working 

across government we know we’re going to see results. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Up to 65 per cent, Mr. Speaker, living in 

poverty. We know poverty costs us all, and we know it’s not 

just about money. It’s also about being excluded from 

community life. It’s linked to social and health problems and 

it’s leading to poor long-term education outcomes for children. 

And I can’t believe these people are heckling at this moment, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we also know that poverty can be eliminated. Other 

provinces and countries have developed anti-poverty strategies 

and have lowered poverty rates. I’ve talked to many people who 

wonder why we haven’t done the same. Why is Saskatchewan 

the only province in Canada that does not have a 

comprehensive and coordinated anti-poverty strategy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — The members opposite are always 

wanting to have a plan and a strategy, and what they really 

don’t want to hear is action. Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’ve 

been doing in the last number of years. We’ve been making 

sure that there is more money in the province. We’ve been 

making sure that there are fewer people that are living in low 

income. 

 

Right now in Saskatchewan we have 34,000 more people 

working in Saskatchewan than when they were in government. 

The low-income people have declined by 17 per cent in the first 

three years of our government. Children that are living in 

low-income families have decreased by nearly 35 per cent. But, 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s more work to be done. And 



2138 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

when we look at the work that we have done, we realize that 

Saskatchewan, we have the second lowest unemployment in all 

of Canada. 

 

And do you know what’s happened with the provinces that do 

have a strategy, a poverty strategy? Saskatchewan’s 

outperformed every province except New Brunswick when it 

comes to reducing the number of low-income people. And the 

number of low-income people has increased in Alberta and 

British Columbia since 2007. It’s gone down in Saskatchewan 

by 17 per cent. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a quote from the report 

from the Saskatoon Health Region: “Children born into a life of 

poverty or low income are more likely to stay in such 

circumstances into adulthood as a result of a cycle that often 

perpetuates itself.” 

 

Poverty has long-term consequences. Ad hoc policies and 

programs may work in small measure but we can see from these 

numbers, as the minister likes to say, there is more work to be 

done. That is an understatement. This government must commit 

to a comprehensive and coordinated plan with hard targets and 

timelines to ensure we make real progress on eliminating 

poverty. Will this minister commit today to put this 

anti-poverty strategy into place as all community organizations 

are asking for? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, 

our anti-poverty strategy has been in place since we became 

government. It means helping people go to work. It means that 

we have the opportunity for good jobs and to make sure that the 

families are working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has outperformed every province 

except New Brunswick when it comes to reducing the number 

of low-income people. And I think the member opposite should 

hear this: Saskatchewan has outperformed Quebec, 

Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, and Ontario. They all have an 

anti-poverty strategy, and we’ve outperformed them because 

we’re working on action. We’re not writing reports. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Attendance at Conferences 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today in Halifax, first ministers 

from across the country are gathering to address issues that 

matter to the provinces. On the agenda of the International 

Economic Forum are discussions about global, economic, and 

trade issues and the implications for Canadian provinces and 

territories. But there will be at least two vacant seats at the 

table: one for the Prime Minister who refuses to meet with 

premiers and one for the Premier of Saskatchewan. Why has the 

Premier chosen not to attend the first ministers’ meeting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be attending 

the meeting, be attending via technology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan has been 

encouraging our counterparts and the Council of the Federation 

that we would continue to meet in person for important annual 

meetings, but that where possible we would also, in the 

interests of taxpayers’ dollars and time, that we would perhaps 

use technology to a greater extent. 

 

Looking forward to the meetings, Mr. Speaker. We have an 

economic story to tell from our perspective. We have some 

input we’d like to provide to that table with respect to foreign 

direct investment policy in this country, with respect to opening 

up still more trade opportunities. We’ll be able to do all that by 

a conference call, Mr. Speaker. I’m looking forward to the 

meeting. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well that’s very interesting because while the 

Premier thinks it’s acceptable to phone in to this important 

forum for premiers, this time last year he couldn’t get to 

another conference fast enough. In Phoenix, Arizona in 

December 2011, the Premier flew off on the taxpayers’ dime to 

bask in the company of right wing American legislators for a 

20-minute speech at the American Legislative Exchange 

Council. ALEC is an ideological organization that promotes 

privatization instead of public services in all areas of 

government. 

 

The Premier has lots of words on international trade when it 

comes to an audience of people who share the Premier’s 

ideology. When it comes to representing Saskatchewan’s 

interests with other first ministers from Canada, the Premier’s 

literally going to phone it in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the ALEC conference deserve the 

Premier’s attention when this important forum doesn’t? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was honoured to 

get the invitation to speak at the ALEC conference on behalf of 

Canadian and western interests, specifically Saskatchewan 

energy interests as well. The invitation came as a result of my 

attendance and a speech that I gave to the National Speakers 

Conference in South Carolina. As a result of that, we received 

this invitation. 

 

I have said pretty clearly that every opportunity we get to tell 

Saskatchewan’s story to fight for the interests of Western 

Canada, especially as it relates to issues like Keystone and 

others that group over there has been remarkably quiet about, 

that we will take those opportunities, Mr. Speaker. Had I been 

able to conference call in the speech for this conference, we 

may have considered the option, but we felt it was an in-person 

engagement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, every day people are asking 

themselves about the surprises that come from this Premier that 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2139 

they just didn’t vote for. Perhaps his visit to the ALEC 

conference might clear a few things up. 

 

It would appear that our Premier received a gift bag of sorts of 

right wing policies from his friends. It certainly explains where 

the Premier got his renewed right wing agenda. It wasn’t in the 

platform he ran on in the last election. Instead it’s been policy 

after policy of gutting labour laws, attacking the arts, 

privatizing and selling public assets. 

 

We know that the Premier has time for a tea party with right 

wing legislators in Arizona. But when it comes to the First 

Ministers Conference and his job of representing Saskatchewan 

in the federation, he’s going to phone it in. Mr. Speaker the 

Premier prefers in his travels to do a little cross-border agenda 

shopping at a tea party outlet mall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the time when the world economy is still so 

fragile, why is meeting with Canadian premiers and 

representing Saskatchewan such a low priority? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Actually, Mr. Speaker, we did do some 

shopping to get some policies with respect to Crown 

corporations in the last election. We shopped at their store, Mr. 

Speaker. Page 44 of the platform simply adopts the Crown 

protection Act that members opposite passed. 

 

I will confess to the House though, that this side of the House 

may be guilty of a few surprises, or hopefully contributing to a 

few surprises. Mr. Speaker, there are 80,000 more people living 

in the province today, that’s a surprise; 12,500 new jobs 

year-over-year, that’s a surprise. Earlier this week, good news 

from manufacturing, sales are leading the nation — surprise. 

Conference Board of Canada earlier this week said we will 

exceed Alberta, we will lead all provinces in economic growth. 

Maybe that’s a surprise for members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are fixing roads with the dividends of growth. 

We’re investing in health care, in education, and kids, and 

building a Saskatchewan advantage the likes of which this 

province has never seen. It’s not the government that should get 

the credit but, Mr. Speaker, some of the surprise policies we’ve 

introduced, I think, have had a role to play. And we’re going to 

continue to work very hard to keep those Saskatchewan 

surprises coming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments, 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 77, 

The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 77, The Horse Racing 

Regulation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 78, 

The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 now be introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Social 

Services that Bill No. 78, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 

2012 be now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask for 

leave to make an introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to do an introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not often that 

we have constituents all the way down from the great 

constituency of Meadow Lake, but we’re very privileged today 

to have Dr. Merv Johnson and his wife, Blanche, visiting us in 

the west gallery all the way down from Meadow. Dr. Johnson 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

and Blanche have been pillars of our community for many, 

many decades. Dr. Johnson just recently retired after being a 

physician in Meadow Lake for many, many years, and it’s great 

to see you here. And I’d ask the Assembly to welcome Dr. 

Merv Johnson and Blanche Johnson. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Effect on Saskatchewan of Federal Agreements With 

India and China 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 

comments I would like to move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly commends the federal government for 

signing recent memoranda of understanding with the 

governments of India and China, which will have positive 

implications for the province of Saskatchewan and our 

uranium development sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to start off by discussing a few facts 

before I speak about the uranium sector. Mr. Speaker, the 

populations of China and India are substantial, and combined 

they constitute about 37 per cent of the world’s population. The 

world population currently is a little over 7 billion and China’s 

population is a little over 1.3 billion and India has a little over 

1.2 billion. And that is a lot of homes that need energy for their 

electricity and heating needs, not to mention their workplaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is forecasted by the year 2050 we will have 9.1 

billion people on this Earth so it is forecasted that 1.6 billion 

will be in India and 1.5 billion will be in China. Now these are 

pretty generous forecasts but I’ve looked at a few different 

studies and forecasts and these numbers seem to be the average. 

India has a plan to build 12 new reactors by 2021 and China is 

predicted to have a sixfold increase in nuclear capacity by 2020. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m no Donald Trump but in my six 

years of business school I learned a couple of things. One, a 

target market as large as both India and China is one we can’t 

afford to overlook. And with the global economy the way it is 

today, it is imperative that we seize the opportunity to benefit 

the people we serve — the people of Saskatchewan. The 

decision by the federal government to have nuclear 

co-operation agreements in place between Canada and India, 

and Canada and China, is a commendable one because this 

fosters our uranium industry here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The production of uranium in Saskatchewan was 9.1 tonnes in 

2011. And to do the quick math to pounds, I would like to 

thank the member from Regina Rosemont for some of his math 

lessons he gave last session. I’m sorry I hadn’t met him sooner. 

He could have saved me six years of post-secondary education. 

Now back to the math. Multiply each tonne by 2,599.8 which 

equals 23,294.18 pounds. So to me, the layperson, that sounds a 

lot like a lot of uranium. And it would be safe to say 

Saskatchewan is the world leader in uranium production. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to go through a few quick stats 

about Cameco, who state that the vast majority of, 90 per cent 

of Canada’s uranium goes to use in clean . . . [inaudible] . . . 

nuclear energy. And Cameco employs 734 Aboriginal people 

across Canada, and 707 Aboriginal people are employed in 

Saskatchewan. At the northern mine sites, 50 per cent, which is 

749 people from their workforce, is northern while 41 per cent 

is Aboriginal, which is 622 people. This equated to 

approximately 64 million in salaries to northern residents. In 

addition another 800 Aboriginal people are employed by 

long-term contractors. So they have programs designed to 

increase Aboriginal and northern employment such as northern 

scholarships, northern summer student program, northern skills 

assessment program, and apprenticeship programs. And since 

2005 Cameco has purchased over 2 billion in goods and 

services from northern-owned companies, another tax and 

wealth generator. In addition they have invested more than 12 

million towards community programs and infrastructure. 

 

On the environmental front, they have been, year after year 

their uranium mines have been Canada’s top performers in 

meeting strict national and provincial regulatory requirements. 

And Canadian uranium is produced solely for purposes such as 

generating clean energy and developing nuclear medicine. 

Millions of people benefit from nuclear technology through 

cleaner air and better health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know all too well about the benefits of the 

resource economy to First Nations and Métis people. I have 

family on both sides, and I have many people in my family who 

work in the mines, on the oil and gas pipelines, as well as 

working in the oil fields. Their employment has afforded them 

to take care of their families and have a pretty decent quality of 

life, far better than the conditions that I grew up in, that they 

have grown up in, and it has allowed their children to not know 

first-hand what poverty looks like. And many people such as 

myself and many, many others have been able to break this 

cycle, contrary to what the other, what the member from . . . 

what the opposition has said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an upward trend. There are many 

hard-working families who work in the uranium industry and 

who can look after their families because of these jobs. And 

shame on the NDP [New Democratic Party] and their followers 

for opposing the resource sector. 

 

So I wanted to list the “Northern Employment Initiatives 2011” 

that I’m sure that the member from Athabasca and the member 

from Cumberland are familiar with, since it directly affects 

their communities they represent. So: 

 

Companies respected the terms of their Human Resource 

Development Agreements by working co-operatively to 

maximize hiring, job advancement and training 

opportunities. 

[They] gave preferential consideration for Northerners in 

employment, particularly Northerners from Priority 

Recruitment Communities. 

Used best efforts to encourage contractors to provide 

recruitment preference to Northerners. 

Targeted entry-level and trainee positions for applicants 

from Saskatchewan’s North. 

[They] maintained northern offices and staff to assist in 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

northern recruitment and communication. 

Partnered with northern training agencies in delivery of 

training. 

[And they also] maintained union agreements that gave 

preference to Northerners and Aboriginal people in 

apprenticeships. 

[And they] advertised jobs in northern media and 

websites. 

[And they] held pre-employment assessment training for 

potential applicants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also have business initiatives, and these are 

from 2011 relating to capacity building. They’ve: 

 

Updated preferred supplier databases. 

Referred small contractors for subcontracting 

opportunities. 

Delivered Contractor Workshops. 

Held information sharing meetings with contractors and 

the public. 

 

And the economic impact is: 

 

$80 million in wages paid to northern employees. 

$481.8 million in goods and services purchased from 

northern businesses. 

 

And the goods are: 

 

15% of total goods were supplied by northern businesses, 

such as: explosives, fuels, lubes, solvents, filters. 

 

And the services were: 

 

52% of total services were supplied by northern 

businesses/joint ventures such as: camp services, 

underground mining, flights, freighting, professional 

consulting, business travel. 

$4.3 billion cumulative total on northern wages and goods 

and services purchased from northern businesses since 

1991. 

 

So they’ve had such a positive impact on northern peoples and 

the employment sector. 

 

Their business forecast for 2012 and beyond is for an increase 

in total wages of 7 million. And forecast for 2012 was total 

expenditures on goods and services is 1.2 billion, an increase of 

30 million from the previous year. And the forecast for 2013 for 

total expenditures on goods and services is 1.23 billion, an 

increase of 28 million from the previous year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this agreement that has been signed between 

Canada and China, and Canada, India in regards to uranium is 

going to positively impact the North and impact Saskatchewan 

and impact our economic outlook. 

 

I just wanted to read a little bit more about the economic impact 

of 2011. So they spent, combined with Areva and Cameco, 331 

million on salaries, wages, and benefits for its direct employees. 

And of this, 96 million was paid to residents of the 

Saskatchewan North. And the industry’s contractors paid out an 

additional 269 million to their employees. 

Mr. Speaker, of my family who work in the resource sector, a 

lot of them are looking to procurement opportunities and 

starting their own businesses. So that’s also going to have a 

ripple effect in our economic community. 

 

So income tax remitted on behalf of the mining industry direct 

employees was 111.1 million. Canada Pension Plan 

contributions were an additional 15.9 million, and Canada 

employment insurance payments were another 6.2 million. This 

is significant. And the value of goods and services purchased by 

the industry was 1.08 billion and over 75 per cent of this 

amount went to businesses based in Saskatchewan and 43 per 

cent went to businesses based in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Capital expenditures were approximately 2.63 billion while 

exploration expenditures were 33.5 million. Also the 

reclamation expenditures were 15 million. Total capital 

exploration and reclamation expenditures, excluding salaries, 

was approximately 2.68 billion. So taxes and royalties of 145.9 

million were paid to the province of Saskatchewan and 5.9 

million to local governments. Total taxes and royalties paid 

amounted to more than 151.8 million. 

 

Approximately 6.3 million was spent on licensing fees and 12.1 

million was paid in service lease fees; 4.5 million was donated 

to community and charitable organizations, and another 

340,500 was given as scholarships and other forms of support 

to contribute to the education of Saskatchewan’s youth. 

 

[11:00] 

 

So needless to say, the uranium industry and the impact of the 

uranium industry is quite significant in Saskatchewan, and I 

believe that it has a bright future with these agreements. 

 

The employment statistics, including contractors, was 5,162 

people. And the uranium industry directly employs 

approximately 2,595 people in Saskatchewan, and industry 

contractors employ an additional 2,567 people. 

 

And the reason why I’m going through all of these numbers is 

just to give you a picture of how the uranium industry affects 

Saskatchewan and affects Aboriginal people and the 

population. The resource sector in the last generation has been 

very good to First Nations and Métis people. 

 

So I wanted to talk a little bit about the environmental 

protection because that usually comes up when you speak about 

uranium and you speak about resource development. It’s 

committed to responsible environmental stewardship, and the 

industry directly employs 82 people whose full-time 

responsibility is to ensure that all operations meet strict 

environmental standards set out by both the federal and the 

provincial governments. Twenty-four hours a day, 365 days a 

year, comprehensive sampling, monitoring, and assessment 

programs are in operation to ensure that the physical 

environment is protected. All sites are subject to 

compliance-based monitoring. Water and air emissions from 

the mine and mills are tested on a regular basis to ensure that 

the contaminants, if any, remain within regulatory limits. The 

industry also performs environmental monitoring to ensure that 

plants, animals, and fish in the surrounding area are not 

adversely affected. 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

And the industry’s long-term goal is to return all operations as 

closely as possible to a natural state suitable for future uses. 

And all uranium mine site operators must issue a letter of credit 

with the province of Saskatchewan to ensure adequate funds are 

available for proper decommissioning of each site after their 

reserves have been mined out. The uranium mining companies 

are already working towards this long-term goal. In 2011 an 

approximately 15.3 million was spent on reclamation. 

 

So the radiation protection and workers’ safety is top priority, 

and the uranium industry directly employs 133 people working 

full time to ensure safe working environments exists for 

employees. All mine sites are monitored regularly to spot any 

potential hazards that may develop. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to put forth this motion: 

 

That this Assembly commends the federal government for 

signing recent memoranda of understanding with the 

governments of India and China, which will have positive 

implications for the province of Saskatchewan and our 

uranium development sector. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Saskatoon Fairview: 

 

That this Assembly commends the federal government for 

signing recent memoranda of understanding with the 

governments of India and China, which will have positive 

implications for the province of Saskatchewan and our 

uranium development sector. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion today 

allows us to talk about the uranium industry in Saskatchewan, 

and I think one thing that all people in Saskatchewan are proud 

of is the balance and the positive way that the uranium industry 

has developed in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think that many people recognize that during Premier 

Blakeney’s years is when the great expansion took place, and 

that expansion took place in light of the advice from the Bayda 

Commission. I always enjoy talking about the uranium industry 

and how it’s benefited especially the people of northern 

Saskatchewan but also the whole province because in my 

previous life, before I was in politics, I was a lawyer at 

MacPherson, Leslie & Tyerman. And I spent many, many years 

working with people within the uranium industry. 

 

One of my most interesting stories that I’d like to put on the 

record relates to the fact that in September of 1978, I travelled 

to Germany with the government contract from the Blakeney 

government to the Uranerz uranium company in Bonn, 

Germany to have them sign the contract that would have the 

province of Saskatchewan build the, at that point, $33 million 

Key Lake Road, which then opened up the Key Lake 

opportunity. And, Mr. Speaker, those types of activities that 

were done by the government in the ’70s are the decisions that 

laid the groundwork for the uranium industry that we have 

today. 

 

And so we know that over the decades there have been changes. 

And I know from my previous life how many hours and days 

and weeks and months various people spent trying to figure out 

how to price uranium, for example. That was one of the big 

issues in the early ’80s because the prices were so volatile that 

it was very difficult for uranium companies to borrow money 

from the bank to actually develop the mines. And we came up 

with a made-in-Saskatchewan solution which ultimately was 

also used to price oil in the Hibernia oil field. 

 

And so it’s not just on the innovation side as it relates to 

mechanical or engineering or other things that we have smart 

people. We have very smart people who work within the legal 

profession, the accounting profession, who worked out some of 

the instruments that allowed for the uranium mining in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The other point that I’d like to identify on an historical note is 

that my former colleague Keith Goulet was very much involved 

right from the start when he was elected with making sure that 

the appropriate agreements were in place with the development 

of uranium but also some of the other mining operations in the 

North to assure that there would be an appropriate percentage 

of northerners who would be hired in there. And I was very 

pleased to hear the previous member talk about the numbers of 

jobs that are part of the uranium industry and the mining 

industry and how it has changed the social situation of many 

people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Keith Goulet worked very, very carefully looking at 

international examples. And ultimately when the whole policy 

was in place in the Romanow years, that policy was adopted in 

many other parts of the world because of the ability that we had 

as a government then to work together with the mining 

companies to make sure that these jobs were appropriately 

allocated within the community. 

 

My understanding and my sense is that that continues and that 

the goals that are set out in those agreements are not always 

being met, but there’s a great deal of effort by Cameco and 

Areva, as the main companies, in making sure that the 

workforce is located as close to their operations as possible and 

also that the net revenues out of this are shared in a way. Now 

are there some other things that can be done? I think that there’s 

no question that everybody agrees about that. 

 

Now when we look at the uranium industry today, we know 

that there are huge international challenges, especially in light 

of the disaster in Japan, and that the processes involved require 

even further care as they’re developed. And part of our 

responsibility as Saskatchewan residents is also with the 

ultimate use of the product that is removed from our province. 

And I think that when federal agreements are entered into, like 

the ones that are listed here, we need to make sure that the 

Saskatchewan perspective on that long-term use of the uranium 

is respected. And we’ll continue to ask the questions around 

this. 

 

We know that this is a first stage in developing what’s 

happened here as it relates to these agreements with India and 

China. But ultimately it’s how this one-time resource can be 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

used appropriately for energy for the world that becomes the 

main question. 

 

Now as it relates to this whole area, we think that examining 

also the environmental impact in Saskatchewan but also the 

long-term worldwide environmental impact of the use of 

uranium has to be part of our discussion. We know that there 

are very capable people at our universities — actually both 

universities but primarily at the University of Saskatchewan — 

who are looking at a number of these issues around the 

long-term use of uranium. And the ideas go everywhere from 

never selling uranium, just renting out its use and then making 

sure that we ultimately control the end waste product, to setting 

up appropriate spaces for use of this. Now what we do know 

and what we have said is quite clear in Saskatchewan that the 

waste from some of the particular facilities that we have already 

should not be coming back into Saskatchewan. We will work 

with the industry around that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at these types of international 

arrangements, we also are aware that the province has hired 

assistance in dealing with some of the Canada-US [United 

States] issues which also relate to the uranium industry and that 

they have on retainer a lawyer, a law firm in Washington, DC 

[District of Columbia], which is called Nelson Mullins. And 

our main contact for Saskatchewan is Mr. David Wilkins. And 

it’s very surprising how often Mr. David Wilkins’s name shows 

up in different things. The Premier alluded to him in question 

period today as the person who had invited him to go down to 

the ALEC conference in Arizona. We know that Mr. Wilkins 

has been involved in a whole number of areas with our Premier. 

My understanding is that the province is paying $400,000 a 

year for this service — $100,000 every three months. 

 

And we know that, you know, often the province will look to 

hire a lobbyist, if we can put it that way, in Washington that has 

some positive relationship with the present administration. I 

think that maybe this is a situation where the Premier should 

review the use, given the recent election in the United States, 

because it would be appropriate for Saskatchewan to have 

someone who maybe presents a little more balanced view of 

what kinds of things we can do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, uranium is important for Saskatchewan. These 

kinds of deals have to be looked at very carefully to make sure 

that they have long-term benefits, and it’s important that 

Saskatchewan hires appropriate people to do the job of their 

lobbying as it relates to all of these issues. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in the 

House to support and commend the federal government on the 

recent memoranda of understanding with China and India, in 

which our uranium resources . . . which of course is an 

important part of our entire resource picture and sector in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the last 10 minutes, it’s unfortunate that I 

don’t know where the opposition is on this. I listened. I did. I 

really listened, and in the last 10 minutes I have no idea. The 

one thing I have found from the opposition is no matter how 

much things can be left unsaid, nothing is ever left unsaid, you 

know. So as long as proper protocols have been in place, which 

have been in place for 30 years or 20 years or 10 years because 

we keep updating them all the time . . . And they use the same 

old excuses, you know. And there are two parties represented in 

this House, and I would believe or I believed that both of them 

would be behind the people and the businesses and the province 

of Saskatchewan. You would think in these halls that would 

happen. Well, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t seem to be the case. 

 

The NDP — the Saskatchewan NDP and federal for that matter 

— still have doubts, continue to have doubts that Saskatchewan 

companies and Saskatchewan people can compete with safe, 

viable products on the worldwide stage. But I guess I should 

have expected that, given the NDP leadership’s silent support 

of Thomas Mulcair. Not one of these leadership candidates — 

two which would normally sit over there but aren’t — stood up 

for Saskatchewan and our resources when Thomas Mulcair 

called our resource sector a disease, a disease on the rest of 

Canada. Our uranium resources are part of this disease, 

according to NDP leader Mulcair. Mr. Speaker, what bothers 

me more is the fact that Mr. Mulcair insults and attacks the 

people that he continues to suggest that he supports. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, please allow me to explain the theory of 

Dutch disease to our many faithful viewers, probably 

thousands, maybe hundreds of thousands of viewers out there. 

If a country has a resource-based economy — resources such as 

uranium, potash, and oil — this country will have a more stable 

economy and will have the tendency to stay strong and 

competitive in the most difficult situations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, countries all over the world are in difficult 

situations. That’s happening today. Our dollar value, because of 

that, because of our strength, has stayed strong. And the NDP 

leader has said it’s because of the strength of the Western 

resources. Our resources, the same resources that allow us to 

balance the budget this year, the only provincial balanced 

budget this year, those resources . . . [inaudible] . . . disease. 

What Thomas Mulcair is forgetting — and I’m sure he’s just 

misreading about it in the newspaper — what he’s forgetting is 

that the USA [United States of America], our largest customer, 

the people who buy a lot of the products that we manufacture, 

are in a recession . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. No, he 

missed that somewhere along. 

 

But let’s just look at the results and forget about his misguided 

notions. The Canadian dollar has risen back up to historic 

levels. We’re not a 67-cent dollar. We were down there for a 

while, but we’ve come back up to historic . . . And you know, it 

happened that the Ontario and Quebec manufacturers and even 

some of our own were hampered when the dollar rose. It’s 

today . . . And the reason for that is because today it’s one of 

the strongest currencies in the world. And that, you know, I 

don’t know about you, but for me it’s a source of pride. I like 

that strong Canadian dollar. I’d love to see the dollar, you 

know, right in there, absolutely. 

 

But you know, the same old NDP values that told us, and I 

quote, ”Saskatchewan is a wee province that will always be in 

and out of equalization.” That’s one of my favourites. 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

An Hon. Member: — Who was it that said that? 

 

Mr. Phillips: — And he’s long gone . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes. And go ahead and let our children leave 

and, quote, “there will be more for the rest of us.” That was 

leadership. 

 

This resource-rich province with a skilled and hard-working 

labour force — ourselves, our kids, our children. Think about 

the people in the labour force. We’ll always be in and out of 

equalization. That’s what they told us. That’s what they told us 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well not anymore. Not when we 

have a Premier that stands up for Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, imagine a world. No. No. Imagine, not a 

world, a universe. Imagine a universe, a parallel universe that is 

so topsy-turvy, nonsensical, that somehow even in that world, 

somehow Thomas Mulcair became prime minister. How scary 

is that? How scary is that? How dangerous would that be?  

 

The official Leader of the Opposition says that our companies 

can’t compete on the world stage. He says that our workers 

can’t compete on the world stage — that’s what he’s saying — 

not if our dollar’s on par with the neighbours to the South. 

Mulcair’s answer is to drive down the Western economy, such 

as uranium and oil, so the dollar can drop again to 67 cents — 

two-thirds of the American dollar.  

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s a news flash for Mr. Mulcair: our workers 

and our companies can compete with anyone in the world, 

period — Saskatchewan companies like Brandt Industries who 

just broke $1 billion in sales; companies like Bourgault 

Industries, Doepker Industries, Cameco, Potash Corporation, 

and yes, ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] in the future. To suggest otherwise is a direct 

insult to our workers, to our businesses, to our economy. 

 

The NDP attitude is that goods produced in Canada can only be 

sold if they’re cheap, and that is insulting. Imagine how a low 

dollar value . . . You know, and at times it did discourage some 

manufacturing because with the low dollar we were able to sell 

without bringing our technology forward. And that was 

unfortunate. It was a natural thing that happened. But I suppose 

. . . Now what do we do? Do we fold our tents and go home? Or 

do we have confidence that our people, our business, our 

workers will get there and we will pull back out of it? 

 

I have tremendous confidence in our workers. Confidence. 

Wouldn’t that be a great word to hear from the opposition at 

some point? It would be different, wouldn’t it. Again I’ll repeat 

that the quality of our workers, of our unions, of our people out 

there working, of our agriculture, of our manufacturing, of our 

mining, they’re as good as anybody, no matter what we hear 

from the opposition. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, I understand why Mr. Mulcair 

would pit the East against the West. I understand that because 

in Ontario and Quebec they have 181 seats in the House of 

Commons. Out of those 181 seats, in the West — between 

Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and BC [British Columbia] 

— we have 92 seats. You know, with the Quebec-centred NDP 

federally, I can understand that. What I can’t understand is why 

the loyal opposition in Regina would not stand up for 

Saskatchewan workers, would not stand up for Saskatchewan 

resources and our companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in case there is any doubt, I will be standing up 

for Saskatchewan workers. I will be supporting Saskatchewan 

companies, and I will be supporting this motion. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to second the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to enter into this debate today. And I do want to review 

the motion because I think the speakers before us on the 

government side seemed to have glossed over a big part of it. 

The action word is commends. And they don’t talk about what 

this government, when they do these trade deals, what really the 

problems are. 

 

You know, our leader here, our leader here very eloquently 

stated our position, our record when it comes to uranium, when 

it comes to resource development. And we’ve been there for 

our province, standing up for our province over the past many 

decades, many decades. And so our record is straight. 

 

But I think when these members get up . . . And I just have to 

say for the member of Melfort, his old lines got older and more 

tired. And I was thinking, this guy’s only been here a few years, 

and he’s, you know, your lines, his lines are getting more and 

more tired. And then they kind of moved into fiction, straight 

fiction. You know, I couldn’t believe it. And I thought, is he 

borrowing speeches? His speech was roaming all over the 

place. I couldn’t tell whether we were debating this week’s 

motion or last week’s motion or he grabbed some paper off 

somebody’s desk or what he was really talking about. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know, they’re talking about, and as I 

said, the action word here is “. . . this Assembly commends the 

federal government for signing recent memoranda of 

understanding with the governments of India and China . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we have to take back and take a look at the 

process of how these have come about. You know, we have no 

problem, no problem at all in terms of promoting our resources. 

This in fact is what we should be doing. We should be doing it 

as well as we can and as strong as we can across the world. And 

we have done that as a government, and we think this is what 

government should be doing. 

 

But when you have trade deals that not many people know all 

the details, and when I look and I try to research what are the 

details about how these deals will come about, what are the 

details? They’re just not there. And we have a federal 

government, we have a federal government that seems to take a 

lot of pride in how they push things through. They’re known as 

the omnibus government. When we talk about the two bills, the 

one in the spring around the budget and now this one that’s in 

front of us, and we particularly talk about environmental 

protection. And this, this is really important. Now the member 

from Melfort’s not sure if he’s heard about these bills but 

because this is not . . . This is because they’re not paying 

attention to what’s happening in Ottawa. 

 

Today of all days, Mr. Speaker, and I think of today of all days, 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

today is National Housing Day. Today is National Housing 

Day. And this is a day that we should be looking to the federal 

government for leadership on this important, this important 

issue. But the federal government is silent when it comes to a 

strategy. Silent. There is no plan. 

 

There is no plan around housing in Canada, and it shows. 

Because there’s really no plan here in Saskatchewan. And you 

have cities and municipalities in this province who are saying, 

we need action from our senior levels of government. And yet 

this government here is silent when it comes to demanding that 

the federal government make a plan, make a plan, make a plan. 

But instead this government here is out to congratulate 

governments on things that are critically important.  

 

But today of all days we should be talking about housing. And 

we know that there are certain segments of people who are at 

risk because housing is non-existent. And whether it’s homeless 

or those who are at risk, you know . . . For example one of the 

key areas we should be talking about is Housing First for those 

who are at risk because of mental health or addictions — and 

again this week is National Addictions Week — we should be 

doing more of that. And yet this government is silent when it 

comes to urging the federal government to get their act 

together. And of course it shows about what happens here in 

Saskatchewan where you have segments of our population who 

are not getting their housing needs met because all the partners 

aren’t coming to the table. Here’s an issue that we should be 

talking about today, today of all days. But no, we’re not talking 

about that. 

 

In fact this government is focusing on commending the 

government on recent trade deals that we don’t know an awful 

lot about. Clearly we’re supporting any kind of work that we 

can see improvements in terms of our resource sector. But we 

also have some benchmarks in terms of what we expect fair and 

reasonable international trade deals to have. And first of all, 

they should be transparent and accountable. 

 

Now it seems to me this is something that this government has 

strayed away from — transparent trade deals, accountable trade 

deals in which people are consulted so people know exactly 

what are the details on these agreements. And the federal 

government has a habit of being silent on that and not wanting 

to share. In fact they, as I say, they have a tradition of bundling 

things together so that they’re so huge and rushed through that 

people don’t get the time to have the consultation that they 

deserve. And of course this government on this side knows all 

about consultation or lack thereof and how when they want to 

get their items rushed through . . . And I just only have to think 

about the labour deal that we have in front of us, this 90-day 

window from May 2nd to July 31st, write in your concerns and 

we’ll see what we can do about that. 

 

[11:30] 

 

There was no proper consultation. And again here’s these trade 

deals, not any kind of consultation process involved. We read 

about them in the newspaper, details are sorely lacking, media’s 

not really picking up on it, not asking questions, and we clearly 

want to know more about it. And particularly when we’re 

dealing with countries that are really very significant players in 

the international market. We should make sure we understand 

what the deals are that we’re getting into. 

 

So here’s this, I think, not-well-thought-out motion 

commending the federal government, when I would ask, do 

they know all the details? And neither of the speakers before us 

have talked about the details. They’ve talked about promoting 

the uranium develop sector and the mineral sector, and what the 

impacts might be for Saskatchewan. But we don’t know what 

those details are. 

 

And so we have a lot of questions about this, and I think this is 

our role as legislators are to ask those questions, are to ask 

those questions and say, so is this reflecting the priorities of the 

people here in this province? Clearly, economic issues are 

critical and we need to have that happen. But what do these 

trade deals really mean in terms of other issues?  

 

You know, I talked about housing today. I’ve talked a little bit 

about labour consultations, clearly a flawed consultation 

process. I hope this government hasn’t learned from the federal 

government how to hold consultations because clearly this 

government is in no position to give lessons or to be students of 

the federal government. 

 

Clearly in this country now we’re seeing and we’re hearing 

more and more that there aren’t proper consultations when it 

comes to issues. And many of us will remember for example 

the NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] trade 

deals that were in the ’80s. In fact there was a federal election 

fought over it because these things really matter. They really 

matter; they’re not just a one-off. And when you’re dealing 

with countries the size of China and India, with the kind of 

economic influence they have, we better get it right. We better 

get it right. 

 

And I’m not sure that this government has demonstrated or the 

government side of the House has really demonstrated or talked 

about in their speeches any of the details of the trade 

agreement. They’ve gone off . . . And particularly the last 

speaker just was a whole buffet of different lines from all sorts 

of past speeches but nothing about the trade deal, nothing about 

the specifics. and yet he’s willing to endorse it right off the bat 

without really looking at the details. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, clearly we can’t support this motion the way 

it’s written. I mean it’s up . . . You know, parts of it . . . Clearly 

our record speaks to what we believe about the resource sector 

and what our actions are. But when it comes to commending 

the federal government for signing these memos, memorandum 

of understanding, the details are not there. 

 

There’s not been enough public scrutiny about it. And if this 

government has more information, I’m looking forward to 

hearing it in the speeches that come forward on it. But clearly 

the two prior speeches have been sorely lacking on details. And 

clearly if this government thinks that the kind of consultation 

the federal government’s done on this is just right, then I can 

understand that by the way they hold consultations, particularly 

when you look at consultations around the new employment 

code. So, Mr. . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next speaker. I recognize the member for 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity to enter into this debate on uranium, the focus 

which will show the importance of this motion to enhance the 

quality of life across the province and beyond. The motion 

discusses the positive implications for the province of 

Saskatchewan and our uranium development sector. 

 

Uranium — the word evokes strong emotions, depending on 

what side of the House you sit on. However, Mr. Speaker, these 

are the facts: Saskatchewan produces 17 per cent of the world’s 

uranium and was the second largest producer in 2011 behind 

Kazakhstan. Uranium mines employ over 3,000 people in 

Saskatchewan, 50 per cent of which are from the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Cigar Lake is the newest uranium mine 

development. Several other projects continue to advance 

through the feasibility and environmental stages towards 

potential production. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers 

have a very good record on the environmental stewardship and 

protection plus worker health and safety. And our government’s 

goal is to ensure a fair return on resources for Saskatchewan 

people while maintaining economic competitiveness with other 

producing jurisdictions. 

 

Also Cameco is Canada’s number one employer of Aboriginal 

people. And, Mr. Speaker, I think future generations will have 

employment by growing the exploration and supporting 

research opportunities for this product. Our Saskatchewan 

values are demonstrated in this motion, Mr. Speaker. Quality of 

life, saving life, are factors in my supporting this motion. 

 

The member opposite said we are silent on social issues, but I 

believe our government’s voice, our motion, shows action, not 

just lip service. And, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Light Source is 

an excellent example of our prairie resourcefulness. The 

Canadian Light Source is Canada’s only synchrotron and has 

been recognized as a globally competitive academic, industrial, 

and government research facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition asked for specifics, and here are 

some of them. The successful operation of the Light Source will 

continue to advance our innovation agenda by supporting 

industry research and attracting top research talent. In total we 

will invest over 17 million for science and innovation initiatives 

this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I heard last night at the Canadian Western 

Agribition sponsors’ reception that our province is doing very 

well. There was a 20 per cent increase of exhibitors at the trade 

show, and one of the other sponsors told me 200 more head of 

cattle were in the barns. I believe agriculture issues and needs 

are to be met and balanced with a wide range of nuclear 

research opportunities in plant and animal science. 

 

As some of you know, I’m also a cattle rancher by trade, so this 

is very near and dear to my heart. As a former 4-H beef leader, 

I take great interest in seeing the next generation take part in the 

leadership role in Canada in the nuclear sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nuclear medicine is a very important aspect of 

uranium, with research centres focusing on nuclear health 

science. In the early 1950s, scientists at the University of 

Saskatchewan pioneered the use of cobalt for cancer treatments. 

This research will focus on nuclear science and engineering, 

materials, and neutron science and nuclear health sciences. I 

think these are the specifics that the opposition was asking for. 

 

I do hope our government continues to move forward with a 

commitment to build the investment in nuclear research. This is 

an investment in human life, Mr. Speaker. It’s saving life and 

there is no price on that. Research and development in medicine 

and new technologies to save people is a very fair return, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Achieving positive impacts in medicine and nuclear health 

sciences are very significant signposts on the road to helping 

our citizens of Saskatchewan and beyond. However, our most 

precious resource is our people, and I think the health 

implications in our research will be enormous. Our social 

conscience in meeting the needs of the people are very strong. 

And that’s what our government cares about — how our actions 

affect people in a very positive impact. Our actions affect those 

around us, and this motion, this very good motion, is a move in 

the right direction. Our actions show that we want to succeed. 

It’s not just lip service as the opposition has been doing. This 

motion is showing some action that we want to change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, radiation therapy is a cancer treatment and 

isotopes help treat cancer. Dr. David Scheinberg, chairman of 

the therapeutic centre at the cancer centre in New York stated, 

“A single atom delivered to a cancer cell can kill that . . . [all]. 

Nothing else approaches that.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, a mammogram was discovered in my mother 

several years ago and, with further treatment, my sisters and I 

were able to have her a few more years. And I’m very grateful 

for the research in nuclear science. And, Mr. Speaker, my 

mother would say, if she was here, continue this valuable 

research on all the diseases as it will save many more lives. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe this motion speaks volumes about 

humanity and our social conscience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding the U of S and uranium, everything is 

centred around the Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation. It’s 

located at the University of Saskatchewan. It’s very 

independent and it supports research, development, and training 

in nuclear medicine, innovation of advanced materials for 

aerospace and small-reactor designs, and will operate facilities 

such as a cyclotron for the production of radio scopes for 

medical imaging. Mr. Speaker, this cyclotron will also offer a 

wide range of research opportunities in medicine, plant and 

animal science, and materials science. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our future will be determined by our attitude, and 

we need to encourage development to see the potential of the 

province realized on a national and global scale. We cannot 

revert back to the old patterns of thinking that kept 

Saskatchewan a not province for so long. With our incredible 

resource base and work ethic that can rival any place in Canada, 

we are only beginning to tap the potential that for years existed 

just below the surface, not geologically, but in the attitude here 

as well. And this motion, in essence, is the sharing of success. 

It’s about building something bigger and better so that more 

Saskatchewan people can benefit. And that’s happening around 

Saskatchewan today, and we have the potential to keep it going. 

There is no standing still. 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

As parliamentarians we continually face great opportunities 

brilliantly disguised as insoluble problems, a fact that the 

opposition knows all too well. If we do not face them and move 

forward, these decisions are like rowing upstream. You advance 

or you lose all. There is no standing still. 

 

Sir Winston Churchill said, “A pessimist sees the difficulty in 

every opportunity; an optimist sees the opportunity in every 

difficulty.” And I reference Churchill because of his definition 

of socialism capturing the essence of how an ideology can stunt 

the growth of a province. And that is what happened to the 

opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to reach our full potential, and I will 

be supporting the motion made by my colleague and friend 

from Saskatoon Fairview. I do believe in moving the province 

forward. And the NDP’s history has been rather interesting on 

that — flip flop back and forth. Flip flop — they can’t decide if 

they are for it or against the uranium industry. 

 

Dwain Lingenfelter once quoted from November 8th 2005, I 

think . . . 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Regina Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, when debates arise 

in this House we hear from different people across the province 

where they say, you know, I was watching the debate but I had 

the sound down. And I actually enjoyed your performance 

better. And I’m not sure if I enjoyed the member’s speech 

better with the sound up on that one, Mr. Speaker, or with the 

sound down. 

 

But I guess the problem we have in this House — and this will 

sound maybe a bit particular or perhaps naive in some regards, 

Mr. Speaker — but the way that, the way that you can’t, you 

know . . . I shouldn’t be surprised that everything in the 

legislature is political, you know — surprise, surprise. But even 

on a resolution that should be as straight-ahead as this, Mr. 

Speaker, you know, we have the opening speech from the 

member from Fairview, a fair enough speech, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I’ll be able to get into some of the particulars of 

that speech. 

 

We had the speech from the member from Melfort . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . He’s apparently got his own camp 

followers over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Should he ever 

falter, they’ll be there to prop him back up, and as it should be. 

But you know, it’s too bad that some of the camp followers 

couldn’t get up and speak in this debate as well. I don’t know if 

they weren’t able to write enough speeches out of the caucus 

research office for them, but it was an interesting speech, Mr. 

Speaker, because it by and large evaded the topic in front of the 

House here today. 

 

And then of course we have the speech for the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers, where again, Mr. Speaker, there are some 

things that you’d like to think would be beyond politics in this. 

And certainly the member was moved talking about the impact 

that nuclear science and medicine has made on her family. 

And in Saskatchewan we have a very proud history of 

innovation and treatments being brought forward under nuclear 

medicine. And again you’d like to think that that could be 

beyond politics somehow. But of course it goes out to that, Mr. 

Speaker, and then it slides back into they’ve got to get some 

cheap shots off about different members of this legislature and 

on. And it’s sad, Mr. Speaker, because it cheapens what should 

be a fairly straight-forward topic. 

 

You know, I don’t know if this is like breaking news or 

anything, but we on this side of the House support the 

innovations that have been made in nuclear medicine. And 

we’re proud of them. And I think we joined with the province 

in mourning the passage of Lieutenant Governor Sylvia 

Fedoruk, a pioneer in terms of the research that went on in 

terms of the treatments available under nuclear medicine. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about, you know, we 

can talk about family members that have been affected by this, 

and certainly I’m no stranger to this. I too have had family 

members that have been impacted by the advances made in 

terms of the treatment of cancer. And again, Mr. Speaker, you’d 

like to think that those kind of things, we’d somehow be able to 

find an agreement on them. But we don’t. We find that time and 

again the members opposite get jacked up by their research 

staffers or I don’t know how this necessarily comes along, but 

you can’t have a straight conversation about anything on the 

floor, Mr. Speaker, and I find that disappointing. And I guess I 

should get over my disappointment because it’s, you know, 

ever has it been thus, I guess. But as an optimist, as somebody 

that is a hopeful person, I think as a positive person by nature, I 

keep hoping. I keep waiting to be surprised by members 

opposite and the way that they approach debates like this. But 

they keep living down to my expectations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So Saskatchewan and the history of uranium mining in this 

province is one that is, you know, decades long and goes back 

to the first sort of discoveries that took place. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of who was one of the main proponents of 

bringing the industry to Saskatchewan and exploring the 

potential around uranium mining, one of those individuals was 

Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker. And I think Tommy Douglas, as 

many have since then, approached uranium with the thought 

that this is a tremendous resource that brings with it tremendous 

responsibility and tremendous opportunity. And you’ve got a 

number of interests that you have to balance if you’re going to 

approach the question of uranium mining, the question of the 

uranium industry. You’ve got to keep those balances in mind if 

you’re going to do the opportunity justice, if you’re going to 

live up to the responsibilities that come with this tremendous 

resource that this province has been blessed with. 

 

And you know, the kind of role that uranium has played both in 

power production . . . I’ll talk about the impact it’s had in 

northern communities and throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the positive economic impact. You know, it 

defies belief to say that that is a history that hasn’t been without 

conflict, hasn’t been without disagreement, often passionate 

disagreement, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of the way that we as 

the province or that the Government of Saskatchewan needs to 

discharge its responsibilities as the steward of that resource, it 

defies credulity to think that you can do that without paying 

attention to some of the hard questions that arise when you’re 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

talking about uranium. 

 

When it comes to the economic development, Mr. Speaker, of 

course, this has been a boon for the province of Saskatchewan, 

and it’s been a boon for communities like Pelican Narrows or 

Sandy Bay or Patuanak or pick your community throughout the 

North, Mr. Speaker, where there are people working good jobs, 

making that paycheque, and making a difference for their 

family And very often, Mr. Speaker, those are First Nations and 

Métis families. And we know very well in Saskatchewan that, 

you know, there’s a tremendous challenge and a tremendous 

opportunity in terms of realizing that human resource potential, 

not just the way that it translates into economic gains or labour 

force gains, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the way that we as 

citizens in this province owe it to each other — that 

responsibility that we have to each other to make sure that a 

segment of the society is not left by the side of the road and 

passed by. 

 

And First Nations themselves, Mr. Speaker, I think about the 

role that then Chief Harry Cook played out of Lac La Ronge 

Indian Band. I think about the role that the Prince Albert Grand 

Council has played and continues to play in terms of the 

industry. I think about someone like Gary Merasty who’s a 

vice-president with Cameco and who’s offered his services to 

the province in many different ways in terms of public policy, 

and is currently the Chair of the task force on First Nations and 

Métis economic employment and education opportunities — 

closing the gap. I think about individuals like that. I think 

about, as my leader had referenced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Keith 

Goulet and the role that he played as a northerner coming from 

Cumberland House, and having come from education; and the 

supports and the demands that that individual placed on the 

industry to do better, not just for Cameco’s bottom line or 

Areva’s bottom line but for the northern people, for First 

Nations and for Métis, and to realize that opportunity. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, you’d like to see this approached in a 

non-partisan way. And again the action word, as was pointed 

out in the motion here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by my 

colleague from Saskatoon Centre, is “commend” the federal 

government. 

 

And I guess it leads me to one last question that I have, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, which is: how is it that when it comes to 

disagreements with the federal government, when the federal 

government which is, you know, stocked full of their cousins, 

how is it that when that government is doing wrong by the 

province of Saskatchewan and not addressing the issues of the 

people of Saskatchewan in . . . You know, just this day we had 

the Premier talking about the need to make up for the refugee 

health claims that the federal government very callously and 

inhumanely went ahead with cutting and then did a bunch of 

divisive direct mail on in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

You know, from that to shortfalls in terms of education funding 

for First Nations on-reserve, to housing, as my colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre pointed out, to . . . Pick your front, Mr. 

Speaker, where that federal government is not serving the issue 

and the interest of the people of Saskatchewan. You know, you 

hear not a whole lot from members opposite in terms of calling 

that government to account. But of course you always get the 

bouquets being served up in a motion like we have here today. 

So that the federal government is doing their job, you know: 

congratulations in terms of finding new markets. But they’ve 

got a responsibility to discharge. And that’s a responsibility that 

the people of Saskatchewan know well. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 

Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier has mused about a nuclear reactor for northern 

Saskatchewan. To the member from Saskatoon Fairview, does 

she agree? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

thank the member from Saskatoon Centre for that question. But 

I would like to speak first about Mark Twain. I love quotes. 

Everybody who knows me knows that. “Get your facts first, 

then you can distort them as you please.” So the members 

opposite seem to have a short memory. They forget their 

paternalistic attitude and subjugation of First Nations and Métis 

people, and their opposition to their resource sector reflects this. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is 

home to some of the largest and richest uranium deposits in the 

world. This blesses our province with ability to be a world 

leader in nuclear technology. Our government has committed to 

invest 30 million in the recently renamed Sylvia Fedoruk 

Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation. This world-class 

research centre will play a vital role in advancing safe, 

responsible nuclear technology that focuses on nuclear 

medicine, materials science, safety, and small-reactor 

technology. Yet the NDP leadership front-runner, Erin Weir, 

stated in his campaign platform that “The $30 million that the 

Sask Party has pledged to the nuclear industry at the U of S 

should be instead [be] invested in university research on 

renewable alternatives.” 

 

To the member from Regina Elphinstone, do you agree with the 

NDP leadership front-runner, Erin Weir, that Saskatchewan 

should not invest in nuclear medicine and technology? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — The question I have, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview, in terms of the short 

funding that First Nations on-reserve receive in this province 

from the federal government, I guess my question in response 

to what the member has to say, you know, why don’t they 

speak up about those things, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Is the member wondering if we’re in favour of nuclear 

medicine? Yes, we are. Are we in favour of research? Yes, we 

are. But when it comes to the other things that their cousins and 

that their federal leader engage in, Mr. Speaker, that 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

shortchange this province, you never hear anything about that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — To the member from Saskatoon Eastview: is he 

in favour of building one of these nuclear reactors in the 

constituency of Meadow Lake? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Eastview did not participate in the debate, and the question, he 

cannot . . . 

 

Mr. Nilson: — The question’s asked to the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’ll recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw South. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As the 

largest sector in northern Saskatchewan, mining has led job 

creation for more than a decade. Uranium mining alone 

accounts for over 3,000 jobs, nearly half of which are filled by 

people from the North. Almost 2 billion is currently being 

invested in northern mining, with another 6 billion projected to 

be invested over the next 10 years. 

 

The NDP refuses to stand up to their federal counterparts who 

think that our natural resources are a “disease.” To the member 

from Saskatoon Centre: why won’t you defend an industry that 

creates jobs and employs hundreds of people from northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, it’s interesting the members opposite of us seem to 

subscribe to that theory of abrupt appearance. Nothing 

happened in this province before November of 2007. 

Everything happened after that. Everything happened. All of a 

sudden, abruptly it was there. 

 

Our record is clear. But my question is for all the members on 

the opposite side: why not today on National Housing Day 

stand up, stand up for people who are homeless and demand a 

national housing strategy? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — This is a question for the member, this is a 

question for the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. Is she in 

favour of having one of these so-called small-nuclear power 

plants set up in her constituency to provide energy for her 

community? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that question of her and of all the members 

opposite because I think many times there’s a sense of, we 

should do this but don’t do it anywhere in our neighbourhood. 

So I ask the member of Saskatchewan Rivers: is she advocating 

for this in her constituency? 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A phrase 

comes to mind as soon as the opposition member says that: 

conquering fear is the beginning of wisdom. And I think we 

have to educate ourselves on nuclear energy. And I’ll refer back 

to my speech, the advancement of research in medicine, health 

science, plant and animal science. We care about the health of 

Saskatchewan residents and the impact of new developments to 

focus on medical isotopes and saving lives. Our social 

conscience just doesn’t talk the talk, Mr. Speaker, but we walk 

the walk by our actions. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from the 

Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A recent 

Conference Board of Canada report, Provincial Outlook, 

autumn 2012, states that Saskatchewan’s economy is on track 

to surpass Alberta’s as the fastest growing economy in the 

country, and that Saskatchewan’s “real economic growth will 

remain [at or] above 3 per cent through 2014.” Capital 

expenditures on our province’s potash industry as well as a 

strong performance from our natural resource sector will fuel 

this growth. 

 

Yet the NDP refuse to stand up for Saskatchewan’s natural 

resource industry. The Leader of the Opposition calls this 

success a myth, and their federal cousins think it’s a disease. To 

the member from Regina Lakeview: why won’t you stand up 

for a sector that employs thousands of Saskatchewan people in 

our province and is fuelling Saskatchewan’s economic growth? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my record in support of 

the resource industry and the development of resources in this 

province is very clear. I worked in that when I was in private 

business and as a lawyer, and I’ve worked in developing the 

policies that have been the very reason for the good economic 

activity in Saskatchewan. 

 

But the major problem is that many of the people of 

Saskatchewan are not sharing in that economy. They’re not 

sharing in the housing. They’re not sharing in the jobs. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a major problem for this government. And 

we are waiting for some kind of policy that deals with poverty 

issues, housing issues, so that we can tell the people of the 

province that everybody is included. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re 

hearing a lot about real economic growth and how we can 

develop the North and how this is important for Saskatchewan 

— all of these things. But we’ve got to talk about the priorities 

that are important for the people in Saskatchewan, really 

important for people in Saskatchewan. And if they’ve truly 



2150 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

been out talking to people in their ridings, they would know 

that. 

 

So my question is to the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 

When is she going to introduce a motion or resolution calling 

for a second bridge in Prince Albert? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I 

find it ironic the NDP can’t decide if they’re for it or against the 

uranium industry. And I’d like to quote Dwain Lingenfelter 

from November 8th, 2005, “I think we should be getting as 

much economic benefit from that as we possibly can get. We 

can do it by developing the Saskatchewan nuclear industry 

beyond just mining.” 

 

Now they go back to against. Peter Prebble, Hansard, 1979, the 

“ . . . Saskatchewan sale of uranium overseas is . . . an immoral 

act, an act over which the people of Saskatchewan may weep 

20 years from now . . .” And I would like to say another quote. 

This is also against. NDP policy on uranium mining in 1990 . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During today’s 

debate, the member from Saskatoon Centre said “we should be 

promoting our resources . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate 

has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 604 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Broten that Bill No. 604 — The Public Health 

(Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I really 

appreciate the opportunity to rise to talk on this issue. It’s a 

very important one and one that’s been in the news, and 

rightfully so, because it’s one that affects families, workers, 

young people right around the world. But here in Saskatchewan 

we have an opportunity to do something that is outstanding and 

meets the needs of so many folks and shows true leadership in 

the field of public health. 

 

So it is my honour to enter into this debate today around Bill 

No. 604, An Act to amend The Public Health Act, 1994 to 

provide access to information relating to Asbestos in Public 

Buildings. And much has happened, much has happened since 

November 1st when this was introduced first in the House and 

the speech that my colleague from Saskatoon Massey Place 

gave on November 8th. 

 

And so it is something special, and we really hope that we can 

see movement, more movement on this. Clearly I think that all 

members in the House see the value that something has to be 

done in this area. I know the government has done some things 

but we could be doing so much more. And so today I’ll reflect 

on that and reflect on some of the things that have happened 

and some of the things where we should go and why we should 

be doing exactly that. 

 

You know, interestingly, Mr. Speaker, when it was first read, 

Bill No. 604, the short title was The Public Health (Asbestos 

right-to-know) Amendment Act. But since that time it’s become 

known as Howard’s law because of what has happened 

tragically to Howard Willems since that time. Because as my 

colleague was giving his speech, just right around that time, 

Howard passed away. And that is a sad, sad thing and many 

folks felt the pain and expressed their condolences to the 

family, and I know that both sides of the House feel that way 

and the ministers have expressed that as well. 

 

It’s a tragic thing when we have something that — asbestos — 

that in so many ways was promoted unknowingly as something 

that would offer so much to the world of industry and to our 

modern world, but found out to be later such a deadly 

carcinogen. And that’s just a tragic, tragic circumstance that we 

are left now with a legacy of that, that houses, homes, office 

buildings, schools, hospitals, all have asbestos in various 

degrees if they were constructed prior to the ’70s. 

 

And it’s a sad tale of how things can go awry and we’re left 

with what to do with it afterwards, and many folks who are left 

to pick up the pieces and unknowingly suffer as Howard had 

done. He was an inspector that would go into many buildings 

and unknowingly was exposed to asbestos, and then many years 

later the results of that exposure came home to roost. And then 

just in a few short years, it played out to his death just a few 

weeks ago. 

 

So his family and many of his friends and many of his 

colleagues at work and many people in this province and 

around the country feel a deep, deep commitment to continue 

that work and making sure that we get it right. And there has 

been a lot of material, and I’ll review some of that material over 

the next short while here that we have in the House to talk 

about that. 

 

And we do want to just again pass our condolences on to 

Brenda, his wife, and the family. And of course on that day, on 

November 1st . . . It was a tragic set of circumstances that have 

played out over the last couple of weeks, but we hope that from 

that something positive can happen. I know that Howard, and it 

was remarked at his funeral last week, about how he was a true 

social activist — that he was working more not just for his own 

sake, not out of a sense of anger, not a sense of, why did this 

happen to me? Because he knew about asbestos before it 

happened to him. And that’s sort of the irony that many of us 

feel and we experience in this House when things happen to us 

that we’ve been working on, and then we get that personal 

connection and it strengthens our resolve to make sure we do 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

right. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say for Howard and his family that 

we will continue that battle. And I know that people like Bob 

Sass who has worked hard in this government, he was in the 

employ of the occupational health and safety section of the 

Ministry of Labour — Department of Labour as it was known 

then in the ’70s — and worked under Allan Blakeney and 

worked hard to develop leading legislation and regulations 

around occupational health and safety. 

 

And we think that’s just a recent time for many of us who are in 

this Chamber because we think of the ’70s as, that’s not that 

long ago. But at that time many of the things just weren’t dealt 

with, and asbestos was one of them. And of course Bob led the 

way in terms of having registries done and making sure people 

knew where they were, but they were internal. They were 

internal to government and how to handle it was internal. And 

so clearly there was more work to be done and he would be the 

first to say that, and that’s why he still plays a leadership role in 

this area and he feels so very, very strongly about that. 

 

Of course people were introduced in the House on November 

2nd. Marianne Hladun, the vice-president of the Prairie section 

of Public Service Alliance of Canada, of which Howard was a 

member. And he was very active in his union, and that’s how I 

believe Marianne got to know Howard and Brenda — but not 

only that, they were good friends. I know they’ve done so much 

work. Particularly, I know Marianne would be thinking a lot 

about this today in terms of Ukrainian issues, and Nashi is an 

area that, a cause she feels strongly about. But she feels equally 

strongly about that, and was here. 

 

Howard’s sister was introduced, Audrey Berlovan. And Audrey 

gave a powerful, moving speech to the SFL [Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour] that actually — I believe it was on the 

Wednesday morning — talking about Howard and his struggle. 

And then they had a fundraising drive to help the organization 

for asbestos, SADAO [Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease 

Awareness Organization]. And it was amazing to see how the 

people came forward to support that effort and making sure that 

the call for an asbestos registry does not fall silent but it has the 

necessary resources to move forward. 

 

And so I just want to acknowledge those folks. And Jesse Todd, 

Howard’s son, and his daughter-in-law was here as well to see 

my colleague and his first reading and the bill come forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot to say about this. I want to take a 

moment to take a look at Bill No. 604. And it’s interesting 

because, as I will reflect today, some of it’s not current, the 

whereases, just because so much has happened. But I do think 

it’s important to go through it. The preamble talks about: 

 

WHEREAS the Government of Saskatchewan has lists 

respecting public buildings that contain asbestos; 

 

WHEREAS these lists must be accessed individually 

through freedom of information requests pursuant to The 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act; 

 

WHEREAS asbestos that is not properly encapsulated 

poses a public health risk;  

And that’s a given. We know that it must be properly 

encapsulated. 

 

WHEREAS the availability of information about asbestos 

allows individuals to make informed decisions regarding 

their health and safety. 

 

I want to go back to the fact that now we know that the 

Ministry of Labour actually has created this. I believe it was on 

November 10th or 12th, created a public registry where they put 

the list and — that actually Howard and SADAO had called for 

— had published them, put them up on the Internet. Now 

interestingly, I had seen those lists. And of course they were 

scanned and put up, and they’re not very accessible. I don’t 

know if you’ve had an opportunity to read them. They’re not 

like a database where you could search for Saskatoon schools. 

You would have to read the whole list and see what’s in 

Saskatoon. Now schools aren’t on that list because they’re not a 

provincial government building. They belong to the local 

school boards. But for example, that’s not on that list. And I 

also believe, and we’ll be asking about this further, but Sask 

Housing unit buildings are not on that list too. I’m not sure why 

that’s the case. But some things are not on. 

 

[12:15] 

 

But they’re not easily accessible. You know in this day and age, 

when we see websites and databases that are really engaging, 

easy to read, and helpful to the reader, so you get the 

information you get, this is kind of the opposite of that. It’s the 

opposite of that. It’s very hard to read. It’s grainy. You have to 

know what you’re looking for. It’s not helpful. 

 

And I know, and we’ve had questions and I’ll maybe get to this 

further down the road, but we’ve asked the minister about 

asbestos several times. In fact I asked him last March about 

this. And it was asked again in early November. And of course 

his response, and it has been a consistent response — but we 

disagree with it fundamentally — is that he says it’s best 

practices not to let people know. That everyone should just 

make an assumption that if it’s an older building then you 

should assume that it’s got asbestos and you should be aware of 

that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of things that we have . . . 

Several parts of that argument we think is false or faulty, 

because not everyone can estimate the age of a building 

properly. When you’re saying the cut-off is the late ’70s, how 

can you tell a building that was built in ’85 versus a building 

that built in ’75? We’re not all that up on architectural styles, 

and they may look all the same, you know. So there’s some 

problems with this. An older building may look newer. It 

depends how they’re kept up, if they’ve been modified, if 

they’ve done anything to the facade. So you really can’t tell the 

age. So if he’s implying that somebody should ask about the 

age of the building, then that’s false. 

 

As well, you know, Mr. Speaker, not many people really are 

aware of asbestos and are aware of where asbestos is. And 

there’s many myths about asbestos. So if it’s left up to the 

individual to become an asbestos expert, they may not. And I 

think that if we have a good registry, then with an engaging 

platform where people want to read or feel these are things we 



2152 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

should know about buildings, then we could go a long way in 

educating the public. We could go a long way to educate the 

public. And I think that’s important. I think it’s naive just to 

assume that we will let people really essentially fend for 

themselves. I think that that’s laden with problems and it’s just 

. . . I’m not sure, when the minister or the ministry talks about 

best practices, what they’re referring to, and if this is an 

established best practice and whether it is actually hard 

research. Is there research that people behave better when they 

don’t know hazards than they do know hazards? It doesn’t 

make a lot of sense. It doesn’t make a lot of sense that if people 

aren’t aware of hazards, that they will engage in behaviours that 

will protect them from that hazard. So I don’t know where that 

that kind of line of thinking is coming from. 

 

And I think that really in many ways I know that too, that there 

seems to be some concern about liability, that if the government 

starts identifying all the buildings and the state of asbestos in 

the building, then that’s a problem because of liability. I don’t 

necessarily agree. Again it’s the style and clarity on the website 

about this, is how this database should be read, that everybody 

should have some caution but that these are the buildings with 

asbestos; these buildings do not have asbestos. And if they do 

have asbestos, what is the current state of the asbestos? Is it 

encapsulated or not? 

 

So I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not, it’s not too much to 

assume that the public, if they’re using a platform that is well 

engaged, a website that’s well engaged and easily read, that 

people will appreciate that. And those who have come there for 

that knowledge will say, I can find out what I need to find out 

and I have a sense of comfort with that. 

 

So I think this needs, I think it needs to be . . . The current 

website that the government has, while it’s a step forward, I 

think that it could be done so much better. And I’ve taken a 

look at the health region from Regina, their contribution to it as 

well. And again it’s more scanned documents, and I think that it 

needs to have much more attention. 

 

I don’t know whether somebody has been assigned to this, 

whether it’s a full-time position or whether it’s something that’s 

done off the side of the desk, whether it’s been looked at since 

it went up. Because clearly it may be that the government feels 

it’s up and now it’s done and it won’t need to be updated until 

the next person asks for more information. 

 

So I think that speaks to the whereas, and again I just want to 

say, “Whereas the availability of information about asbestos 

allows individuals to make informed decisions regarding their 

health and safety.” Clearly in this day and age we know people 

really do want the information. They really do want the 

information. And they don’t want to have a government make 

those decisions for them and say, it’s better you don’t know. 

It’s better you don’t know. No, I think it’s better that they do 

know and they can act accordingly. 

 

So what this goes on to call for, and of course I said the short 

title is The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment 

Act. It’s interestingly since Howard’s passing that there has 

been a movement afoot that wants it to be known as Howard’s 

law, and I think that’s a fair thing. I think that’s important 

because Howard in so many ways was the face of this 

movement and I think will continue to be the face of this 

movement. Because when we tragically feel what Howard and 

his family have gone through, we all ask ourselves, do we want 

this to happen repeatedly again and again in Saskatchewan? 

And unfortunately it does. Unfortunately it does, you know. 

 

On April 28th we will have the reading of the names of people 

who’ve died because of a workplace . . . because of the 

workplace. I won’t say it’s an accident because that kind of 

implies that something happened. But in Howard’s case and 

many people’s case, there was no accident. They just happened 

to come in contact with something that should have been 

encapsulated or should have been protected. So, Mr. Speaker, 

last year we knew there were 14. I don’t know how many there 

were this year, but clearly each one of those families feels the 

pain of what this means. They’re very aware of what asbestos 

can do to a family and what it can impact them in terms of 

whether it’s a father or a brother, sister or mother. It’s important 

that we do this type of thing. 

 

Goes through this, and it’s an amendment to The Public Health 

Act. And that’s very interesting and I think rightfully done so. I 

know that there was some discussion. We had met with Bob 

and Brenda and Howard on this issue, and when Cam and I 

talked about this, we talked about the various ways, what would 

have the best impact for the people of Saskatchewan. And of 

course some people think it might be best with labour and be 

best with occupational health and safety. And that would not be 

a wrong place to go, but it would be limiting the number of 

people who would be impacted by this. And clearly 

occupational health and safety has limited resources as well. 

We know that in terms of the number of inspectors that they 

have, the impact could be much better felt if right across the 

province we had health inspectors look after this and public 

health people. 

 

And you look at who’s calling for this, and I know my 

colleague talked about the medical, CMA, the Canadian 

Medical Association, and the cancer, Canadian cancer 

association, are very aware of this issue and are calling for, 

calling for more work to be done in this area. 

 

So that’s why it is part of The Public Health Act. I think it’s 

critical that we realize this has moved beyond just to workers, 

but it’s about workers’ families. It’s about kids in schools. It’s 

about people in hospitals. And of course we had the situation 

last year of potential problems in Humboldt with St. Mary’s 

Villa. And so we just have to be aware of that and be cognizant 

of it. It’s much bigger than just a workplace thing, even though 

the workplace is a critical place and we’ve seen so many people 

come into contact and pay a horrible price for that. 

 

So we’re glad to see it go into the public health amendment 

Act. And it’s interesting because we really have two ministers 

involved now, because we’ve both the Health minister, who 

administers, who’s responsible for The Public Health Act, and 

the Minister of Labour, who’s involved through occupational 

health and safety, and the people who’ve led and been 

responsible for this file to date. But we are hoping to see more 

and more that it will become a public health issue and take on 

its bigger role in health because of its place in public buildings 

and that it becomes, people become aware of it in their own 

homes. 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2153 

Now as you know, that . . . So what this talks about, it talks 

about asbestos and how it’s defined in The Occupational 

Health and Safety Regulations, talks about an: 

 

“electronic registry” means a website or other electronic 

means where information regarding public buildings that 

contain asbestos and the details of its encapsulation is 

maintained. 

 

So that’s what that’s about. It talks about public buildings 

because we’re not talking about private buildings. We’re 

talking about public buildings: 

 

owned and operated by the Government of Saskatchewan, 

including Crown Corporations; 

 

[and as well] owned or operated by a regional health 

authority as defined by The Regional Health Services Act; 

 

that house a school or educational institution that comes 

within the ambit of The Education Act, 1995. 

 

So we’re really talking about those. The Government of 

Saskatchewan is a big player, obviously clearly that. And as 

well, the health buildings that are owned or operated by the 

regional health authorities because they have so many. We 

move beyond much more than hospitals. It could involve 

clinics. It could involve long-term care facilities, that type of 

thing, and that they clearly need to be part of that. And as well, 

schools because clearly our most vulnerable are youth. We sure 

hope they’re not coming in contact with asbestos. But we hear 

that there are schools out there that still have issues with 

asbestos. 

 

And it is a challenge because we actually . . . And I’m a big fan 

of old schools. And we had a class here yesterday from Caswell 

and, as I said yesterday that I taught in that school and my kids 

went to that school. And I can still see the water pipes 

underneath there, wrapped up in insulation. And I can still see 

the letters, asbestos, on there. And you walk by that and you 

know, but I love that old school and I sure would hate to see 

anything happen to it. But we’ve got to take care of that and 

make sure it’s done well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is important. And then the 

minister, this is the action: 

 

The minister, in accordance with this section, shall make 

information available through a website or other electronic 

means regarding public buildings that contain asbestos. 

 

And: 

 

Every registry or listing of public buildings that contain 

asbestos that are currently in the control of the 

Government of Saskatchewan or any of its agencies shall 

be made available on the electronic registry mentioned in 

subsection (1). 

 

Now as I said, and I see the minister . . . We’ve got many 

ministers in the House but as again, I don’t think Sask Housing 

units are on that list. When we looked over the list it was 

interesting, and you know I have an eye for Sask Housing. I 

didn’t see that Sask Housing buildings were on that list. Now 

I’m not sure why that was missing in the original freedom of 

information request from the government. 

 

It was good that we . . . I know Howard and Bob and Brenda 

were very surprised at the speed in which they got that 

response, which is a good thing. But we then saw some holes in 

it and we don’t know why that is. Sometimes when you ask a 

freedom of information request, if you don’t word it just right, 

because Sask Housing we know is not what we think of a 

Crown in the sense of SaskTel or SaskPower — more of an 

agency. So I don’t know why that is the case but we’ll be 

asking more details about that. 

 

So that’s the review of the bill and we think that it’s important 

that we get this right. 

 

[12:30] 

 

But you know, we’ve spent many times talking about this piece 

of legislation in the House. And as I said, you know, the 

minister has often talked about, and I just want to quote from 

November 1st when the Minister of Labour, and he said that in 

his answer, and I quote: 

 

The concern that they have with maintaining a central 

registry is it may create a false sense of security. The 

assumption should be there that whenever dealing with a 

building that there is asbestos there and that appropriate 

steps be taken . . . [and] that people ought not rely on a 

registry that may be incomplete or may not have accurate 

information. We know that the vast majority of our 

schools that were built during the 1950s and 1960s contain 

asbestos. 

 

And now he talks about working and maintaining good 

practices in that area. But again, that I just feel that we cannot 

rely solely on the idea of assuming that people who are coming 

in the buildings are aware of asbestos. They may just not even 

have . . . [inaudible] . . . Now he says ’50s, ’60s. And if you 

know Caswell School and other schools in my riding, they’re 

not built in that generation. They were added on. There was a 

renovation that caused them to have the asbestos in there. 

 

I want to take a minute. I want to talk a bit about the editorial 

that appeared in The StarPhoenix because I think that was a 

very thoughtful editorial, and it’s really helpful when you have 

that third perspective. You know, we’re in here, and as you 

know, we have the thrust of debate and we take sides and 

sometimes we get too wrapped up. And it’s also very good to 

have a perspective, somebody else’s perspective. And I 

appreciate editorials. I may not agree with them, and clearly 

they’re there to spark more thought, more reflection on the 

issue. 

 

So I think we’re glad to see that the papers are thinking that this 

is an idea that we should take a look at. But of course they want 

it to go farther. So if I can quote a little bit from this, I think it 

would be helpful because again as I said, you know, since this 

month, the first of the month, this has been quite a month for 

asbestos and bringing it to the forefront, and the kind of things 

that have happened. 

 



2154 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2012 

But this was an editorial that was from the 15th of November, 

and I’ll just quote directly from it. This is The StarPhoenix on 

page 10: “Asbestos list no panacea.” And it says, and I quote: 

 

Rather than simply create a registry of buildings, it would 

be far more useful to require the listing to describe just 

where the asbestos-containing material is located, along 

with any measures taken to mitigate the risk of exposure. 

Also required should be regular inspection and testing of 

sites that contain asbestos, and to list on the public registry 

the date of such inspections. 

 

So again this speaks to my point that it’s more than just to say 

we’ve done it and walk away from it. You know, we’ve done 

that with too many things where really there needs to be . . . 

This is a serious, serious health hazard, public health hazard. 

And if we can turn this around and have more confidence in our 

public buildings because we know we’ve got the right thing, 

we’re doing the right thing when it comes to asbestos, that 

would be great. 

 

So what they’re really doing is calling for a more rigorous, 

more full, more robust registry: one that is used, one that’s 

maintained, and not one that’s just put up one day and then 

said, you can do your search there. And I think that’s actually a 

good idea. 

 

Now obviously when we put private member bills out in front, 

it’s a starting place. We think that we want to see that. But you 

know, and I believe the Deputy Speaker has put private member 

bills out there, so you’re aware of the limitations of that. 

There’s a money cost to it, so we can’t be saying you should 

hire somebody to do this. That would be . . . We couldn’t do 

that. 

 

But I think we should pay attention to this idea. I think the 

registry should be, it should be a source of pride in this 

province. And people should say, take a look at our website and 

how we describe where asbestos is, what the state of the 

asbestos is in our public buildings. And it could be a source of, 

you know, this is what we feel. This is an indication of how we 

believe public health should be handled in Saskatchewan. And I 

think that we have a lot of the tools already in place. It just 

needs more work. So I think in many ways this editorial’s right 

on. But I want to read the last paragraph: 

 

The death of Mr. Willems and 14 others in Saskatchewan 

in the past year of asbestos-caused illnesses speaks to its 

deadly and long-lasting legacy, and the need for decisive 

action to mitigate its impact. However, creating a 

mandatory registry of buildings by itself isn’t going to 

prove particularly useful. 

 

And in many ways I agree with that because we need to do 

much more. We need to do much more. Our work of being 

vigilant is critical in this area. Who knew that we would be 

dealing with this kind of crisis, you know, 50 years ago? And I 

don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you’ve ever been to one of 

the asbestos mines in Quebec, Thetford Mines. I’ve been able 

to drive by and to see the town in the Eastern Townships. It’s 

quite amazing actually. My wife and I were driving through. 

Beautiful, it’s absolutely a beautiful place, a part of Quebec, the 

Eastern Townships. And then as you’re driving into Quebec 

City, you’ll go in past the mine sites. 

 

And of course, you know, it sort of speaks to what we have to 

be careful with. If I may go off on a tangent here, we have to be 

careful with, in Saskatchewan, when we start talking about 

resource extraction. We have to make sure it’s safe. And we 

have done that in many ways. We have to keep that vigilance 

up. But in Quebec they’ve paid a horrible price for going down 

that road of asbestos mining because on one hand they thought 

they were very fortunate in that they had really a monopoly on 

the world’s market of asbestos, and only later were we able to 

determine that wasn’t such a good thing. And you see towns 

that were based around it. 

 

Thetford Mines is one where if you go in, I believe there’s two 

or three mine sites there and they’re open-pit mines. And if 

you’ve probably seen open-pit mines in the North with uranium 

where they’re huge. They’re so big. I mean it’s hard to get a 

scale to them. But it’s open-pit and they just go down and 

down. It’s like drilling into the ground. And you wonder when 

you see these things, what were they mining here? What were 

they mining? And then you find out asbestos and the tragic 

legacy of that. 

 

And of course, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do feel . . . 

We understand that, you know, in the race to support 

economies and the resource sectors are usually seen as such an 

important part, but we must remember public health. We must 

keep public health front and centre. And so this is why I think 

that at this part of our . . . You know, the world’s experience 

with asbestos and how we’ve come to determine that it’s such a 

deadly carcinogen that we must do the right things. 

 

And so I think that as we, at this end of the tunnel, we can say 

we’d better start getting our registries together, and they’d 

better be rigorous and they’d better be full. And if we take cues 

from — whether it’s the World Health Organization or whether 

it’s the CMA or the Canadian Cancer Society or The 

StarPhoenix editorial board — they’d say, you know, we really 

have to wake up to this deadly legacy that we’ve got on our 

hands. And it’s right around the world, but we could play a real 

leadership role here in Saskatchewan by doing the right thing, 

passing this private member’s bill and even enhancing it. 

 

I would call to say that we should go further than this, that in 

fact what The StarPhoenix is calling for would be only, you 

know, would be the best thing to do. But we have to get that 

platform. We have to get a website. We have to make it easily 

read. We have to make sure that people, when they go to it, 

there’s an ease to read it so they don’t get misinformation or 

they’re not overwhelmed by it and say, you know, it’s not being 

handled at all because I do believe that actually in the schools 

and in our health sector and our public buildings, that actually it 

is being looked after. And I think that, Mr. Speaker, it’s an area, 

it’s actually our moral responsibility to do this. 

 

I don’t know the other 14 people but when you look at the 

impacts it can have, and that’s only just for the past year. You 

think of the number of years where this has happened. And you 

know, we just hear tragic stories about kids playing in open 

storage units where the insulation was asbestos, and they saw 

the white fibres flying. We need to clearly have to do more. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that as we go forward and as we’re 



November 22, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

in the final weeks of the session here before we end for 

Christmas, I think it would be absolutely the right thing to do. 

 

So I think that we need to do more. I think that while the 

government has put together this voluntary registry as a signal 

that they’re going to be engaged in this, and it’s a good step 

forward, but clearly we can do so much more. And I really hope 

that we can get more resolution between who’s really the leader 

here. 

 

I’m hoping that the Ministry of Health will take the leadership 

because it is a public health issue. It’s a public health issue. 

And while the good folks over at the Ministry of Labour have a 

lot of expertise to bring to the table, I think that we need to start 

thinking more on a broader perspective of this and really see 

that we can take this further down the road because I know this 

is what Howard and his family would want. But it’s not out of, 

as I said, anger or a sense of vengeance, they are deeply 

committed to righting wrongs that have been done in our 

society, whether knowingly or unknowingly. We all know that 

this is out there. We all know this is a problem, and so we must 

act accordingly. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, one of my quotes that I live by is 

Martin Luther King who once said, it’s not the evil or the 

actions of the evil people that we have problems with because 

we know what they’ll do. They will do the bad things. They 

will do the bad things. It’s the appalling silence of the good 

people that we have to worry more about. 

 

So in this House of 58 people, clearly it’s our moral 

responsibility to do the right thing and to pass Bill No. 604 and 

then to take it even further, take the cues, the points that The 

StarPhoenix has raised and others have said. We need to make 

sure we get this right, and I think it’s only appropriate that we 

do that. 

 

So I’d encourage everyone in the next week or two to think 

more about this and, if we can get a chance to vote for this, I 

know we would be very happy to see this move forward as 

quickly as possible. I would urge us to do exactly that. We have 

acted in a co-operative manner before, and we’ve actually been 

recognized and commended for doing that. If there’s areas of 

common ground where we can do the right thing, I think it’s up 

to us to do the right thing. And we should be doing that. 

 

I think that we’ve laid aside those arguments around what the 

best interests of people are to not to know. Nobody’s defending 

that position anymore. Everyone is saying that we really should 

be doing as much as we can to resolve this deadly legacy that 

we have and that we can do. It’s unfortunate because we know 

there’ll be more deaths due to asbestos, but if we can curtail 

that and help that out a bit, then I think that’s our moral 

responsibility to do that. And particularly if it comes to seniors 

who are in long-term care homes or if they’re in hospitals or if 

they’re in schools or if they’re in the workplace, it’s something 

that we should all strive to make sure we have that done. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we have this unfortunate, unfortunate 

other legacy that we have such a high injury rate and 

death-in-our-workplace rate in Canada. And this to me would 

be a clear signal that we are taking our responsibility to keep 

our workplaces and our public places as safe as we can. 

So with that, I know that many of my other colleagues will 

want to speak to this bill, Bill 604, An Act to amend The Public 

Health Act, 1994 to provide for access to information relating 

to Asbestos in Public Buildings. It’s a very outstanding bill. It’s 

one that I think we need to pass, we need to act on. Much has 

happened since the introduction of the bill but there’s much 

more that we can do, and I think that we should do what we can 

to pass Howard’s law. So, Mr. Speaker, what I’d like to do is 

now adjourn debate on Bill No. 604. Thank you. 

 

[12:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 604. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the participation of members in the Holodomor 

ceremony, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this Assembly does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. The Assembly is 

adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:45.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2131, 2132 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2139 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2132 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Housing Day 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2132 

 International Holodomor Remembrance Week 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2132 

 Shannen’s Dream Walk and Rally 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2133 

 Huskie Coach Recognized by Football Canada 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2133 

 Girl Guides Honours and Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2133 

 Youth Action for Prevention Program 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2134 

 Kal Tire Distribution Centre 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2134 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 College of Medicine Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2134 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2134 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2135 

 Support for Early Learning 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2136 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2136 

 Support for Low-Income People 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2137 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2137 

 Attendance at Conferences 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2138 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2138 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 77 — The Horse Racing Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2139 

 Bill No. 78 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2012 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2139 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Effect on Saskatchewan of Federal Agreements with India and China 

  Campeau ........................................................................................................................................................................ 2140, 2148 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2142, 2149 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2143 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2144, 2148 

  Wilson ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2146, 2149 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2147, 2148 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2148 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2149 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2149 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2150 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES — SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 604 — The Public Health (Asbestos right-to-know) Amendment Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2150 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


