




















































Hansard: November 14, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 12A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1921 

 November 14, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s an honour 

to introduce a guest that has joined us. He is seated in your 

gallery. He is Mr. Peter Kujawinski, who is the consul general 

of the United States of America to our country. And obviously 

he’s visiting our province both for meetings today, and I’ll have 

a chance to meet with him tomorrow. This is the consul 

general’s first visit to the province of Saskatchewan and to our 

Legislative Building, and we hope he will return frequently for 

ongoing discussions, and as we further this relationship 

between our two countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he is a career diplomat, having joined the United 

States state department in 1998. He has been posted to US 

[United States] embassies in France and Israel and to the US 

delegations to the United Nations Security Council in New 

York. He served in the US embassy in Haiti as a political 

counsellor and coordinator of US assistance promoting 

governance and the rule of law. 

 

He’s going to be meeting with a number of provincial and 

community representatives including the Minister of 

Agriculture, the Minister of the Environment, and the Minister 

Responsible for Energy and Resources and for Trade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t need to tell members in this House how 

important the relationship is between our country, indeed our 

province, and the United States. Last year Saskatchewan 

exported $17.2 billion worth of goods to the US. It’s actually a 

23 per cent increase from the year before. And on the other side 

of the coin, we bought about $8 billion worth of US goods into 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by way of perspective, by way of context, it’s 

important to note that the state of Illinois — and I think the 

consul general’s from Chicago — the state of Illinois represents 

$55.8 billion in Saskatchewan exports. That actually is three 

times larger than our entire trade with China. So the 

relationship is the most important one we have with respect to 

trade. We look forward to it continuing and of furthering the 

relationship to the mutual benefit of our two countries and the 

province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join in 

on behalf of the opposition and welcome the consul general to 

Saskatchewan. If this is your first visit, I know what you will 

find in Saskatchewan, that many of us have American roots 

back in our ancestry because so many people who settled 

Saskatchewan came via Chicago, via Iowa, Wisconsin, 

Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota. 

And so practically you have many, many friends and probably, 

if you look a little bit carefully, you may even find some 

relatives. So I think that’s important because the trade 

relationship that we have as Saskatchewan people with United 

States is crucial to our future, but I think it’s also crucial to the 

future of the US Midwest and all of the United States. And I 

know that’s why you come to the job that you have in Calgary. 

It’s a very important one, and we welcome you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, it is an honour to 

introduce my friends and their daughter, seated in your gallery. 

No stranger to this province is Dan Rashovich, wife Laura, and 

daughter Olena, recently moved back from Calgary. Give us a 

wave. Dan played for the Riders for 13 years, was a teammate 

with the member from Regina Dewdney; might be a few stories 

there we’ll hear later. Culmination of his career led to his 

induction into the Riders’ Plaza of Honor in 2011. 

 

The one sidebar here, the day after the ceremony, a wee bit late, 

Dan had promised to door knock for me. And the deal was he 

could quit when he got someone to take a lawn sign. Well I can 

report that Dan was one for one — one house knocked and one 

lawn sign. Probably helped that the house had a Go Riders Go 

sign in the window. 

 

Laura is a great clinical and diagnostic social worker, and Olena 

is a future Olympian, presently with the Dolphins and takes 

Ukrainian dancing with Tavria. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members of this Assembly to welcome 

Dan, Laura, Olena, back to Regina and to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature, 17 grade 5 and 6 students from École Connaught 

Community School in Regina Lakeview. They’re accompanied 

by their teacher, Jacqueline Roy, and Jackie Jerret, and Scott 

Mazur. And so I ask all members to welcome. They’re seated in 

the east gallery. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you I have the pleasure of 

introducing a number of guests seated in the west gallery, and I 

would ask them to stand or give us a wave when I say their 

name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today is World Diabetes Day and we have a 

number of events planned this afternoon at the Legislative 

Building. And I’m very pleased to be able to introduce the 

president and CEO [chief executive officer] of the Canadian 

Diabetes Association, Mr. Michael Cloutier; the vice-president 

of government relations and public affairs for the CDA 

[Canadian Diabetes Association], Mr. Glen Doucet; Warren 

Wagner, the regional director for Saskatchewan for the CDA. I 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

had the opportunity to meet with Warren this summer at the 

diabetes run which I had the opportunity to attend. 

 

Paige Orser, a student and CDA leader in training from 

Estevan; Robert Lydiate, a CDA volunteer from here in Regina; 

Tristan Banyay, a CDA leader in training in Saskatoon; and 

Carlene Schmaltz, a nurse diabetes educator from Carrot River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said a moment ago, we have an opportunity to 

meet with these individuals later this afternoon. As well, the 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] reception is this 

evening and I hope we have a good turnout this evening. And I 

would ask all members to help me in welcoming them to their 

Legislative Building. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming this group of individuals to the 

Assembly today on World Diabetes Day. Thank you so much 

for the work that you do throughout the year. I think all 

members in the Assembly have a family member or a friend 

who lives with diabetes and that’s why we appreciate and value 

so much the work that goes on on an ongoing basis throughout 

the year for improving awareness and pursuing advocacy at all 

levels of government. So I welcome all individuals. But I do 

want to say a special hello to Tristan Banyay who is a 

constituent and I know is very active in Saskatoon. So with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I would say welcome and we look forward to 

the reception this afternoon. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to request 

permission for an extended leave for introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has asked for leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Third time’s a charm, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of this 

Assembly, visitors in the Speaker’s gallery, 27 members of the 

Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association. I thank them for the 

work they do throughout the year promoting snowmobiling, 

which I believe has become our number one, our premier 

tourism attraction, as well as making it safer. 

 

Just recently they have worked with the SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] and the Minister of SGI to deliver an 

online snowmobile safety course that will be delivered starting 

November 19th. So we thank them very much for that. 

 

They have worked very hard to develop snowmobiling to the 

true family-oriented sport that it has become. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

ask them to wave as I introduce them separately. Firstly, Mr. 

Chris Brewer, president and CEO of the SSA [Saskatchewan 

Snowmobile Association]. His wife, Jeannie Brewer, who is a 

breast cancer survivor and founding member of Prairie Women 

on Snowmobiles which to date has raised $1.8 million. Beside 

them, well no, not quite beside . . . We’ll just ask them to keep 

waving. Bev Bradshaw isn’t able to get up in the gallery. She’s 

seated on your floor, a good friend of mine and a mother of a 

good friend mine from Yorkton. Her husband, Barry Bradshaw 

is up in the gallery. He’s the chairman of the SSA and one of 

the founding, if not the founding member of Timmy’s 

Snowarama or Easter Seals Snowarama in Saskatchewan. He’s 

been there since the inception, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With them is John Popoff, founding member and director of the 

SSA, and his wife, Mae Popoff. Founding member of . . . 

Another founding member of the Prairie Women on 

Snowmobiles, Carol Tulik. And other members of Prairie 

Women on Snowmobiles, Mr. Speaker, Carol McKnight, 

Daphne Wickstrom, Carol McSymytz, Pat Haeusler, Rhonda 

Dressler, Cheryl Lorenz, Clarice Hunter, Ingrid Conrad, Ruth 

Lockert, Shirley Biehn, Shannon Scott. 

 

And along with them other members of the SSA is Jennifer 

Schneider, Kelsey Lockert, Chelsie Steurmer, Jill Kratky — 

Emily Grimes is on the floor down here with us, Mr. Speaker 

— Kathy Lindsay, Don Thompson, Joan Thompson, and Barry 

Nontell. 

 

I will be speaking more about a few of these members during 

members’ statements in a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, but in the 

meantime I ask all members to welcome these significant 

members of our province and members of the Saskatchewan 

Snowmobile Association to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to join 

with the member from Yorkton in welcoming the 27 members 

of the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association to your 

legislature. 

 

I know through the years the activities of the Snowmobile 

Association have increased and taken on greater and greater 

significance here. It takes tremendous effort to ensure that there 

are marked and groomed trails for snowmobile enthusiasts 

across the province. And perhaps even more important is the 

work your association does in educating and reminding people 

about the safety aspects involved in snowmobiling. So thank 

you for all your work in that regard. 

 

It looks like apparently winter’s here in full force again. And I 

know many people would have seen that as a bit of a downer 

but there’s so many snowmobile enthusiasts who are thinking 

it’s a wonderful thing that winter is finally here. So I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming the members from the 

Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you there is a lady here from Carrot River who’s 

Carlene Schmaltz, who is a RN [registered nurse] in the Kelsey 

Trail district specializing in diabetics. And Carlene works hard 

at her job there. And not only that, her husband, Cory Schmaltz 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

happens to be the coach of our Carrot River Wildcat football 

team, which is well known for winning four provincial titles in 

the last 12 years, Mr. Speaker. So I would like to welcome her 

to this Assembly. 

 

Plus while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, with the SSA is Emily 

Grimes who is from Carrot River. And Emily has been a 

tireless volunteer at various different things throughout the 

community and a very good asset to the Carrot River 

community. So I’d like all members to welcome these people to 

their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition in reference to 

cellphone coverage. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

To undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel 

delivers cellular service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also known as 

Dillon, and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nation, 

also known as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nation along with the community of 

Turnor Lake, including all the neighbouring communities 

in each of those areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Cole Bay, but we have signatures from all 

throughout the northwestern Saskatchewan, including Turnor 

Lake, Patuanak, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, Cole Bay, 

Jans Bay, etc. And, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Remembering Jim Sinclair 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

remember Jim Sinclair, a driving force of the Aboriginal 

movement in Canada, a true leader in Saskatchewan, our 

nation, and internationally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition spoke of Mr. 

Sinclair’s accomplishments yesterday, so they are already on 

record. This statement is of a more personal nature. The 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations was going to do 

this member’s statement, but it was agreed that I do it because 

of my personal connection with Jim. 

 

Jim has been a close friend of the Campeau family for many 

years, so close that I thought he was a blood relative until I 

actually got the opportunity to work for him. He was active in 

Aboriginal politics along with my late uncle, Clarence 

Campeau, and my uncle, Alvin Campeau. I looked at old news 

footage of Jim this morning, and in most of the shots you could 

see my Uncle Alvin right next to him. They were inseparable, 

and when they had the time, you could find them on the golf 

course. 

 

Those who knew Jim knew he had a lifelong love affair with 

golf. Jim had a picture of Jean Chrétien and himself on the golf 

course on his desk when I worked for him at the Native Council 

of Canada where he was a founding member — the first time I 

was 15 years old, and later as an adult. And I remember him 

asking me, how the heck did you get a status card? 

 

So recently, just this last year, Jim gave me his blessing to run 

for a seat in the legislature. Jim had affected me in a profound 

way which caused me to not accept the status quo and to always 

push myself to do better and to expect more from others. 

Recently Jim was able to get a status card due to Bill C-31, and 

I always wanted to ask him and get cheeky and, how the heck 

did you end up with the status card? Sadly I didn’t get the 

chance and there will never be another leader like Jim. 

However he carved a path for others to follow and made sure 

Aboriginal rights were included in the Canadian Constitution. 

 

On behalf of the government and the people of Saskatchewan, I 

would like to extend our deepest sympathies to the family and 

friends of Mr. Sinclair. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

University of Saskatchewan’s Wall of Honour Inductee 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

congratulate Ms. Marguerite Gallaway on being inducted into 

the Wall of Honour for the University of Saskatchewan’s 

College of Education. 

 

Marguerite is a true community builder. She grew up in Birsay, 

Saskatchewan and taught in Estevan before turning her career 

focus towards the arts. In 1974, she was hired as the first 

executive director of the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts 

Councils where she organized 55 new arts councils. She also 

started the Saskatchewan concert series and the program, 

Koncerts For Kids. 

 

Marguerite has served on many influential boards including 

UNICEF [United Nations International Children’s Emergency 

Fund] Canada, UNICEF Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan arts, 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], and the Sun Country regional health board. She 

was also a founding member of CAPACOA [The Canadian 

Arts Presenting Association/l’Association canadiennes des 

organismes artistiques]. She went on to develop Souris Valley 

Theatre and served as executive producer for 20 years. During 

that time she also founded the Souris Valley Museum where 

she gathered an impressive collection. 

 

Marguerite has been honoured with many other awards, 

including the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, the Order of 

Canada, an honorary degree from the University of 

Saskatchewan, and most recently a Diamond Jubilee Medal. 

 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all to join with me to congratulate and 

honour Ms. Marguerite Gallaway and to thank her for a life and 

career truly dedicated to enriching our proud province. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

World Diabetes Day 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to recognize World Diabetes Day. Ninety-one years ago, 

Canadian Frederick Banting gave the life-saving gift of insulin 

to the world. World Diabetes Day is an opportunity for 

Canadians to celebrate this important discovery on Frederick 

Banting’s birthday. 

 

Today over 80,000 people in Saskatchewan are living with 

either type 1 or type 2 diabetes. This number is expected to 

increase to 111,000 or close to 10 per cent of the population by 

2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last year our government has followed 

through on its commitment to better support those living with 

diabetes. In December 2011, two long-acting insulins were 

listed in the Saskatchewan formulary as full benefits. And in 

January 2012, the insulin pump program was expanded to 

include adults up to age 25. Diabetes must be diagnosed early 

and managed well in order to delay or prevent serious 

complications. Access to diabetes medications, health care 

providers, devices, and supplies is critical for individuals to 

manage their disease. By ensuring people with diabetes receive 

the support they need to manage their illness, we are ensuring a 

sustainable future for all people living in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a type 2 diabetic, I would like to thank all those 

who work in the diabetic field in our health system, and I would 

also like to thank the work of the Canadian Diabetes 

Association. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the 

House join me in commemorating World Diabetes Day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

St. John’s Anglican Cathedral 

Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

year St. John’s Anglican Cathedral celebrated the 100th 

anniversary of the laying of the cornerstone by the Governor 

General, His Royal Highness Prince Arthur. 

 

This beautiful and historic building’s stained glass windows are 

among the finest in Canada and the steeple is among the tallest 

in Western Canada. The building was designated as a municipal 

heritage site in 2004 and is among the most visited and 

photographed historic buildings in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the cornerstone to this beautiful building 

was laid, hiding behind it was a shallow copper time capsule. 

This year the cornerstone, now badly in need of repair, was 

carefully removed by masons and the time capsule brought out. 

Isabella Rhodes, born September 14th, 1912, was on hand to 

open the capsule. Now housed in an antique display case in the 

cathedral’s north annex, the 100-year-old capsule contained 

many things. Among them were a Bible and a Book of Common 

Prayer, coins of the realm, photos of the bishop and Canada’s 

then recently appointed Governor General. 

 

The cathedral has marked its 100th anniversary year with a 

whole range of events. In September, they had a three-day 

homecoming celebration where the restored cornerstone was 

replaced, this time with three time capsules filled with current 

photos and other items. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in celebrating 

the 100th anniversary of the laying of the cornerstone at St. 

John’s Anglican Cathedral in Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

International Education Week 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today to announce that our government has 

proclaimed November 11th to 17th as International Education 

Week. This week is celebrated in over 100 countries and is 

intended to increase the profile of international education and to 

help celebrate its benefits for our scholars, our students, our 

employers, and our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the global theme this year is Canada Engages the 

World: Realizing our Potential through International Education. 

Mr. Speaker, since 2008 the number of international students 

studying in Saskatchewan has increased by nearly 35 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to helping build a 

better quality of life for people right across the province, and to 

do so our Premier recently unveiled the Saskatchewan plan for 

growth. Importantly our plan includes strategies and steps to 

better connect Saskatchewan to the world, including goals to 

enhance international education, goals like increasing the 

number of international post-secondary students by at least 50 

per cent by 2020, promoting the study of international 

languages in our business schools, as well as by establishing the 

Saskatchewan international future scholarship, which will 

provide 20 business students a year the opportunity to study 

abroad as long as they come back to help fuel our future 

growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these goals help to demonstrate Saskatchewan’s 

commitment to International Education Week, to our students, 

and to the continued growth and prosperity of the new 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Drug Awareness and Healthy Lifestyles Day 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today Saskatoon 

recognizes Drug Awareness and Healthy Lifestyles Day. This 

annual initiative is hosted by the Saskatoon Health Region’s 

mental health and addiction services, the Saskatoon Police 

Service, Saskatoon Fire and Protective Services, and MD 

Ambulance. It is aimed at educating young people about 

positive choices that contribute to a healthy lifestyle. 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

Mr. Speaker, more than 1,900 grade 7 students assemble at 

Prairieland Park. They are given presentations on making 

healthy choices and the consequences of making poor choices, 

such as using drugs, drinking and driving, and texting while 

driving. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan, through SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] and SGI, is 

providing $15,000 in support of Drug Awareness and Healthy 

Lifestyles Day in Saskatoon. By supporting this initiative, 

government is helping our province’s young people learn about 

the negative consequences of minors consuming alcohol and 

the dangers associated with impaired driving. SLGA is 

committed to promoting the responsible use of alcohol, and SGI 

is committed to reducing the number of deaths and injuries 

caused by impaired driving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing Drug 

Awareness and Healthy Lifestyles Day and to join me in 

thanking the Saskatoon Health Region’s mental health and 

addiction services, the Saskatoon Police Service, Saskatoon 

Fire and Protective Services, and MD Ambulance for their 

support in this worthy cause. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

International Snowmobile Hall of Fame Inductees 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today to recognize four Saskatchewan citizens and one 

Saskatchewan-based club who’ve been recognized by the 

International Snowmobile Hall of Fame, based at the World 

Snowmobile Headquarters in Eagle River, Wisconsin. 

 

Chris and Jeannie Brewer, Barry Bradshaw, and John Popoff 

are four Saskatchewan snowmobilers who have been 

recognized for their efforts in promoting the sport of 

snowmobiling throughout North America. Barry and John were 

both inducted individually in 2008 as volunteers, while Chris 

and Jeannie Brewer were Saskatchewan’s most recent 

inductees, being recognized in 2012 for their dedication to and 

promotion of snowmobiling. 

 

Prairie Women on Snow, co-founded by Jeannie Brewer and 

based out of Wadena, Saskatchewan, were also inducted into 

the International Snowmobile Hall of Fame in 2009 for their 

volunteer efforts, which brings awareness and raises funds for 

breast cancer research through snowmobiling. This may make 

Jeannie Brewer the only person inducted into this significant 

international institution twice for separate reasons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the International Snowmobile Hall of Fame is 

dedicated to recognizing the men and women who have made 

snowmobiling what it is today — a national winter pastime, and 

likely Saskatchewan’s premier tourism activity. The first 

induction of awards and the awards ceremony was held in 1989, 

and to date only 90 people have been inducted. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing the achievements of 

these Saskatchewan citizens and thank them for their 

commitment and join me in congratulating them on their 

inductions into the International Snowmobile Hall of Fame. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Information Services Corporation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s now been a full 

month since the Sask Party announced its plans to privatize the 

information Crown corporation, ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]. When they were first elected, 

the Sask Party minister of ISC said it’d be his priority to ensure 

all of the Crown corporations remained publicly owned. He 

said it right in ISC’s annual report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then the new minister announced he’s interested in 

privatization. He has already drafted legislation to do just that. 

On October 11th he said, “We don’t want to slip past the fall 

session.” In that same scrum, the minister said that the 

evaluation by RBC Securities would be done by the end of 

October, so he presumably has had it now for several weeks. 

Will the minister now table this report, and has the Sask Party 

government decided to privatize ISC? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I wasn’t sure I was going to get any more questions on 

ISC after the amnesia that struck the NDP after the last set of 

questions they asked. Mr. Speaker, none of them could 

remember that they put a bill in this House that had ISC 

included and then it was taken out, Mr. Speaker. Not even the 

Leader of the Opposition, who was head of the legislative 

instruments committee, Mr. Speaker, an avid reader of 

legislation, but couldn’t quite remember that ISC was in and 

then taken out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think they also should have a memory check 

when they were in government because not only did they take 

ISC out of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, they had a financial 

study done on ISC by RBC Dominion Securities. And one of 

the recommendations, Mr. Speaker — and I have it here, and 

I’d be more than glad to table it — was selling ISC directly to 

Teranet, Mr. Speaker. So not only did they have the study done, 

but it also suggested selling it to Teranet, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we have not made the decision. That would be coming 

very, very soon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. That was 

one of the better non-answers I’ve heard since I started in this 

career.  

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe he’ll answer this question. On October 

11th, there is “a real hesitation for other jurisdictions to contract 

a government-owned company.” Well that doesn’t actually 

seem to be the case, Mr. Speaker. Yukon officials lined up 

meetings with ISC about potentially doing business together. 

They were scheduled to meet in the beginning of November. 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, they are interested in contracting 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

ISC’s excellent database software for Yukon’s land titles 

system.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party said one of the main reasons for 

selling ISC was to allow it to do business with other 

jurisdictions. Since Yukon is interested in doing business with 

ISC, why would the minister then tell the media the exact 

opposite? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know there are a 

number of jurisdictions that are interested in doing business 

with ISC. In fact if we want to look back again, and I know this 

is awkward for the opposition, but Chris Axworthy said that 

ISC was set up to tap into the $1 billion worth of land title 

registry information that was out there, Mr. Speaker. They 

thought they could tap into it. How many sales did they make 

when it was solely owned by the government, Mr. Speaker? 

Not one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was another reason. They went and sold ISC 

technology before it was even up and running, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, of course they didn’t make any sales. What we are 

hearing from other jurisdictions that haven’t bought with ISC, 

or haven’t contracted with ISC, is because it is solely owned by 

the government. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — It would be helpful if the minister would give 

us the names of those jurisdictions. Yukon officials have asked 

ISC directly: “What opportunities might exist for Yukon to 

piggyback on yours or another system by purchasing or leasing 

all or part of your software and adapting it to our needs?” Mr. 

Speaker, it’s clear that ISC is valuable for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And it’s also clear its services are valued by 

other jurisdictions, including Yukon, who are interested in 

using this Crown corporation services for their own land titles 

registry. 

 

The Sask Party’s central argument about wanting to sell ISC 

doesn’t hold water, Mr. Speaker, because it’s clearly able to 

offer its services to other government clients who are seeking 

what ISC is selling. This leads one to wonder if there’s another 

reason they would want to liquidate valuable assets and 

privatize this Crown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, are there buyers already lined up for ISC, and if 

so, who are they? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you know, I would refer 

them back to question number one, when they had an 

evaluation done of the company, and it explained that Teranet 

was interested in buying it when it was under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I will not go on, Mr. Speaker, as far as any 

decisions that have been made because that will come in the 

future, Mr. Speaker. I will say though that we are in possession 

of the latest evaluation, Mr. Speaker. ISC is a very profitable 

company. It is positioned very well, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

positioned very well to be able to sell its goods around the 

country, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you there is one reason why 

it hasn’t, out of 16 years of the NDP trying, Mr. Speaker, is it 

never sold to one jurisdiction because it was solely owned by 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the president of ISC told 

reporters a month ago that governments like Yukon wouldn’t 

want to buy a service from ISC. Yet, Mr. Speaker, that is the 

exact scenario Yukon wanted to explore with ISC officials. 

Those officials sought ISC’s advice because they recognize our 

Crown corporation does excellent work for this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder why the Sask Party would want 

to sell ISC when it’s presently able to market its services, meet 

with other jurisdictions, and bring in good revenues for 

Saskatchewan people. People didn’t vote for the sale of the 

Crowns. The Premier has said, in no uncertain terms, “The 

Crown corporations will not be privatized under a 

Saskatchewan Party government.” 

 

Why is the Sask Party government going back on their 

promises, presenting false arguments, and making plans to 

privatize ISC? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we were very clear in 

the last election of 2011 that turned out pretty darn well, Mr. 

Speaker. We were very clear that in the last election that we 

would follow along with the Crown protection Act, a Crown 

protection Act that was introduced by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve said we’d follow along with that. That’s the same Crown 

protection Act that had ISC in originally and then taken out by 

the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why was it taken out by the NDP? Because I really think, with 

an evaluation done by RBC and excluding it from the 

legislation, that they had plans on selling it. Now every NDP on 

that side now is trying to distance themselves as far as they can. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, even the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t 

seem to have a memory of taking it out when he was head of 

the legislative instruments committee for the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that ISC is a very good company here in 

Saskatchewan. We think it’s got very good potential to sell 

those goods outside of the province, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

you’ll hear more on that in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Prince Albert Bridge 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. No 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

news on a new bridge remains bad news for the people of 

Prince Albert. The southbound lanes of the bridge will be 

closed due to repairs on the underside of the bridge, leaving 

P.A. [Prince Albert] residents and the businesses frustrated with 

their single option to cross that river. But the work doesn’t end 

there, Mr. Speaker, because northbound lanes are going to be 

closed for another four weeks of work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert desperately needs a second bridge 

now. A growing economy in Prince Albert can’t work without 

it. Yet completely missing from the Premier’s booklet and his 

speech in Prince Albert were details on why the Saskatchewan 

Party can’t get the job done on a new bridge for Prince Albert. 

To the minister: why has the Sask Party government failed to 

build a new bridge for Prince Albert? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that the bridge in Prince Albert, when it was 

built many, many years ago, it was built, Mr. Speaker, by the 

provincial government. The city of Prince Albert at that time 

said that they would pay for repairs. Repairs have been needed, 

Mr. Speaker. That bridge had deteriorated and now repairs are 

needed. Our government, Mr. Speaker, has picked up 100 per 

cent of those repairs to make sure that that bridge will be 

functional well into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it curious because, you know, for 16 years 

there was no growth in the province. Now we hear the critic 

talking about growth, but I wish he would ask his seatmate 

sitting right beside him because the Leader of the Opposition 

said that growth was a myth here in Saskatchewan, an absolute 

myth. But now his seatmate is saying, why don’t you fix 

another bridge? Why don’t you build another bridge because 

there is growth, Mr. Speaker. I would ask those two to just kind 

of talk to each other for just a little bit and determine, is there 

growth in Saskatchewan or is it a myth? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert’s gateway to the 

North status has been hard-earned, but the city’s current efforts 

to have another bridge built have been ignored by all of the 

Sask Party MLAs from the region and from the city and from 

this Premier and this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the city has resorted to launching a campaign to 

build a second bridge. Perhaps people are going to go now to 

buildasecondbridge.com and reading about how the Sask Party 

has failed to work with the community at Prince Albert to get 

the job done. With Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan 

booming, the lane closures are making businesses and residents 

slow down to a crawl. It’s affecting people’s quality of life and 

the economic opportunities of the entire North.  

 

Mr. Speaker, why is Prince Albert’s second bridge missing 

completely from the Sask Party’s plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I didn’t hear the answer to the growth 

question, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the critic will talk about that in 

the future. But, Mr. Speaker, we know that there is growth in 

the province, Mr. Speaker. We know that. 

 

That’s why a study has been conducted just recently. We’ve 

just received the study, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll be talking with 

the officials in Prince Albert on the feasibility of a second 

bridge and the growth in the area as to whether it has warranted 

a second bridge. Mr. Speaker, we know that there are two 

studies that have been done before that would show that a 

second bridge wasn’t warranted in the area, Mr. Speaker. But 

we’ve just received another study and will be reviewing that 

and dealing with the officials in Prince Albert in the very near 

future. 

 

But I will say, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to spending on 

bridges, on roads, on highways in this province, we’ll take no 

advice from the opposition, Mr. Speaker. In fact this year, $631 

million spent on our roadways in Saskatchewan — the second 

highest budget in the history of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the lane closures are causing 

financial hardships, and the long lineups are really frustrating 

for many drivers and the people of Prince Albert. And the need 

for a dangerous goods route put the spotlight on the city’s 

desperate need for a second bridge. Recently the Premier said, 

“We should think about the bridge and the infrastructure in this 

city in terms of what is going to happen in 5, 10, 15, 20 years 

and not necessarily what’s happening right now.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier says the second bridge is on the list, 

but you can’t travel on a list, Mr. Speaker. You have to actually 

travel on a physical bridge, Mr. Speaker. They brag about the 

money they have. They brag about the mandate they have. Yet 

they take no responsibility for helping Prince Albert get that 

second bridge. 

 

To the minister: when will this minister or members from P.A. 

stand up for the people of Saskatchewan and provide leadership 

and a new bridge for the people of Prince Albert and northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee that the 

members from Prince Albert and the members around Prince 

Albert stand up for P.A. each and every day in caucus, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they have for four years, Mr. Speaker, 

and they’ll continue. 

 

But I would ask before, if you go back to the last dying days of 

the NDP government, why didn’t the members from Prince 

Albert stick up for their city then when they were NDP? 

Because if you remember back — and he used to be a minister 

of Highways; he was that minister of Highways — they had 

trouble with that P.A. bridge when they were in government. 

And what they did do is, they fixed part of it and then relied on 

the city to do the paving on top. They would only pay for part 

of the repairs, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, did those members 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

from Prince Albert stand up then? No, they didn’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our members have. That’s why we’re paying the 

full cost of this repair, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’ll 

continue to invest in our infrastructure here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

State of Corrections System 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For a 

number of years, overcrowding has been on the rise in 

Saskatchewan’s corrections system. Earlier this year the 

Ombudsman had some fairly alarming things to say about the 

circumstance of prison overcrowding, stating that he was very 

concerned that the current situation could go “from bad to 

worse.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, securing inmates and running orderly prison 

facilities is fundamental to ensuring public safety and security. 

My question is to the Corrections minister: can she provide 

accurate numbers on where prisoners are being housed each 

night in the Saskatchewan correctional system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I get into my 

answer, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the staff at our 

correctional centres throughout the province of Saskatchewan 

for successfully managing the number of offenders within 

existing structures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our investment in facilities in this province, it is 

huge. In June of 2009, we put 90 beds into the Saskatoon 

Correctional Centre. 2009-10, we put more security upgrades 

into our correctional facilities. Pine Grove correctional facility 

for women, we added 60 beds. In Prince Albert provincial 

correctional centre, we added 144 beds. Mr. Speaker, we 

recognize that there’s pressures in our correctional facilities in 

the province of Saskatchewan, and we are working hard to 

address it. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, she did not answer the question. 

But in addition to the Ombudsman’s report, I am also 

concerned about a news report I watched recently. A good piece 

of investigative journalism on Global revealed just how bad the 

Sask Party has allowed the situation to become in the 

province’s jails. 

 

The news story discussed where inmates are being housed, 

based on information it received through a freedom of 

information request. The reporter revealed that there are 360 

inmates being housed in 196 overflow spaces. Mr. Speaker, that 

leaves us wondering where 164 unaccounted-for inmates are 

being housed. So my question again to the Corrections minister: 

can she explain where the additional 164 inmates are sleeping 

at night? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A hundred and 

sixty-four inmates unaccounted for — Mr. Speaker, the premise 

of that question is absolutely ridiculous. We have spaces in our 

facilities for every person who belongs in a correctional facility 

in this province. We will never turn anybody away. We don’t 

put no vacancy, no vacancy in our correctional centres, Mr. 

Speaker. We will find room, albeit there are pressures within 

our facilities, Mr. Speaker. And we are working hard to address 

these overcrowding pressures. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re sure she’ll never turn 

anyone away, but we’d like to know where they are, is the 

question. If a corrections worker had the count off by 164 

inmates, they would be fired, Mr. Speaker. In the interests of 

public safety, I ask again: where did the 164 unaccounted for 

inmates sleep last night? And does the minister believe that this 

situation is in the best interests of public safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, the people that the member 

opposite cites are not unaccounted for. They are in our 

correctional facilities, and if we had the world according to the 

members opposite, those people would be out on the street. Mr. 

Speaker, we will find room. We have room for people who 

deserve to be in our correctional facilities, and we will continue 

to manage the pressures that we are currently experiencing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our overcrowding pressures did not start in 

2007. We had these problems long before. What were the 

members opposite doing at that particular point in time? Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we all know. We’re dealing with these issues 

today. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, if inmates are sleeping three to a 

bunk or sleeping in closets or hallways, that doesn’t sound like 

security to me. What is worse is that the minister cannot 

account for the 164 inmate overflow on the current 196 

overflow inmate spaces — inmate spaces that are already 

overflow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Common sense would tell us that this situation is a risk to 

public safety. It tells us that there is an increased likelihood of 

violence in the system, and it tells us that more inmates will be 

on the path to reoffend. Mr. Speaker, can the minister admit 

that there is a major problem in the Saskatchewan correctional 

system.? And can she tell us what her plan is to fix it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, this issue of overcrowding did 

not just happen in 2007. We inherited the current overcrowding 

issue that we are facing within our institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just go back on some of the history, the 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

record of the NDP government: 2001, the design of the Regina 

Correctional Centre replacement project, denied. 2002, inmate 

counts were increasing, Mr. Speaker; the only capital spending 

was a $30,000 tractor, Mr. Speaker. 2006-2007, 40 new cells 

for Pine Grove Correctional Centre and 216 new cells for 

Saskatoon Correctional Centre, denied. It’s a constant issue 

with those members opposite, Mr. Speaker. They denied every 

proposed increase in bed space in this province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The public has been 

talking about the Sask Party’s nonsensical decision to cut the 

film employment tax credit since March. One would think, as 

the leader of the government that cut the tax credit, the Premier 

would have understood how it worked, but it still seems he 

hasn’t been properly briefed. 

 

Last week he claimed, “It’s a cheque whether you spend the 

money or not.” That could not be more false, and he should 

know this. How is it possible that the Premier still does not 

understand how the film employment tax credit works? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, this government, this 

Premier in particular, understands completely how a refundable 

tax credit works in this province, Mr. Speaker. We know that 

single-purpose production companies are formed between 

producers in this province and producers outside the province. 

They funnel all of their expenses through this single-purpose 

entity, Mr. Speaker, and apply for a 45 per cent refundable tax 

credit on labour costs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We think refundable tax credits are not good public policy. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we are working with the creative 

industries in this province to move forward on a new 

mechanism to support all of the creative industries. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a cheque you 

get whether you spend the money or not. I would suggest that 

there’s many, many people who would like to straighten the 

Premier out on that particular quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly the Sask Party needs a lesson on the film 

employment tax credit. The program helped film producers plan 

their project finances and leverage money from banks and 

investors. Only after a project was wrapped and delivered, 

meaning all the money had already been invested and spent 

here, producers could apply for the tax credit for a portion of 

their Saskatchewan-based labour costs. But the Premier doesn’t 

get it, and people are tired of his campaign of misinformation. 

How is it good government and governance to eliminate a 

major program without first studying or even understanding the 

possible effects of that decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, we should be clear with 

the hon. member the difference between a refundable tax credit 

and a non-refundable tax credit, Mr. Speaker. The entity that 

receives the refundable tax credit pays no corporate income tax 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. In all likelihood these 

single-purpose entities, these single-purpose production 

companies, Mr. Speaker, funnel all of their costs through the 

single-purpose production company that only exists for the 

purpose of the production of that particular production. So, Mr. 

Speaker, they then apply for a 45 per cent refundable tax credit. 

They receive the money, regardless of whether they spent any 

of that money in the province of Saskatchewan or not. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, by SaskFilm numbers that 63 per cent 

of production volumes, 63 per cent of production volumes are 

spent here in the province. Thirty-seven per cent of production 

volumes are used to procure goods and services outside the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We also know that 

then the distribution of marketing rights of these particular 

productions are taken elsewhere. That’s where the money is 

really made in the production of these films, Mr. Speaker. 

Those entities pay no corporate income tax in this province, 

virtually, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

should base public policy on facts and common sense, not on 

their own narrow opinions. The tax credit worked for our 

province — fact. The business community supports its use — 

fact. The industry knows the tax credit helped create jobs — 

fact. The families employed in film see its value — fact. The 

community sees the economic and social spinoffs — fact. But 

the Sask Party ignores every single fact presented to them, 

including about how the tax credit actually works, and plows 

ahead with rigid ideology. Why can’t the Premier admit he’s 

got all the facts wrong on the film tax credit and fix his 

government’s huge mistake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said earlier, there 

is no other business in the province of Saskatchewan that 

enjoys a 45 per cent refundable tax credit on their labour costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the taxpayers of this province have 

contributed over $14 million over the last 14 years to SaskFilm, 

an entity that only exists to promote film in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that taxpayers in this province have spent 

over $10 million over the last 14 years on the 

Canada-Saskatchewan production studios, Mr. Speaker, a film 

studio that only exists for the film industry in this province. 

These are direct taxpayer-related expenditures, Mr. Speaker, in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

These are also the facts. SMPIA [Saskatchewan Media 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

Production Industry Association], the motion picture industry 

association has said, Mr. Speaker, a new mechanism “. . . 

should be as cost neutral as possible. It needs to meet sector 

requirements while not participating in what is seen as a 

bidding war. And it cannot be a tax-related initiative,” Mr. 

Speaker. Those are SMPIA’s words, Mr. Speaker, in a letter to 

me on October 3rd. We’re trying to build a new mechanism to 

support all of our creative industries. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 

Education Savings (SAGES) Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 66, 

The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 

(SAGES) Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 66, The Saskatchewan 

Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 59 — The 

Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh into discussion this afternoon as it relates to 

Bill No. 59, An Act to amend The Animal Identification Act to 

offer a few comments. Of course this has recently been 

introduced, and there’s an awful lot of consultation, 

conversation, and dialogue to be had as it relates to this bill 

with the respective stakeholders in industry and across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

What I recognized in the minister’s statements that he’s 

suggesting that this is a bill that’s required to provide needed 

flexibility, as he suggests. He states that this is about industry 

control and, in many ways, outsourcing the role and 

responsibility that has been that of government in working with 

industry to, I guess, see that transition occur. 

 

What I notice, or I guess want to put onto the record, is that this 

relates to brand inspection in this province. And brand 

inspection and quality brand inspection is really an important 

aspect of support that we can work with producers and work 

with the industry to make sure that we’re supporting our 

producers across this province. 

 

So brand inspection itself is very important, and certainly 

working together to adopt best practice, making sure that we’re 

modernized and responding to the needs, and as effective as we 

can be, is a very important discussion for the industry itself. I 

know it’s something that various producer groups have weighed 

in on. I know the Cattlemen’s Association are participating as 

we speak; the stock growers, I believe, as well. I believe some 

of the livestock marketing companies and organizations are 

involved in this, as they should be. 

 

But when I look at this, I’m not quite certain yet what the 

minister is suggesting and have some caution around, I guess, 

changes that are being proposed that haven’t yet been fully 

consulted with those for whom it impacts, Mr. Speaker. And 

making sure that we do get it right as it relates to brand 

inspection and that we’re bringing forward the tools and 

looking in as broad of a lens as we can with the resources of 

government, along with our producers and the industry, to make 

sure that we’re serving that industry as well as we can be. 

 

What we’ve seen in many ways from this government is them 

taking a very narrow-minded approach to looking at problems 

and seeking out solutions. I’m not sure that that’s the case in 

this event or not. Certainly we’ll be seeking out those sorts of 

questions in consultation with industry stakeholders. But really 

what we need to be looking for on all fronts is a responsive 

government that’s willing to take a very wide view and look at 

what the most common sense solutions are to be as effective as 

we can be towards our goals. And our goal should be certainly 

to be providing a very effective brand inspection process in this 

province, and certainly I support and urge that sort of 

thoughtful and broad consultation to occur. 

 

What’s interesting when I look at this legislation is in fact 

there’s really no plan in place yet. What the minister’s 

referenced is that stakeholders in industry are meeting and 

having discussions on this front, and I believe he states actually 

that the reason he’s putting forward this legislation now is to 

make sure that’s there’s not any obstacles for when a solution is 

found. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d caution against this sort of approach in 

deriving legislation. I’d caution that we’re better served by 

working with stakeholders well in advance, working with 

stakeholders in a consultive fashion, understanding full 

intended consequences of decisions we’re making but also 

understanding some of the unintended consequences that might 

occur or result from changes that are rushed ahead by 

government. 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

So I find it passing strange that we’re actually looking at 

legislation here that in fact supports changes for a plan that has 

yet to be identified. What we should be able to do here when 

we’re talking about such legislative changes is also be talking 

about the plan. We should be able to talk about those 

stakeholders and what their perspective is as it relates to the 

plan and hopefully their involvement in deriving that plan. And 

really none of that has happened to date. All we have is a 

message from the minister that there’s meetings that are 

occurring, a committee that’s been struck, and that’s all 

valuable work. But it seems that the minister and this 

government have the cart a little bit ahead of the horse on this 

process, and that’s where it’s going to be so important for us to 

make sure we’re doing, as we will, the consultation with 

stakeholders, with producers, with industry leaders to make 

sure we’re understanding their perspectives and making sure 

that we’re serving them as well as we can be to be supporting 

our producers here in this province. That’s the kind of work 

we’ll be doing moving forward. 

 

I wish we had a plan before us at this point in time. I wish it 

reflected consultation, full consultation with the full industry, 

all players, the stakeholders for whom will be impacted. 

Certainly that hasn’t been the case. So what we see is 

legislation before us without a plan to support the kinds of 

changes this government has in mind. So on that front it’s 

difficult to examine this bill in too much more detail at this 

point in time, other than I think it’s, as I say, it’s sort of having 

the cart ahead of the horse a little bit here, that it seems to be a 

bit of a hasty or rushed approach by this government. 

 

What I’d urge them to do is to dedicate their resources, their 

time, to work with the sector, to work with the industry to get 

the plan right, to make sure we understand all the consequences 

all across the province and for all that are impacted and then 

bring something forward to this Assembly here. 

 

[14:30] 

 

But certainly, you know, putting forward legislative changes 

without any substantial, meaningful plan, or any plan at all that 

is, Mr. Speaker, signals a reckless approach of government and 

one that I would take a cautious approach to and one that we’ll 

dedicate our time and our energies to make sure we’re working 

with the sector, with the industry all across this province in all 

regions to make sure that we get this right and make sure that 

we’re able to serve the industry well in finding an instrument 

and a process that best supports brand inspection in this 

province. 

 

It is interesting to see this legislation put forward, which does 

outsource responsibility that has been that of government, 

suggesting in vague ways that that process was out of date, but 

without any of the consultation that’s really required to make 

sure we’re getting this plan right. 

 

So at this point in time I don’t have much else to say other than 

to let Saskatchewan people know, to make sure they’re 

connecting with us on this front, let them know that we’ll be 

connecting with the industry and that we’ll be leading informed 

dialogue and discussion on this front, both in this Assembly and 

into committee structures, as we move forward, making sure 

that we serve the entire industry’s best interests, something that 

right now through this rushed process and lack of a plan seems 

to be sort of an afterthought of the current government, Mr. 

Speaker. Without too much more to say on Bill 59 at this point 

in time, I will adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 59, The Animal Identification Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 60 — The 

Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on the subsequent bill here, Bill No. 60, 

The Animal Products Amendment Act. This bill identifies a 

couple different purposes, a couple different goals that it’s 

pursuing. It again, this is one that’s been . . . This is in response 

to a federal government that has abdicated some of its 

responsibility in food protection, food security and has done so 

without any consultation with the current government, 

something that, you know, certainly all of us should expect 

better of our federal government. 

 

And I know when we’re looking at the delivery of inspection of 

our food, this is something so critical when we’re talking about 

food safety and protecting our industry as well, and our 

producers’ interests, and something that has certainly recently 

occupied a lot of the public debate as we’ve seen the risks, the 

harm as it results to the process that was in place at one of our 

meat-packing facilities and the subsequent impact back onto 

communities. What I find interesting is that this is something so 

critical and so important to beef producers in this province. It’s 

important for them that their industry is . . . that the product of 

their industry is safe and hitting the tables of consumers across 

this country with a level of confidence. And this is something 

that our federal government has truly failed us on as a province. 

 

I recognize that the reason for this legislation to be brought 

forward is in fact cuts and abdicating a role that the federal 

government once fulfilled to producers and to facilities here in 

this province. It’s stated in the, actually, the minister’s message 

here, his speech. I’ll quote, “This was a federal decision and we 

had no input into it.” And this is speaking about the fact that 

CFIA [Canadian Food Inspection Agency] once fulfilled this 

role. The federal government has stepped away from fulfilling 

that responsibility, and now the provincial government is 

scrambling, if you will, to provide something that should be an 

absolute certainty to our producers and to consumers and 

kitchen tables all across this country. 

 

It’s an approach though that’s sadly consistent with the federal 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

government as it relates to agriculture in this province, a federal 

government that has foisted changes onto producers here in this 

province without any consultation either with that Agriculture 

minister or this government or with certainly the producers 

themselves. We’ve had a provincial government that’s failed to 

stand up for producers on this front, on so many fronts. 

 

And I know so many producers right now are trying to get a 

sense of what the recent cuts to AgriStability and AgriInvest 

will be for producers, for themselves, for their operations. We 

haven’t had any of that analysis put forward by the current 

government nor any representation of any meaningful nature 

and standing up to make sure that our producers and our 

industry has been well served on this front. 

 

The list actually goes on on this front of the federal impacts, the 

federal cuts as it relates to agriculture and the impact back to 

Saskatchewan. It’s not just the cuts here as it relates to the role 

that CFIA played in food safety in this province and in this 

country. It also extends, as I say, to AgriStability and the cuts 

there and AgriInvest and the cuts there. But it also goes further. 

It gets into the community pastures that have played such an 

important role in balancing off our agricultural sector in this 

province and also protected some of the biodiversity and 

environmental protections that are important to Saskatchewan 

people and as good land stewards. 

 

We recognize that the cuts as well go further. And I know one 

community that’s been particularly impacted, and certainly our 

entire province and producers have been impacted, are the cuts 

to the federal tree nursery out at Indian Head here in the 

province. And this is a tree nursery that has served this province 

and Western Canada so well, establishing itself in fact before 

we were actually a province, Mr. Speaker, and has distributed 

more than 600 million trees all across Western Canada. And 

often I know as I travel across this landscape, our province, 

from the Southwest to the Southeast to the Far North, I find it 

astonishing to see this landscape that was once barren in many 

parts in fact transformed in no small way, or actually in large 

measure, by the tree nursery and the . . . [inaudible] . . . in this 

institution that served Saskatchewan for so many years, an 

institution that still plays a vital role to our province now and 

right well into the future. 

 

And again this was another cut of the federal government that 

was made without any consultation, as I understand, certainly 

with the producers, certainly no consultation with the workers. 

And I don’t know if there was consultation with the Premier or 

with the minister or not, but it was certainly . . . This was 

announced in the recent federal budget that was brought 

forward and the same federal budget that that Premier pats 

praises onto the federal government for, Mr. Speaker. So 

certainly it seems to me that there’s sort of a federal and 

provincial government working together to eliminate some of 

the very important structures and institutions that have served 

Saskatchewan in our agricultural sector and industry so well. 

 

When I’m looking at Bill No. 60, I know some of the shift that 

they’re looking at is shifting the delivery from what was CFIA 

and the role of the federal government and on to third party 

delivery. Another example of it appears to be outsourcing, Mr. 

Speaker. We don’t have any sort of a plan put before us about 

what sort of assurances the public has on this front or what sort 

of assurances that our beef producers have on this front. And I 

think it’s important. 

 

When we look at the failure to provide food safety and food 

protection as we’ve seen recently with the XL Foods debacle, 

Mr. Speaker, and the federal debacle that the federal 

government has placed us into, I think we have to recognize 

that this has an impact both for confidence of those that are 

utilizing our food, in this case beef, and it has a direct impact 

back to the producer themself. And in our province, I mean, and 

in all parts of Canada, we need to care about both those pieces. 

Certainly first and foremost, food security needs to be our 

number one priority, and it’s sad that it’s become sort of an 

afterthought by a federal government and, you know, in many 

ways a provincial government that has worked hand in hand 

with that federal government. 

 

But we also need to make sure that we’re serving our beef 

industry, our producers well in this province. And I find it 

awfully frustrating . . . And I’ve heard the concern and 

frustration from so many across this province that have worked 

so hard and have seen that industry through some dark days, 

through some tough days and many, Mr. Speaker — and I 

know you would have many in through your own constituency, 

Mr. Speaker — that were finally in a position to see a 

reasonable return or a better return. And, Mr. Speaker, that just 

hasn’t been the case. That opportunity’s been taken away from 

them by a reckless approach to government, a reckless 

approach of cuts and outsourcing responsibility. And in this 

case neither the consumer or the families that are putting that 

meat on the table have the confidence that they deserve. And 

unfortunately our beef producers all across this province have 

taken a direct hit by those actions of government. 

 

Certainly Saskatchewan people and all Canadians deserve 

nothing less than full protection of our food security, our food 

safety. And I know that the plans that are . . . Well I shouldn’t 

say there’s . . . Again this is the problem with this legislation is 

it in fact puts forward a structure that allows a third-party 

delivery model to be in place, and it talks about a new 

inspection delivery model to be established. But, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s no plan yet. There’s nothing in place. And so it’s 

incredibly difficult when we have something that’s as large of a 

priority as food security and food safety, Mr. Speaker, for us to 

enter in with any level of assurances that the best interests of 

consumers and our beef producers are going to be maintained 

or met through this process. 

 

And this is where we’re going to make sure as an official 

opposition that we’re following this process through in direct 

consultation with the entire industry, all stakeholders, all 

partners, all producers, and all food security, food safety 

organizations, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that the tool and the 

mechanism that’s being put forward is putting the priority that 

should be placed on food safety and the protection required for 

our industry, our beef producers all across this province and all 

of our producers across this province. 

 

Again this is a case where legislation is in fact brought to the 

Assembly, put before this Assembly, but there’s no plan in 

place. And what we would expect is that legislation that comes 

to us has a plan to go with it and reflects fulsome consultation 

with those producers, the industry all across this province in all 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

regions, Mr. Speaker. And I can say with certainty that that 

hasn’t occurred yet. 

 

I find it incredibly troublesome how this government continues 

to simply accept cuts and impacts of the federal government 

onto our agricultural sector here in this province. They, as I’ve 

said, have made unilateral decisions without consultation with 

those for whom it impacts, with cuts and reductions in 

AgriStability, AgriInvest, with the elimination of community 

pastures that serve a very important role to producers and to our 

environmental protection in this province, and the elimination 

of our tree nursery, something that is a proud legacy but also 

purposeful to our future, Mr. Speaker, and something that really 

has transformed our province and our landscape. 

 

So I question in many ways when I look at this. And I quote 

from the minister here who says, “This was a federal decision. 

We had no input into it.” That’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. We 

deserve a stronger relationship with our federal government, a 

relationship that does in fact respect the interests of our 

province and our producers, our industry. That hasn’t been the 

case. 

 

I know a second component of this bill is putting forward a 

fund, an assurance fund for producers. But again this 

legislation’s brought forward, but it speaks to the fact that this 

assurance fund that they speak of is currently a discussion point 

for the industry. And for us to have meaningful discussion, 

meaningfully consultation, meaningful questions of the plans 

being put forward, we need to have something more substantial 

than that. We need fulsome legislation that’s been derived out 

of fulsome consultation with the industry, with the producers. 

And certainly what I know of the plan that’s being discussed 

right now, there’s certainly no consensus at this point in time 

within the industry or those important partners. And that’s 

something that we need to work towards. 

 

So again I would argue on this piece of legislation that this 

government has the cart ahead of the horse, that they’re rushing 

through a process without getting the plan right, without the 

fulsome consultation, and that we should be making this a 

major priority for us as it’s so important to our agricultural 

sector, to our economy. And of course food safety should be a 

number one priority, our number one priority back to 

consumers and families in our province, across the country, and 

abroad, all the consumers of our product. 

 

So at this point in time, I don’t have much else to say other than 

we expect a better relationship with the federal government. We 

expect our provincial government to start standing on its own 

two feet and start standing up for Saskatchewan producers in 

our agricultural sector, something that we haven’t seen. And 

certainly we expect better performance from our federal 

government as it relates to our agricultural sector and all of 

those for whom it impacts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this point in time, I don’t have any other comments, but 

certainly we’ll be engaged in consultation with industry and 

bringing further questions, comments, ideas, suggestions 

forward. But at this point in time, I adjourn debate of Bill No. 

60, The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 60, The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 61 — The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Glad to 

rise today to join in the debate on Bill No. 61, The Railway 

Amendment Act. Primarily, Mr. Speaker, this bill is concerned 

with the orderly transfer or sale provisions of a rail line when it 

is to be abandoned. Under the current legislation of course the 

abandonment process requires the railway owner first advertise 

their intentions to either sell or abandon the line and invite any 

expressions of interest from buyers. 

 

One of the key sort of changes in this piece of legislation, as far 

as I can tell through my perusal of it, is the bolstering of the 

powers accorded to The Highway Traffic Act wherein they’ve 

presently got insufficient authority to remedy situations where 

either the seller or potential buyer is negotiating in bad faith. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of negotiating the net salvage 

value, or the NSV, it’s in the current legislation with the 

government purchase phase. A municipal government is 

required to either decline or accept the offer to purchase the net 

salvage value within 60 days of receiving the offer. They can 

only request a net salvage value after they’ve accepted the 

offer. Consequently these folks are being forced to make 

critical decisions without knowing what the exact purchase 

price will be. 

 

So again in terms of lending some clarity to that situation, Mr. 

Speaker, and in terms of making for a more orderly approach to 

the whole question of rail line abandonment and hopefully 

putting another tool in the toolbox of interests such as shortline 

railroads in this province, Mr. Speaker, in terms of bolstering 

the hand of municipalities, both urban and rural, and in terms of 

making sure that the railways that we know so well in this 

province — and we know so well also, I’d say in some cases far 

too well, the occurrence of rail line abandonment — I think it’s 

only right and just that local people working together can have 

an opportunity to take advantage of these public goods that 

were afforded to private rail interests to ensure that those 

services and that transportation opportunity continues to serve 

community. 

 

I guess one other thing about the piece of legislation just in 

going through the provisions, Mr. Speaker, in addressing the 

bad faith negotiation allegations against the seller during the 

sale phase, it proposes to give the Highway Traffic Board new 

powers to evaluate the dispute, and that evaluation having been 

conducted, Mr. Speaker, if necessary issuing an order to the 

parties to enter in an agreement that the board believes is fair 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

and reasonable. It will be interesting to see again how that is 

operationalized, Mr. Speaker, how that plays out. Also wherein 

the board is able to make a determination of potential buyers 

negotiating in bad faith, giving the board the authority to relieve 

the seller of their obligation to continue negotiating with the 

interested party. Again, Mr. Speaker, in the immediate context 

of this legislation and in the immediate context of The Railway 

Act itself, this would seem to be fairly sensible. 

 

We of course want to make sure that they’re given full scrutiny 

and due diligence. We want to talk to the communities that will 

be affected most by this legislation. We want to gain a better 

appreciation of how this has played out in the field, out there in 

the real world, Mr. Speaker. We want to talk to folks in the 

shortline rail industry which has been a real boon to the 

province. We want to talk to, you know the CNs [Canadian 

National] and the CPs [Canadian Pacific] of the world. And we 

want to talk to partners out there in the municipal government 

land such as SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities], SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association], as well as local RMs [rural municipality] and 

urban municipalities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are other of my colleagues 

that are interested in this debate. This again would seem to be 

on the face of it a useful proposition, but, as with various things 

forwarded by this government, Mr. Speaker, sometimes what’s 

on the face doesn’t match up to what’s beneath. So we want to 

make sure that we do the due diligence on this and that this is as 

it seems to be. As such, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 62 —The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising 

today to speak to The Parks Amendment Act, 2012, Bill No. 62, 

and have a few comments I’d like to share with the Assembly 

in relation to this bill. 

 

First of all I’ll just speak a little bit to the comments that the 

minister made as he announced the bill. And he’s announcing a 

very large new provincial park here in Saskatchewan including 

Anglin Lake and Emma Lake. And I think for anyone who’s 

ever travelled in that area, they’ll know it’s one of the more 

beautiful parts of our province. 

 

Certainly the boreal forest is one of the most beautiful parts of 

the province. And it’s one that I’m very familiar with and really 

enjoy spending time there, both in the summer and in the winter 

and in fact during every season, as I think it’s one of the most 

beautiful places in the world. This part of the northern boreal 

forest is in the parkland. And there you get the beautiful mix of 

the deciduous trees and the conifers, and it really makes for I 

think what makes Saskatchewan special. You know, in addition 

to our prairies, we’ve got these beautiful, the forested lands. 

And certainly protecting those forests in terms of a parks 

context is something that is commendable, and I think we’re 

looking forward to seeing these new parks established. 

 

The process he has indicated he’s done extensive consultation 

with various groups including First Nations and Métis groups. I 

think we want to hear from those groups as well, Mr. Speaker, 

as to the adequacy of the consultation. Quite often we hear that 

this government is of the view it’s adequately consulted, but 

often we find out that the consultation is actually not what was 

anticipated or was acceptable to the people that were being 

consulted. 

 

So we will definitely want to have a look and talk to some of 

the groups that were consulted and find out if there are groups 

who weren’t consulted that felt they should have been. So we’re 

certainly looking, will be looking at that and asking any 

members of the public who are watching now or have any 

interest in this area whether they have any comments about 

these the establishment of a very large new provincial park. 

 

The ministry indicates it will include a total of about 16,000 

hectares which is a large area. We also understand that the area 

will include the existing recreation sites of Anglin Lake and 

Emma Lake recreation sites. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a very busy area, particularly in the summer. And so of 

course the interaction between humans and the other species 

that inhabit that area is always one of a delicate balance. And 

with the amount of activity that’s going on, human activity, it’s 

often a challenge to ensure the integrity of the ecosystem of 

these parks. 

 

He’s indicated that by designating the land as a park, it will 

result in improved protection of this mid-boreal upland 

ecoregion and will protect the watersheds as well. This is 

something again that we’re interested in and concerned about to 

ensure that these watersheds are indeed protected, particularly 

with the intense activity and the rather large cottage lots and 

intensive development of the shorelines of these lakes, Mr. 

Speaker. And those are things that can be of concern and need 

to be really monitored carefully. 

 

So hopefully the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport and 

certainly the Minister of the Environment will ensure that these 

water bodies are protected, particularly when we see the federal 

government once again abandoning its responsibility in the 

protection of watersheds by drastically changing the nature of 

the Navigable Waters Protection Act. Most of these lakes will 

now be removed from the purview of that bill. And that was an 

internationally recognized environmental protection bill which 

is now being gutted basically in Bill C-45. 

 

And very little has been said — certainly by this government, 

but by anyone — because of the speed with which the federal 

government is pushing this basically down the throats of the 

Canadian people. And the whole notion of a large 400-page bill 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

being introduced federally to change things like water 

protection is something that is actually appalling and is 

alarming to a lot of people in this country. 

 

So we are looking definitely to this government now to pick up 

the slack where the federal government is abandoning it and to 

ensure that these water bodies are protected, in particular with 

the extensive development that we see happening in the cottage 

lots areas around these parks and around these lakes. 

 

We also see that, in this case, there will be an amendment to 

remove some land from the Danielson Provincial Park, again 

something of concern. We should always be somewhat, I guess, 

vigilant when it comes to removing lands from provincial 

parks. The minister indicates that the land has low ecological 

integrity due to impact from the construction of Gardiner dam. 

So that may be the case, Mr. Speaker. We’re certainly looking 

to hear from the people in that area whether they agree with this 

observation by the minister and his staff, and want to be sure 

that if we are removing lands from provincial parks for cottage 

lot development, that indeed it is appropriate and that the land 

shouldn’t be perhaps rehabilitated and protected rather than 

removed from the park. 

 

Now he’s saying there’s an offset to this reduction in the 

acreage, and what will happen is that 65 hectares of other lands 

will be added to the park. Now these are lands he indicates that 

contain native prairie grassland. And I have to say, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s very encouraging to see a minister from this 

government protecting native prairie grassland, because 

unfortunately that’s not what we’re hearing from the Minister 

of Agriculture right now, when it comes to protecting the 1.6 

million acres of native prairie grassland that’s on the selling 

block if he continues with his plan to sell and dispose of the 

community pastures here in Saskatchewan, which are actually 

one of the largest intact areas of natural prairie grassland in the 

world and certainly part of our obligations under the 

representative area network system that we have obligations 

federally and internationally to protect these grasslands. 

 

So while it is encouraging to see this minister protecting native 

prairie grassland, he’s protecting 65 hectares, and we see the 

Minister of Agriculture actually disposing of 1.6 million acres. 

So it’s kind of like a drop in the bucket what this minister is 

doing, but we’re hoping that his leadership will encourage his 

colleague and the Ministry of Agriculture to do the same with 

those vast tracts of native prairie grassland that are at risk with 

his plan to sell. 

 

There’s a couple of other points the minister has indicated that 

he hopes to achieve with this new bill. One is protecting visitors 

while they’re in the parks. And of course we know the 

dangerous wildlife exists. That’s their home. They live in the 

parks, and certainly it’s the humans that are the visitors there, 

Mr. Speaker. So we’re looking to make sure that humans are 

safe. And certainly I think the tragedy in all of this, as he 

indicated, that there was 1,000 calls with nuisance bears in the 

provincial park system last year, or . . . Sorry, in 2011. Yes, last 

year. And my experience with nuisance bears is that once 

they’ve been exposed to human food, they often find it very 

difficult to give it up. They’re immediately addicted and for all 

intents and purposes that bear is spoiled and in most cases will 

keep coming back when they know there’s human food around. 

And it’s very difficult to manage these bears and in most cases 

they have to be destroyed. And that’s not acceptable when we 

go into someone else’s home and cause damage to their way of 

life that effectively causes them to be put to death. 

 

It’s a tragedy and I think it’s . . . I agree totally with the 

minister on this one that education is very important, to 

continue to try and educate visitors to parks that they are 

endangering those bears when they leave food and waste 

improperly disposed of. So that’s a positive step. 

 

And finally, we see this bill is dealing with an amendment to 

the description of Steele Narrows Provincial Park and they’re 

improving the mapping of the park. That’s a very interesting 

park, Mr. Speaker, and a very important part of our history with 

some of our . . . One of the last wars, actually the last battles 

fought in Saskatchewan, was at Steele Narrows where the park 

is. I’ve had the opportunity to visit there and there’s some 

interesting monuments and gravesites there that are remnants of 

that battle, and I guess a reminder of our shared history with 

First Nations and the treaty people. So I think it’s always 

appropriate to do something like that. So I have no further 

comments on that part of the bill. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would, at this point I think that’s the 

extent of my comments on Bill 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 

so I would like to adjourn debate on this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 63 — The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a pleasure 

this afternoon to be able to join in on the discussion on this 

important piece of legislation. 

 

It’s important, Mr. Speaker, because for the vast majority of 

Saskatchewan people, I believe the role of regional parks is 

very important. It’s something that we care about. It’s 

something that we want to ensure is a top priority and it’s 

something that we want to protect and preserve for the years to 

come. And we want to protect it, Mr. Speaker, and promote it in 

an environmental sense in terms of having space in our 

province where people can go and enjoy the great outdoors. 

 

But we also, Mr. Speaker, want to promote and encourage the 

role of regional parks with respect to the important role that 

regional parks play in our province economically. I think of . . . 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

Well probably most members in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

have had a fair amount of exposure to regional parks. For some 

MLAs there may be regional parks in their constituencies. But 

for others, regional parks are the places that we go to holiday, 

the places that we go to build memories with our families, the 

places that we go to have a break and have an opportunity to 

relax. 

 

I know in my own experience, Mr. Speaker, Memorial Lake 

Regional Park is a very important place for my family and spent 

many summers there enjoying the golf, enjoying the lake, 

enjoying friends, enjoying camping and campfires. But also 

great places like the regional park at Outlook as well, and 

there’s so many examples. And each person in the province, I 

hope, would have a positive opinion of a regional park in their 

backyard or a place where they commonly go to and travel in 

order to have that holiday whether it’s, Mr. Speaker, in the 

wintertime or the summertime, though summertime is often 

when parks are most commonly used in the province. Though 

today with the presence of the snowmobilers’ association in the 

Assembly, we’re reminded that we’re a 12-month province 

here, four seasons of activity, and good outdoor activity 

happens around the year. 

 

So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, when we’re looking at any sort 

of legislation around regional parks, it’s important to ensure 

that we’re taking the right steps. And this has to do in a 

legislative sense when we look at the protections for parks, 

when we look at the rules and the governance structure and how 

decisions are made, it’s very important. Because we love this 

province. We want a healthier and a stronger environment in 

the years to come and that means having legislation in place 

that allows us to realize that goal, that objective. 

 

Regional parks are also hugely important and this is why we 

have to get it right when we’re looking at legislation about them 

in an economic sense, as I said in my earlier comments. The 

presence of regional parks in local communities can be a huge 

factor in economic activity for a local area. Mr. Speaker, I think 

of the example of Memorial Lake Regional Park and I said 

that’s a place where I go in the summers very often — beautiful 

part of the province and we love going there. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where is it? 

 

Mr. Broten: — By the town of Shell Lake. The Health 

minister’s interested in knowing. But you can see a real change 

in the community between the summer and the winter months. 

And you can see a number of businesses, Mr. Speaker, that are 

in the area because of the existence of the regional park, 

because of the existence of a good golf course and of good 

camping facilities and then all of the economic and business 

spinoffs that are associated with the regional park being in that 

location. 

 

So it’s important when we’re looking at legislation and making 

decisions, looking at proposals about how governance 

structures and decisions about the parks are made, that we get it 

right. And it’s not just one park in isolation, Mr. Speaker. We 

have to realize that the network of regional parks across the 

province is a strong network. It’s an important network and it’s 

a network that has an impact and an influence on many parts of 

the province. 

So when looking at this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, Bill 

No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012, and it was introduced by 

the Minister Responsible for Parks as an Act and changes 

coming to things that needed to occur, according to his view. 

And the minister highlights a number of areas where this 

legislation is having an influence. He first said, Mr. Speaker, 

that “The first . . .” These are his words: “The first area of 

improvement under the proposed legislation [is], Mr. Speaker, 

is to provide a much clearer description of the minister’s 

powers with regard to the regional parks program.” 

 

At face value, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t disagree that we need to 

have the powers and the roles clearly explained within the 

legislation. I think that is an important thing. It also, Mr. 

Speaker, talks about, according to the minister’s second reading 

speech, and what he is suggesting that this legislation will 

accomplish is that it “. . . establishes the authority to delegate 

certain minister’s powers to the . . . Regional Parks Association 

via a formal administration agreement . . . by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council.” 

 

So decisions, Mr. Speaker, that traditionally have been the 

realm of the minister being delegated and having local 

associations with being given the power and the authority to 

make new decisions. And that’s an important point. Also, Mr. 

Speaker, this legislation is looking at a “. . . formal recognition 

of community and non-profit organizations in the establishment 

and operation of regional park authorities, where previously 

only municipalities had this formal recognition.” 

 

So I would assume, Mr. Speaker, that this . . . I hope . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well perhaps the minister can 

explain further on in committee. But it’s a modernization and a 

recognition of the role that other players on the ground have in 

the functioning of the parks, and that of course is very 

important. And “A fourth component of the proposed 

legislation is overall improved clarity throughout the 

legislation, including the removal of many out-of-date and 

redundant references.” 

 

So that’s the modernization aspect. And then it goes on to talk 

about the adjustments in boundaries and the type of public 

accountability that is required. 

 

So at face value, Mr. Speaker, some changes here which are 

significant are important because, as I said, the topic itself is 

very, very important. But when we think of regional parks and 

the news that has been generated by regional parks, we think of 

the sale of the regional park at LeRoy, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a 

broader discussion. The minister’s comments in his second 

reading speech were silent on that issue. But I can’t help but 

think that this is connected or coming out of those decisions 

that had been made. And as I said before, any time there’s a 

decision to, if there is a decision to sell a regional park, that’s a 

pretty big deal and it’s not something that we should take 

lightly. It’s something that should be discussed and debated and 

be conducted and pursued in a very transparent and open and 

accountable manner. 

 

And so I hope, Mr. Speaker, that any steps in that direction 

would in fact be openly discussed in the Assembly, would be 

discussed in an open manner by the minister. And I would, Mr. 

Speaker, like to have additional comment from the minister 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

with respect to how this legislation ties into that other situation. 

Because when we think of the hot spots that have been in the 

news around regional parks, most certainly the sale of that park 

is a major issue for, as I said, affecting one specific area of the 

province, but it has much broader and far-reaching implications 

for the regional park system throughout the province. And 

that’s an important, a very important note to recognize. 

 

So I wish the minister had elaborated more on that point 

because I think that’s what many people are wondering about 

and are concerned about. And it would have been good if his 

remarks had addressed that in a more upfront manner and been 

open about why the changes are in fact occurring. 

 

As I said, this piece of legislation is significant. It’s important. 

And for that reason we need to get it right. And for that reason 

we need to hear and listen to many people in Saskatchewan. 

And I would encourage all members of the Assembly to do that, 

ensure that these proposed changes are in fact in the best 

interests of individual parks and the parks system. And I would 

encourage all members to do that. It’s most certainly what we’ll 

be doing in the official opposition as we continue to discuss this 

bill through adjourned debates and perhaps later on at the 

committee stage. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 63. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2010. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 64 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 64 — The 

Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having just 

made a few remarks about Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 

2012, I’m happy to carry on the discussion about the value and 

the importance and the significance of regional parks through 

the context of Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the title and the name of the bill would suggest, 

this is of course quite tied to the previous piece of legislation in 

the sense that often when you change and make amendments to 

one part of legislation, there are implications for other bills. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is the case in this situation. We know 

that just as the regional park system is valued but it’s complex 

and diverse, and it most certainly touches many parts of the 

province, the legislation about the regional park system also 

touches other parts of existing legislation. And therefore when 

changes occur in one area, it’s necessary to make adjustments 

in the other. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, is bilingual, which is always nice, 

and it’s Bill No. 64. As the minister said in his second reading 

speech when talking about this, Mr. Speaker, he said that these 

consequential amendments “. . . update references to The 

Regional Parks Act, 1979 which are contained in The Alcohol 

and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a connection between these things. 

Alcohol and gaming regulation Act, the minister’s remarks 

were fairly brief and perhaps he could’ve expanded a bit more. 

Often when people are at a regional park, they might like to 

enjoy themselves around the campfire. And that’s part of the 

reality of going camping too, so long as it’s done in a 

responsible, safe, and respectful manner. So this is a legislation 

that is tied to that. 

 

I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the earlier comments I made 

concerning Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act would apply to 

this piece of legislation in the sense that when we make 

changes, any sort of adjustment to legislation affecting parks, it 

must be done in a responsible manner, must be done in an open 

and transparent manner, aware of the full implications of the 

decisions that we make, and how that may affect local 

communities because regional parks are hugely important for 

the local environment, for preservation of places that we love, 

whether it is a river or a lake or a piece of grassland. And, Mr. 

Speaker, regional parks are hugely important as economic 

drivers in local communities, providing business opportunities 

and employment for many people, so it’s important to get it 

right. We will carry on with the consultation that we need to do 

on this piece of legislation and look forward to doing that in the 

weeks ahead. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 64. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 64, The 

Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 65 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 65 — The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to speak to Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The Securities 

Act, 1988 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts. 

And this is a very technical bill dealing with securities and 

those related matters. And as I’ve read through it, of course, it 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

is one that needs to clearly be well-thought-out, 

well-articulated, and I appreciate the comments that have been 

made to date on it. 

 

Fortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have my stories about 

buying pots and pans or getting my lawn fertilized and that type 

of thing that would relate to this bill. I don’t have the same kind 

of experience going on on a Saturday afternoon, buying some 

over-the-counter derivatives. But I will do my best because I 

think what you want to do is have bills that work for every 

person. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And I think that, as the minister in his opening comments 

alluded to, that a lot of the things that happened in the financial 

crisis of 2008, there were many causes, but one of the things 

that played a role was over-the-counter derivatives. And he 

talked about the role it played in the financial crisis of 2008. 

And it’s important, and I quote: 

 

In 2008 the OTC market and the complexity of OTC 

derivative contracts was compounded by a lack of 

transparency. This made it challenging for regulators to 

identify the risk before the crisis. This is contrast to the 

trading of derivatives on regulated exchanges which did 

not experience any significant failures during the 

financial crisis of 2008. 

 

So it’s important that we get it right as we see, in Saskatchewan 

and across the world and throughout North America 

particularly, the interest in securities and online investing and 

this type of thing and how it’s important that there be some 

level of transparency and that people who are investing have 

confidence in this system. And clearly in 2008 confidence in 

the system was severely, severely shaken as we saw particularly 

what happened in the United States. And they’re still 

recovering, and of course what happens in the United States has 

a major, major chilling effect here in Canada. 

 

And so this is an important piece of legislation, and it’s 

important that we get it right. And so we’ll be making sure that 

we talk to the stakeholders and those in the know about this 

type of thing to say, does this meet the test? Does it meet the 

needs of investors, ordinary people who are looking to invest 

their money to make sure they’re not at risk, that they’re going 

to see some return, and that you don’t have the large, systemic 

computer-driven collapses of what happened. 

 

We often think back now about the marketplace. And clearly 

it’s got to be, now it’s becoming one of the most complex areas 

for anybody to try to understand when you’re investing money, 

when you’re talking about particularly relating it to the housing 

market, when people were hedging their mortgages and 

mortgages were grouped together and the impact of that. Boy, it 

does make your head spin to try to keep track of all the details. 

 

So we’re glad that this is being taken on and we hope that it’s 

the right thing. And of course, as I said, we’ll be looking at it 

further with those in the know. And you know, when we think 

back and we think back about some of the stories that came out, 

particularly from Wall Street where this kind of investment and 

people who were able to benefit greatly by the kind of things 

that were unethical, but clearly they were able to do it because 

of the lack of transparency that the minister speaks about. 

 

And so I think this is very, very important that we see this kind 

of work be done, that it’s transparent, that it’s clear, and people 

can understand what the risks are, and when they’re investing, 

what will happen to their money. So we’re glad to see this. And 

of course when the minister talks about jurisdictions where 

many of our Canadian firm counterparties are based, such as the 

European Union, the United States, they are . . . [inaudible] . . . 

ready to impose a new regulation on the OTC 

[over-the-counter] derivative market. And of course when they 

have those rules set out, there has to be consistency across the 

marketplace internationally, nationally, and provincially. And 

so we hope that those meet that test. This is very important. 

 

As he talked, he says, “. . . regulatory inaction is not an option 

given the commitments Canada has made as part of the G20.” 

And that’s very important that we do live up to those 

obligations. 

 

You know, one of the things, and we take a lot of pride . . . You 

know, on one hand we often hear about getting rid of 

regulations and regulations are bad, that somehow the less 

regulations, the better the marketplace can play. 

 

But you know, one of the things that we sure are proud of in 

Canada is our banking regulations, and the things that we can 

take a lot of pride in that have been balanced over the course of 

the years that meets the need of the marketplace so people can 

do their business but they do it ethically and that people are safe 

and not left in vulnerable positions. And so this kind of thing, 

and of course when our national government takes leadership at 

the G20 [Group of Twenty] and says, these are the regulations 

and hopefully they’re meeting the needs at the international 

level, and then down to the national, as I said. And now down 

to the provincial level, it’s our obligation to follow suit as soon 

as we can. So we hope that these are sufficient to meet those 

tests. 

 

Clearly it’s an important area and we cannot, we can’t all fall 

behind. We just don’t want to hear the horror stories of what 

happened in 2008 repeat itself. Just too many families, 

particularly in the United States, we can see were left in 

positions that they’re still trying to recover from. And so while 

that was limited in Canada and even more limited here in 

Saskatchewan, it’s one that we just don’t want to see again. So 

it’s a lesson learned, I guess, at the school of hard knocks. And 

of course, unfortunately for those who did lose significant 

amount of monies, particularly in their retirement funds, it was 

a hard, hard, hard lesson. 

 

So we will be watching this one very closely. It’s an important 

one and a complex one. I mean it’s one that when I look at . . . 

The legal terminology is dizzying if you’re not familiar with it. 

But I’m glad that there are people within the public sector, 

within the public service who know this area. And that’s part of 

the consumer protection authority, it references that. And I 

think that’s a good thing because people need to, as I said, have 

that confidence in the system, that there’s the leadership of the 

government, the provincial government’s there to protect 

everyone. 

 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

And more and more we know that while it’s a tough thing, it’s a 

tough thing to deal with debt, but if you’re fortunate to have 

some savings, fortunate to have some securities, you want to 

make sure that you’re not at risk of losing it because it took a 

lot of work to get your savings, to get your investments 

together. You sure don’t want to have it be lost because of 

something you couldn’t see. And I guess that’s the ultimate test, 

or the transparency test, isn’t it? You couldn’t see it. You didn’t 

think of it. It was too opaque, a term that the minister uses. So 

we think this is important. 

 

He also talks about that: 

 

this bill also provides that certain confidential records and 

information gathered by officials with the Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority may not be publicly 

disclosed. These include records relating to examination 

of market participants and self-regulatory organizations 

. . .  

 

And he goes through, he says, “Protecting the confidentiality of 

these records is critical to ensure the effective enforcement of 

securities legislation.” 

 

And I think I appreciate that in a sense of, you know, in terms 

of the business climate, you want to be competitive but yet you 

have to have some transparency. And so when you have our 

agency, the Financial Consumer Affairs Authority, being able 

to do a thorough investigation, that there’s some confidence in 

terms of the business marketplace that there will be some 

confidentiality that these records will not be bandied about and 

that there will be an ability to keep some of their practices, their 

records, what they do in a confidential manner, is important. 

 

So I think this is an important bill. Clearly if they said that 

when we look back to the crisis of 2008 and how it manifested 

itself in so many different ways — whether it was in the 

manufacturing sector in Ontario, whether it was the housing 

collapse in the States, or the financial sector with the collapse in 

terms of investments for people, particularly in terms of 

pensions — it was so widely felt and how it’s all 

interconnected. And so it’s important to make sure all links in 

the chain are strong, and whatever we can do to make that as 

strong as possible, that’s very important. And I do appreciate 

the fact that this is largely driven through a national, 

international response to make sure we don’t have that kind of 

thing happen again. 

 

And as I said, we can take a lot of pride in the fact that we do 

believe in the importance of government regulatory frameworks 

so that business can have a level playing field, so everybody 

knows what the deals are, but that the consumers, the 

individuals are protected and they’re not left in vulnerable 

positions because of a lack of transparency. 

 

It’s only fair that people can have confidence in the 

marketplace, especially when, as I said, you’re investing what 

to individual people may be large amounts of money. To others 

it may be small, but when you lose your investments and your 

pensions and you have to work several years more, this can be a 

crushing, crushing life experience at a time when you want to 

. . . when you’re looking forward to retirement and something 

comes along and essentially just blows you right out of the 

water because of some unethical behaviour and a chain of 

events that’s launched and that were within the legal 

framework, but unfortunately it was not transparent and it 

wasn’t as well thought out as it might have been. And so I hope 

that this fits the bill, that it actually meets the need that it’s 

trying to do. 

 

We also hope that there are no unintended consequences. We 

hope that people do have confidence in the marketplace, will 

invest, will look at over-the-counter derivatives as a financial 

product that they can have confidence in. We think this is 

important that when they do this kind of thing, that it will be 

fair. 

 

Now I know the minister in his remarks . . . And they were very 

technical and so I appreciate that. And of course I can’t match 

that technical knowledge and I won’t try to. So we’ll have to 

leave this to the experts to really comb through and say, yes, 

this is the right answer; this is the way it should be. Or if there 

are things that are left out, if there’s some glaring omissions, we 

clearly will be raising those questions about why isn’t this part 

of the issue. So I think this is an important issue to go forward. 

 

He does talk about the fine collection branch that will be 

operating and collecting financial compensation orders and how 

that will proceed, and I think that it seems to be all part of the 

package. 

 

And so with that I know that many other people will want to 

speak to this, and of course we hope that we will have a chance 

to speak more in committees and different venues about this 

issue. Because clearly, as I said, when you’re dealing a 

consumer protection area like this, this is an important one, that 

people say it meets the needs. It’s the right thing. It allows for 

the marketplace to offer a wide range of products, including the 

OTC derivatives, but that they’re fair and that they meet and do 

what they say they’re going to do and not anything more. 

 

And so it’s not making people accept the risk that shouldn’t be 

there. It shouldn’t be there, and that it then, you know, is part of 

a larger collapse as we saw with the financial crisis of 2008. 

You know, when I think about some of the stories and of course 

the films, the narratives of some of the things that happened in 

2008 where people lost so much money, and yet some people 

were able to walk out of that with a whole lot of money, 

millions of dollars, because they happened to be at the right 

place or it seemed like the money fell from the heavens. Now 

how did that work? I don’t know. So it’s a bit of a mystery, but 

I think this goes a long way to solving that. I think that, again as 

I said, we’ll be talking to people in the know who can assure us 

of that. That’s what we’ll be asking. I would want to know 

more about that. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll be asking a lot more 

questions about it. We’ll be having . . . I know many more 

people will want to talk a bit about this. But at the time being 

right now, it’s a very thick bill. It’s not a small one. Like some 

of the other bills will have one page or something. This again is 

some 40, 50 pages, 49 sections, very thorough. But it has to be. 

It has to be when we’re talking about contracts and financial 

contracts, some 49 sections. So a lot of work here that needs to 

be gone through and a very thorough, thorough combing of all 

the details to make sure that all the pieces fit and that it actually 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

sets out to do what it means to do and that there won’t be any 

unintended consequences. It doesn’t create any more loopholes 

or weaknesses in the legislation so problems can arise. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move 

adjournment for Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The Securities 

Act, 1988 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 65. Is it the pleasure of Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 45 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s always 

a pleasure to wade into the debate on bills in this House. And 

today I’m speaking to Bill No. 45, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in looking at the bill and the minister’s 

second reading comments, the two things that this bill proposes 

to do, Mr. Speaker, is to . . . They speak to borrowing limits and 

provisions to allow SaskTel to in fact borrow at 30-year terms 

which is consistent with the Ministry of Finance and . . . over 

30-year terms actually which is consistent with the Ministry of 

Finance and allows them to access some of the financial tools 

that the bond markets has put onto the marketplace here in 

Canada. 

 

The second part of this bill, Mr. Speaker . . . And as I said, the 

minister in his second reading comments refers to these as 

housekeeping items. But what is happening here is there is . . . 

The minister says here: “Currently [you need an order in 

council] SaskTel requires an order in council for all lands 

purchased in excess of $100,000.” And the minister says, “This 

can delay the purchase of land for cell towers.” And he’s 

arguing that this “. . . impacts SaskTel’s ability to provide 

exceptional service to its customers in the highly competitive 

cellular market . . .” 

 

So they are removing the need for an order in council for lands 

purchased in excess of over $100,000, which of course our 

Crowns are . . . Crowns exist to provide exceptional service to 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The whole 

goal of Crown corporations is to ensure all Saskatchewan 

residents have access to the services, that it’s not limited or that 

it’s just not people in Saskatoon or Regina who have access to 

services, but people in the North, people in rural and remote 

communities have access to whether it’s cell service, Internet 

service, all those kinds of things. 

 

So I think it’s useful or I understand why the minister is saying 

that it’s important to be able to react quickly. But any time 

you’re removing a piece of oversight or diminishing oversight 

in any case, there are some concerns. Our giving more power 

and less scrutiny to government is problematic, especially here 

in this province where we’ve had some difficult financial times 

and where there were some less than stellar borrowing practices 

in the ’80s, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So yes, we do understand the 

importance to be able move quickly to provide services to the 

people of Saskatchewan by accessing land. But obviously it is 

some concern that there is a little bit less scrutiny or oversight 

in that. 

 

Also the one thing that stands out, this is a government who, 

particularly thinking back to 2009 with the Crown sector, took 

$755 million in one year from the Crown sector. So the Crown, 

in this case SaskTel, is increasing its borrowing limits. But one 

could argue that this enables the government to mask, mask 

some of the debt that it’s incurring by not having it in the 

General Revenue Fund. Instead, that borrowing is happening in 

the Crowns, and because the government doesn’t report on a 

summary financial basis, we don’t get a full picture of the 

province’s accounting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So that is a bit of a problem. But these are early days when we 

receive . . . Sorry, I have a bit of a cold, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

These are early days. We’ve just seen these bills in the last 

couple of weeks, and it does seem like a pretty simple bill. But 

our job as the opposition is to take a look at the bill and see if 

there’s any other questions or concerns, and as the opposition, 

we will continue to do that. 

 

And with that I would like to move adjournment of debate on 

Bill No. 45, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act and The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 45. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 46 — The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The topic of pension, 

something that everyone should think about often. Some people 

think lots about it and act about it, and others put it off, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s an important topic because it talks about the 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

type of lifestyle and benefits that one can have when they’ve 

completed their working years, Mr. Speaker. And it’s an 

important topic because we know that individuals in society, 

those that have paid into pension plans for so many years, Mr. 

Speaker, deserve to receive the benefits according to the rules 

of the plans. 

 

And so when we’re looking at pensions, it’s a really important 

issue for everyone. It’s top of mind, Mr. Speaker, for people 

who are retired or people that are close to retirement. I think, 

you know, some individuals might look at their pension 

numbers and use that as a calculation as to when they might be 

able to finish working or complete working or do some sort of 

semi-retirement arrangement. For others, Mr. Speaker, it’s more 

of a far-off prospect but still thought about from time to time, I 

would think, by most people. 

 

So whenever we’re making decisions around pensions and 

there’s legislation on pensions, it is important to get it right. We 

know that there have been many discussions provincially as 

well as federally with the types of pensions and old age security 

and benefits that individuals in the country have in their senior 

years. And it’s rarely without controversy, Mr. Speaker, that 

there are changes to pension plans without people raising their 

voices. And rightfully so because when people pay into a plan 

for many years, it’s only fair that they expect the benefits to be 

there when they’re needed, when they’re entitled to them. But 

pensions are also very important, Mr. Speaker, because they 

also involve the role of the employer who pays into a plan, 

recognizing the work that the employee is doing, the 

contributions that the employee is making. 

 

Generally speaking, Mr. Speaker, there are two types of 

pension plans: either the defined benefit plan or the defined 

contribution. The defined contribution plan, Mr. Speaker, where 

the employee would put in some and then there’d be some of 

type matching arrangement by the employer, and it’s put into 

some sort of fund where the employee has a say in levels of risk 

that he or she is willing to assume and also assumes more of the 

risk associated with the plan and fluctuations in the market and 

how the pension dollars are invested. So that’s the one side of 

the equation. And for most people, Mr. Speaker, defined 

contribution plans, I would imagine, are more common these 

days. And there’s been a shift from other types of plans to 

defined contribution plans. Most for example most civil 

servants in the province paying into the public employees 

pension plan, or PEPP, would fall under that category. 

 

However the defined benefit plan, Mr. Speaker, is a different 

arrangement where an employee once they hit a magic number 

of age and years of service are able to retire and then be given a 

percentage of their annual or monthly earnings on a going 

forward basis. And in some situations, Mr. Speaker, that benefit 

may be indexed so that it increases as inflation in the country 

occurs. And so it’s a very secure model, Mr. Speaker, in the 

sense that when individuals who have been working in a career 

for a period of time have put in the service, they know that they 

will be getting a certain benefit for the duration of their life. 

And then when they die, that benefit would end, though there 

are most often spousal arrangements for entitlements to pension 

plans under a defined benefit scenario. 

 

So this piece of legislation here, Mr. Speaker, I make those 

introductory comments because I think it’s important to set the 

stage for the nature of the discussion that we’re looking at with 

this particular piece of legislation, the municipal employees’ 

pension plan, which is a defined benefit plan. As the minister 

said in his second reading speech — our Finance minister, Mr. 

Speaker — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment 

Act, the plan is commonly referred to as the M-E-P-P. Perhaps 

it’s pronounced or said as MEPP [municipal employees’ 

pension plan]. I’m not too sure on that, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a 

defined benefit pension plan administered by the Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Commission. 

 

So when we’re looking at possible changes to a pension plan, 

especially when it’s a defined benefit plan, there’s sort of two 

main factors I think that we need to consider. One is the 

solvency or the financial well-being of the plan and the fund, 

whether or not there’s enough money being contributed by the 

employer and the employees in order to ensure that the dollars 

will be there in the long run, in the years ahead, as people retire 

— live increasingly long, Mr. Speaker, thankfully in most cases 

— and are expecting a benefit, and there needs to be enough 

dollars being contributed on an ongoing basis in order to keep 

the defined benefit plan on good ground. So the solvency and 

the health and the well-being of the fund is one factor to 

consider. 

 

What’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to consider is the aspect of 

contributions and the aspect of benefits. And so when 

employees have worked for many years, Mr. Speaker, have 

given their years of service under existing plans and rules, it’s 

fair as most would see, Mr. Speaker, and as many courts would 

discuss, that they’re entitled to the arrangement of the plan at 

the time that they signed up and paid into the plan for many 

years. 

 

So there’s a benefit that pensioners are entitled to. And then at 

the same time, there’s a responsibility for the employer in the 

situation with defined benefit plans to pay into it and ensure 

that it’s on good ground. 

 

So looking at these changes, we should never take any sort of 

change to pension plans lightly. We always have to make sure 

that we ask the correct and the proper questions. Many of the 

plans, many of the changes here are of different nature. Some of 

them are more administrative and perhaps more modernizing 

and some of them might have a larger story behind them. And 

that’s information that we don’t necessarily know given the 

short length of the minister’s second reading speech. 

 

There’s one aspect about continuing the length of terms for 

Chair so that there is continuity. Mr. Speaker, that’s one 

component, so that’s an important point to make note of, but 

there is also, Mr. Speaker, the issue on plans: we want to ensure 

that there is the necessary steps being taken, that there is new 

leadership coming in, and proper decisions are being made. 

 

There are also, Mr. Speaker, comments that are made by the 

minister concerning benefits being given to spouses in the 

situation of marital breakdown or a death of a loved one, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s important to have clarity around that. And it’s 

based on, the changes here, I would imagine that the changes 

being brought forward are coming out of a situation where the 

pension plan has had a problem or a concern. So I would hope 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

that issue has been handled properly and appropriately and that 

this legislation would help in that matter, but I am interested in 

finding the background story on what is the impetus for this 

change that’s being brought forward and proposed by the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, some important comments. 

Whenever we’re talking about pensions, we need to be careful 

and we need to be thorough. And I look forward to ongoing 

discussions on the issue of pensions and on the particular issue 

of Bill No. 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment 

Act. So with that I would move to adjourn debate on this piece 

of legislation. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 46, The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 47 — The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to enter debate on Bill No. 47, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts. Mr. Speaker, this bill 

actually seems fairly straightforward, that basically the 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority is going to be renamed the 

Water Security Agency. So the bill itself is only, well two pages 

double-sided, but basically it is a name change. 

 

I do know the minister in his comments, changing the name of 

the Watershed Authority to the Water Security Agency, I know 

the minister in his comments, which isn’t mentioned in the bill, 

did talk about amalgamation: “The Water Security Agency 

brings together for the first time all of government’s core water 

management responsibilities and technical expertise to ensure a 

comprehensive and integrated approach to water management.” 

So I know that the minister mentioned that in his second 

reading comments, but that’s not in the bill, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The one thing about water, the minister actually had quoted Mr. 

Thomas Axworthy and Mr. Bob Sandford: “Water security is 

the foundation for food and energy security and for overall 

long-term social and economic development,” and I would 

completely agree with that. Without access to water for 

drinking, for cleaning, for economic activity . . . Water is the 

thing that we need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more than anything 

else. And I think sometimes here in Saskatchewan with the 

abundance of the lakes and rivers that we have here, that we 

often take water and water security for granted. 

 

I know here in, well not here, but in Saskatoon over the 

summer, in a community in Saskatoon, there was a boil-water 

alert for about a week. So we take completely for granted that 

when we turn on the taps that clean, safe water will flow from 

the taps, but that isn’t the reality all the time. As I said, this 

community in Saskatoon faced some difficulties. I know in 

communities around the province that can be a very real issue, 

and living under a boil-water alert is not particularly fun, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So making sure that we have access to clean 

water for drinking and living is imperative. 

 

In terms of recreation and livelihood, I grew up actually just 

four blocks from the South Saskatchewan River. It’s been a 

huge part of my life since I was about 10 years old and able to 

have permission to run or ride my bike along the river. I know 

the huge role that the South Saskatchewan plays in my life and 

continues to in terms of recreation. And many people in 

Saskatoon and visitors to Saskatoon, the access to the amazing 

river valley and the water is hugely important. For myself too, 

when it comes to recreation or accessing all the waterways that 

we have here in Saskatchewan, I’ve had the opportunity — it’s 

been many years now — but to canoe the William River into 

Lake Athabasca, which I would say is probably one of the 

highlights of my 42 years. It was the most amazing experience, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be on this pristine waterway, the 

William, and see both the power and the purity of that body of 

water, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Apparently I’ve mentioned my age, which I don’t think is a big 

deal, but the current Minister of Highways thinks it’s a big deal. 

So anyway, recreation and access to our waterways is an 

important part of life for many people here in Saskatchewan. 

This is another interesting fact. I think water for birth, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is an important thing. I know from my own 

experience, my second daughter was born in a big plastic pool 

in my living room which . . . So water is something that we 

need from the start of life to the end of life. So making sure that 

our waterways and security of that water source is absolutely 

imperative. 

 

And this bill, as I said, simply speaks to the name change of the 

Watershed Authority to the Water Security Agency, which I 

wonder a little bit about why. Why the name change? You 

always wonder when a bill comes before the House, what’s the 

rationale? Where has this come from? So again, is this a 

rebranding effort? I’m not sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we 

have no idea what the Water Security Agency or why, why the 

need to change the name from the Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority to the Water Security Agency. And that wasn’t laid 

out. Why the change has happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has 

not been laid out in this Act. 

 

But I think the reality is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we all 

recognize that water again is imperative for life, for quality of 

life, for health, for economic development, all those things, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and making sure that there . . . We often take 

that for granted and we need to think more about this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

No. 47, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority Act, 2005 and to make consequential amendments to 

other Acts. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 47. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 48 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m pleased to rise today to speak to Bill No. 48, which is An 

Act to amend The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases Act. 

 

I have a few comments about the bill itself and I guess its 

predecessor bill, or I guess the bill is now chapter M-2.01 

which is The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

and Adaptation to Climate Change Act which I understand, 

although it was assented to over two years ago in May, it’s still 

not in force. And so I do have a couple questions about that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But first of all to the bill itself, the minister’s indicated that it’s 

just meant to allow the province to negotiate an equivalency 

agreement with the federal government on the federal coal-fired 

electricity regulations that were gazetted just a couple of 

months ago in the House of Commons. 

 

And so what appears to be happening here is this equivalency 

agreement is just to avoid duplication of regulation, which 

makes a lot of sense. We see that happening when there’s 

duplication of regulation in things like food inspection. 

Unfortunately that seems to be flip-flopping around, a lot of it. 

So we have to be very careful when we’re talking about a 

duplication of regulation in these areas, and particularly in the 

environmental area because we’ve seen it with food inspection. 

And what happens is that the province got out of the field 

because the federal government was in the field. But now we 

have the federal government and the Minister of Agriculture 

getting out of the field, and so now the province is going to 

have to step up its efforts to make sure it’s in the field. 

 

And these kinds of flip-flops are something that I think are 

unfortunate, particularly in times of fiscal restraint like we see 

these days, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so in terms of 

management and reduction of greenhouse gases, as we know, 

this is an issue that’s very important in the entire planet, not just 

in the province of Saskatchewan or the country, the nation of 

Canada, but indeed around the world. And we know that 

greenhouse gases are seriously impacting climate, and we see 

the types of extremes of climate that pretty much has 

established science these days that is caused by the increase of 

greenhouse gases in the planet, and certainly in Canada and 

Saskatchewan where we know Saskatchewan is one of the 

largest producers of greenhouse gases. 

 

Now I’m looking right now at a document that was presented 

actually today in Calgary by the deputy minister of the 

Department of Environment, Liz Quarshie, and it was presented 

to the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. And she 

gave an update on Saskatchewan to CAPP [Canadian 

Association of Petroleum Producers], particularly on 

environmental issues. 

 

And one of the things she had was a pie chart on the 

PowerPoint presentation that she provided. And in that pie 

chart, she sort of indicated where greenhouse gas emissions are 

coming from in Saskatchewan. And I think the public might be 

interested to take a close look at this kind of chart, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because although we think, you know, in our 

residential buildings and in our homes, that that’s a source of a 

large amount of greenhouse gases escaping . . . And if you 

don’t have secure and sustainable houses, there’s a lot of 

greenhouse gases escaping into the atmosphere. But actually, 

residential buildings in Saskatchewan only account for 3 per 

cent of the greenhouse gas emissions that are being emitted in 

our province. 

 

So who do you think the other culprits might be then? Well 

maybe it’s big commercial buildings. But in fact those are only 

responsible for 2 per cent of the greenhouse gas emissions. I 

know, then it might be cars. We’re thinking, well it’s got to be 

our personal cars. Well they certainly do have a lot of 

emissions, but cars, personal transportation, 6 per cent, 6 per 

cent of greenhouse gas emissions. Well maybe it’s those big 

trucks we see driving up and down Highway 11. Yes, there’s a 

lot of those, and in fact more and more all the time. Well they 

account for 11 per cent. So we’re still not even really about a 

quarter of the greenhouse gas emissions that come from the 

province. Homes are 3 per cent. I already mentioned that, but I 

want to reclarify that for the previous minister so that he knows 

how much his house is responsible. 

 

Then we look at there’s other three main areas, other three 

sources of greenhouse gas emissions. First of all agriculture, a 

large amount of greenhouse gas emissions come from the 

agriculture fields — 17 per cent. Then what would be next? 

You would think well probably power plants, and that’s correct. 

Coal-fired power plants I assume would be a large part of this. 

Twenty per cent of our greenhouse gas emissions come from 

coal-fired plants. And the big winner in the greenhouse gas 

emission contest in Saskatchewan is the oil and gas sector — 37 

per cent. Almost half of our greenhouse gas emissions come 

from the oil and gas sector. 

 

So that’s something that might be interesting to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And certainly the management of these 

greenhouse gases is something this government is attempting to 

deal with, and also they’re trying to reduce it. We heard some 

numbers the other day that in fact they haven’t introduced any 

significant measures since they came into government to 

actually reduce greenhouse gases. And although there have 

been some lofty targets set for 2020, we’re not sure how that’s 



1944 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

going to go for this government. So we’ll be watching that very 

carefully. 

 

Certainly coal-fired emissions from power plants, as I said 

earlier, is responsible for approximately 20 per cent of the 

greenhouse gas emissions. And hopefully these bills that this 

government has, well, they’ve introduced — they haven’t 

passed them yet — will make a change. But we’re not sure 

because of the environmental scan that was recently released 

for the department shows that no change has really occurred 

yet. So again we see lots of good words and lots of good 

intentions, but we will be looking for results. And as much as 

I’m hopeful, I’m not going to hold my breath, Mr. Speaker, on 

these just yet. 

 

So Bill 48, what it does is it seems to try to bring the 

government’s bill that was introduced two years ago into the 

requirements for the equivalency agreement with the federal 

government in order to allow the province to occupy this field 

of regulation. And the basic change that the bill attempts to do 

is to allow for individuals or citizens to have an investigatory 

power as well, and that’s a legal requirement for the 

equivalency agreement. So the citizens, anyone over the age of 

18, this amendment will allow anyone over the age of 18 to 

apply to the minister for an investigation into a matter they 

think is a contravention of the Act. So this is something that’s 

drawing citizens in and giving them some of the responsibility 

and powers to ensure that the government is doing its job and 

that if there’s a contravention of the Act, which is a fairly 

significant Act in terms of greenhouse gas emissions, that the 

government will be responsible for ensuring the investigation 

takes place. 

 

So the first change they’re adding is section 62.1. And that one 

just defines who it is that can actually apply for an 

investigation, and that would be any resident of Saskatchewan 

who’s 18 years old and is of the opinion that a contravention 

against this Act or the regulations or code has been committed. 

So they’re allowed under this section to apply to the minister 

for a contravention. And in their application, they certainly 

have to state who they are, what’s the nature of the alleged 

contravention, the names of people alleged to be involved in the 

commission of the contravention, and a concise statement of the 

evidence supporting those allegations. So those are the three 

requirements for any citizen to file or apply for an investigation. 

 

And once that happens — this is a very strong section, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — after 20 days of receiving one of those 

applications by any resident of Saskatchewan, as long as 

they’ve given all the information required, the minister has to 

send them a letter and tell them or provide them in some form 

of acknowledgement of their receipt of the application and the 

minister shall investigate all matters that the minister considers 

necessary to determine the facts. So the minister has no choice. 

They have to investigate as far as the minister considers 

necessary. So there is a bit of room for the minister there to 

make some sort of determination, but the minister has to do 

this. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And then after acknowledging, the minister has to report to that 

same applicant every 90 days on the progress of the 

investigation. So no matter how long it takes, the minister’s 

required to file a report with that applicant. It’s a very good 

move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is something that really keeps 

the applicant in the loop and feels like they’re part of the 

process. So I think that’s an important change, and if it brings it 

within the equivalency agreement that the government’s 

negotiating, that makes good sense. 

 

And of course the minister is also required under the second 

new clause to “. . . include an estimate of the time required to 

complete the investigation or to implement action.” The 

subsection, the new subsection also says a report isn’t required 

if the investigation’s discontinued within that current 90-day 

period that the minister is under. 

 

And then subsection (5) of 62.2 says the minister can 

discontinue if he’s of the opinion that the contravention does 

not require further investigation. So certainly there’s an 

opportunity there for the minister upon consideration to 

discontinue the investigation if he or she feels it’s not 

warranted. However if they do discontinue it, again they have 

to report to the complainant or the applicant and make sure that 

they’re aware of it and the reasons, and they must state the 

reasons why. 

 

So I think this is definitely a positive move for including 

concerns of citizens in Saskatchewan and ensuring that they are 

part of the process of dealing with the contraventions under this 

Act. 

 

I would really encourage the minister to take the similar 

approach when it comes to investigating illegal drainage under 

the Saskatchewan, well it will be the Saskatchewan water 

security Act because the process that happens there is actually 

quite a bit different. And in that case, neighbours are pitted 

against neighbours. They have to report against their neighbour 

first before the ministry even gets involved or the authority. 

And in that case, you know, sadly the authority seems to be 

understaffed, and they’re not able to keep up with the volume 

of complaints. And we don’t see this kind of process where the 

ministry or the authority that’s responsible for the 

investigations are required to report and make 90-day reports 

and then every . . . you know, and then let the people know who 

have complained. In fact those people have to pay to have the 

complaint heard by the, currently, the Watershed Authority. 

 

So I think this kind of approach makes a lot more sense and 

would probably be more proactive. And certainly I think people 

would think more than once about actually conducting illegal 

drainage on their property. And currently I don’t think the 

current process seems to encourage people to follow the law. 

There seems to be more benefit in not following the law 

because it’s so difficult for this government and for the 

authority to enforce it. 

 

So I’m thinking since the minister is responsible for The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act is also 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, this is 

an approach I think that we would certainly recommend that he 

consider for the control and certainly reduction of illegal 

drainage which is an equally important issue here in 

Saskatchewan. Well maybe not as important as greenhouse 

gases and climate change, but it certainly is one of the 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

contributing factors to some of the climate change that we see 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other thing I did want to talk about 

a little bit was sort of the climate change framework that this 

government is approaching. And I wanted to indicate that the 

province has signed an agreement in principle on efforts to 

address climate change with the federal government in 2009. So 

take a little look at the timeline here. So this government signed 

an agreement in principle in 2009. Then they introduced a bill. 

And in 2010, the bill passed but . . . Or sorry, it received third 

reading, but it’s not in force yet. That’s more than two years 

ago now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, two and a half years ago. We 

still don’t have the bill in place. Now two and a half years later, 

the government is finally introducing changes to enable it to 

enter into the equivalency agreement that was contemplated 

back in 2009. 

 

So I think this is another example. We’ve seen two or three 

examples in this session where this government is not properly 

passing bills to begin with. They’re not doing the proper 

consultation. They’re not doing their homework. They’re 

hastily passing the bills. And then we see two years, two and a 

half years later, oops, we forgot to deal with the citizenship 

requirements under the equivalency agreement. We now can’t 

pass the bill until we do the proper amendments. Oh okay, 

we’ve got to get the amendments through this session. Those 

likely won’t get through until next year. It’ll be a full three 

years before they can pass the original bill that was passed in 

2010. And they’re still not able to sign the equivalency 

agreement with the federal government that they entered into in 

2009 or they promised to commit to negotiate an equivalency 

agreement. 

 

So this government is really quite behind. Alberta has already 

passed this equivalency agreement. They’re caught up, and 

they’re dealing with it although their greenhouse gas emissions 

are significantly higher than ours, as you can imagine, with the 

tar sands and the oil and gas activity in that province. 

 

So greenhouse gas emissions are a serious issue. It’s one that 

we take very seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we will be 

watching not only the progress of this particular bill but more 

importantly this government’s progress on its commitments to 

Canada, to the federal government, to the people of 

Saskatchewan to ensure that not only these lofty goals are set 

but really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these lofty goals are met. 

And based on what we’ve seen so far, we’re actually going in 

the other direction. 

 

So if carbon capture happens and coal-fired generation, they 

can get the ball rolling. Hopefully that will make a difference. 

That’s one area where this government is making, attempting to 

make progress, but there are other areas that have been 

overlooked and we haven’t seen any action on. 

 

So at this point, I think I can say that the amendments to this 

bill or the Act, I guess it is, seem to be in order. It will move us 

along, our obligations, federally with Environment Canada and 

that hopefully once these pass, if we can get them through, this 

government will be able to proceed in a more timely fashion 

with its obligations to the federal government. 

 

I think that’s the extent of my comments at this point. I’m sure 

my colleagues are going to want to comment on this as well. 

And so at this point, I’d like to adjourn debate on Bill 48, An 

Act to amend The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 48. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 49 — The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions Act. And 

this professional legislation is being amended in some ways 

that I think requires some further study and further information 

as we move forward. 

 

The minister, when he introduced the bill, talked about how this 

title as a forester or professional forester would be further 

protected, but I think we need to understand what the issues are 

in the forestry business. 

 

Now I have to say off the top that I’m a lawyer by profession 

and not a forester, but I have had many years of experience in 

forestry as a worker in the mills, and also my uncle was very 

involved in the forestry business. So I know quite a bit about 

this over many decades. And one of the interesting issues that 

comes from looking at this particular bill is how they’ve 

decided to change the definition of forestry. And it’s not 

entirely clear from the minister’s comments or from the 

comments in the explanatory notes and other information that’s 

here why these changes are being made. 

 

Our present legislation has the definition of the professional 

practice of forestry under section 2(m) state that it includes all 

of the standard things that foresters do. And I think it’s quite 

interesting to actually look at that. First one is, “. . . the 

planning, classification, inventory, mapping, measurement, 

certification, appraisal and evaluations of forests and forested 

land.” 

 

And we know that in Saskatchewan we have a large boreal 

forest with some little pieces that are south of the boreal area. 

But our forest is actually the size of modern-day Germany. So 

we have a very great interest in making sure that this forestry 

definition and use in Saskatchewan is appropriate because all of 

these plans for the harvesting of trees, whether it’s done 

through some of the larger companies or through some of the 

smaller companies, all have to be certified by a forester. And so 

therefore the plan and classification of the trees, the mapping, 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

all those things need to be approved by the forester. So that’s 

the core definition of practice of forestry. But also in this whole 

process it also includes how you set out the development and 

implementation of the harvesting programs and then 

subsequently examining how the harvesting has been done, and 

then ultimately auditing how that has been done. 

 

Also there’s a role for the foresters to be very much involved in 

the long-term cycle of the forest, and I think we often forget 

about that. What we know in Saskatchewan is that our forests 

have a lifetime of about 100 years, maybe slightly less, and that 

when forests are I guess conserved or preserved in a way that 

allows for more older trees, they’re subject to risk of disease 

but also forest fire. When we look at a map of Saskatchewan, 

we can see the numbers of fires over the years which have been 

part of the rejuvenation of the forest, and much of the work of 

the professional forester is to understand how the harvesting fits 

in with the natural cycle of the growth and then death of the 

forest. 

 

And so it’s important that the people who are involved in this 

area have those professional skills. What happens also then is 

professional foresters who are on the licensing side will 

approve plans done by other foresters and make sure that they 

follow the standards that have been set out in the forestry 

legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And then finally there’s the other roles that it has here of 

developing the integrated forest land use plans. And we’ve seen 

in Saskatchewan some of those plans like the ones around 

Meadow Lake or around Prince Albert or over on the east side 

around the Hudson Bay area. All of those are extremely 

important for the long-term health of the forest but also for the 

health of the communities and the industries that rely on those 

forests. 

 

And finally there’s a role of a forester to actually be the 

manager within the various commercial companies that are 

involved in the harvest of the forest. 

 

Now what this legislation does is it takes out of this 

professional practice of forestry two terms that have been there, 

or are still in there now, but will be removed by this legislation. 

One of them is “the teaching of forestry at a college, technical 

institute or university,” and the other is “the conducting of 

research activities related to forestry.” 

 

Now it’s not entirely clear from the information that we’ve 

received why those two areas have been removed from the 

definition of professional practice of forestry. I can just see 

from my own profession as a lawyer that we do not remove 

lawyers from membership in the Law Society because they’re 

teachers or doing research. They end up paying the fees like 

everyone else if that’s what they want to do. 

 

Now they’re not absolutely required to do that, and it may be 

that there is something here that relates to the fact of requiring 

professional fees, but we don’t have that information. Or it may 

be that there was some mention of trying to be in sync with our 

western neighbours and their forestry legislation, but we don’t 

have that information either. 

 

[16:15] 

So it raises a question for me as I look at this legislation, that 

people who have traditionally been involved in the professional 

practice of forestry are now being moved out of that category 

into what they call a “broader science of forestry.” Now I’m not 

quite sure exactly what that means. 

 

Now there may be another issue which I guess we have to 

speculate on. And that may be an issue that people who 

primarily are teaching forestry or primarily doing research have 

also been able to, on the side, do all of these other forestry-like 

activities and maybe take work away from professional 

foresters, and that therefore in the profession itself they’ve 

made some decision to try to move these people who are maybe 

a bit of freelancers or people working on the side. Now we have 

no, once again, no evidence that that’s what has been proposed 

here. But it raises the question of, if that’s one of the reasons 

that this legislation has come forward. 

 

So there in that one small provision we’ve ended up . . . and so, 

which under the Bill 49 is section 2 amended. We’ve taken out 

two small clauses but there’s a lot of questions about why that 

has happened. 

 

Now they then go on into another section which under the bill 

is section 4 and it says section 22(1) is amended. And so what it 

then does is to I think basically add something called a 

restricted member, but once again it doesn’t really explain what 

this person is and why the restriction is there. It will expand the 

use, it says, of the professional seal to other categories of 

membership but it doesn’t totally explain why this particular 

perspective is taken. And so it . . . Now it appears also here that 

they’ve created some other categories or maybe included some 

other people who have forest technology training into the 

professional forester designation. But once again it’s not 

entirely clear why this is being done or what it will do to 

change the nature of the profession in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so I know that professional legislation is often not brought 

to this House without a request but in this area once again it’s 

not entirely clear what the legislation is, the purpose of this 

change is. 

 

So we need to continue to look at this and see if more 

information is forthcoming as this matter proceeds. But it’s 

important that we don’t dilute the professional standards of the 

people who are monitoring our forests in Saskatchewan because 

they’re part of a long-term resource in this province. So in those 

particular sections of that, we end up with some changes. 

 

Now as we can all see, this bill is only two pages long but 

already it’s raised a number of questions for us here in the 

opposition and we look forward to getting more information as 

to exactly why many of these changes have been included. 

 

And so then the next area of change is section 5 which adds a 

section after section 23 in the existing legislation. And this 

amendment says that there are individuals and classes of 

persons that may engage in activities falling under the 

definition of professional practice of forestry without being 

registered as a professional forester, a professional forest 

technologist, or a restricted member. So that’s an interesting 

point that there are people that do some of these types of work, 

but they’re not registered under this Act. So the question 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

becomes, well why do they have these special exemptions for 

these people? 

 

So we need to then look at, well who is it that can be a 

professional forester? And this new section 23.01 says that 

basically a professional forester is a person who is registered as 

a member with the association of professional forest 

technologists, registered with an association as a professional 

forester, or is registered with the association as a restricted 

member pursuant to section 19(6). And so those restricted 

members are I guess people who have been approved by the 

particular association. 

 

But then it goes on to say that there are people that can do some 

of the activities which are regulated by the professional 

legislation for foresters that don’t have to be a member of the 

association. And so the first category is people who are 

foresters-in-training or forest technologists-in-training, 

provided that they’re working with a professional forester. So 

that seems to be a reasonable exemption. 

 

The second person who doesn’t have to be under this legislation 

is an individual who works “. . . on property or premises owned 

or occupied by that person, if the work is for the sole benefit of 

that person.” So that includes the person who has a forest on 

their own land. They can go and do forestry work with that 

forest that they own without causing any difficulty under the 

professional forestry legislation. Now that’s an interesting 

concept that, you know, obviously is a holdover from how 

things have happened in Saskatchewan, but it does raise the 

question about the responsibility when different people or 

different groups own a portion of the forest where the 

management of the forest is crucial when it includes all of these 

privately owned pieces. 

 

Another person who is exempted is “a member of the Canadian 

Forces performing his or her duties in the Forces.” So that 

raises quite a few interesting possibilities. I assume it’s the 

issue of taking down trees when they’re in doing whatever 

work they’re doing in the forces, but does it also include some 

other activities of planning around the use of the forest? And 

we do know that there are some parts of the northern forest in 

Saskatchewan that were part of military lands or have some 

military reserve status. So this may relate to some of that but 

once again it’s not entirely clear why that exemption is there. 

 

Then subsection (d) talks about another exemption where a 

person is responding to: 

 

a present or imminent situation or condition that requires 

prompt action to prevent or limit: 

 

(i) loss of life; or  

 

(ii) harm or damage to the safety, health or welfare of 

people. 

 

So that’s not entirely clear what that is but presumably it might 

relate to a forest fire or it might relate to some other situation. 

So that would be helpful to have some explanation for that. 

 

Subsection (e) talks about an exemption for an agrologist. Now 

maybe this relates to the practice of tree farming and the rapid 

growth of trees within a farming-like operation or a forestry 

agriculture kind of a situation, and I think that may be 

appropriate but once again we should probably get some 

information about that. 

 

And then it also, under (f), gives an exemption for a land 

surveyor who is practising their surveying skills under the 

meaning of The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors 

Act or a Canada Lands Surveyor. And so I assume there are 

some things that these surveyors would do that would infringe 

on The Forestry Professions Act. But once again I think we 

could use some information that would help us there. 

 

And then we have under section (g) an exemption for a 

professional engineer or professional geoscientist who are 

doing some of their work. Now does this relate to the types of 

clearing of the forest or plans that are created around some of 

the mining operations in the North or some of the oil and gas 

well operations? And does that mean then that the requirement 

to have a professional forester do an overall plan for an area 

could be overridden by somebody with some other purposes? 

And where does this exemption lie? And who makes the 

decision as to whether the engineer or the geoscientist’s 

approval of a particular process overrides that of the 

professional forester who is out to protect the forest? So there’s 

a big question on that one. 

 

Section (h) in this new section also gives the prospector 

engaged in the activity of prospecting, whether they’re doing it 

for themselves or for others, they also get an exemption under 

The Forestry Professions Act. So once again that’s a place 

where we would need some explanation as to why all these 

exemptions exist. 

 

The legislation itself, as you can see, is quite short. But it has a 

whole number of questions within the Act that are not fully 

explained yet, and I think we will have other of my colleagues 

raise some questions about this that they see. And we’ll also be 

looking forward to spending time in committee, when we get to 

that point, so that the minister and the ministry officials can 

give us a full explanation of what the intent of this legislation 

is. 

 

So at this point, I would move we adjourn debate on Bill No. 

49. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had quite a few 

questions about a two-page bill. And now we’ve got Bill 50, 

which is The Medical Profession Act. And it’s a little bit longer, 

and once again it has a number of questions. 

 

But I think what I will do is start out with looking at what 

appears to be the intent of this particular legislation. It’s clear in 

Saskatchewan that the medical profession is a profession that’s 

had professional legislation for a long time and that they have 

developed many procedures for dealing with the issues that 

arise in the practice of medicine in Saskatchewan. As well, they 

have worked very closely with their colleagues in other 

provinces across the country and in fact the States, the United 

States, and probably in other medical professions in other of the 

western medicine countries of the world. And so what we have 

is legislation that meshes with this international perspective on 

how medical profession legislation is organized. 

 

[16:30] 

 

What we’re seeing in this particular piece of legislation though 

is a move away from having some of the registers or the ways 

of keeping track of the numbers of doctors in the province 

spelled out very clearly in the legislation and moving it to 

bylaws which can be changed more easily. And as many of the 

members of government know from when they were in 

opposition, this was something that they would often spend 

many, many hours talking about in the legislature because it 

relates to transparency and openness and how the public knows 

what’s happening within a profession. A little bit of that is 

covered as it relates to The Medical Profession Act because 

many of their activities are very public, even though they’re not 

public in the legislature or in a legislative committee. 

 

So I don’t have quite as big a concern about that, but this 

legislation is once again moving the transparency about, 

especially the registers that they talk about quite regularly in 

here, into bylaws. And it sets up a generic method of describing 

these registers which then can be established by the medical 

profession itself. And that’s not necessarily a bad thing, but it 

does put a special onus on the medical profession to make sure 

that the information is open for inspection for all. And if we go 

to section 9 of the legislation, which describes new sections 27 

and 28, it really does go through to say, well these registers 

shall be kept at the head office of the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons. They’ll be open for inspection by anyone without a 

fee during the normal hours that the college is open, and it will 

have the information available for people to check up. 

 

Now what we also know is that these registers are, more often 

than not, available on the Internet. So that information is 

available by people outside of the hours that are set out in the 

legislation, and I don’t think that the medical profession is 

opposed to that. They want to make sure that the information is 

available and can be used by people when it’s needed. 

 

But one of the interesting things about the medical profession 

itself is that there are often situations where the qualifications, 

the licensure, and related professional standards of medical 

doctors are called into question. And sometimes it’s related to 

incidents that happen in another jurisdiction that harm the 

reputation of the practitioners, so they want to get away from 

that place and move to another place. Sometimes we’ve had 

situations where there are people who are not properly trained 

or properly registered that attempt to hoodwink the authorities 

and go into practice, but practically there are fewer and fewer 

incidents of that. 

 

But anyway what happens in this particular registration is that 

this moving of the registries and the control of the registers into 

the college administration itself can work, provided that it is as 

open and transparent as possible and that strict rules apply. So 

we have that whole section that is an area of concern. 

 

Now one of the things that ends up in this particular legislation 

is section 5, and section 5 where it amends subsection 6(2). And 

so effectively subsections 6(2)(f) and (g) are changed. And one 

of them is establishing the registers that I was just talking 

about, and then (g) talks about how you maintain and inspect 

the registers and make sure certificates can be issued as to the 

status of those doctors that are there. 

 

Then it goes on and talks about, under the what would I guess 

be subsection 6(2)(j.1), a whole issue around” 

 

authorizing the duly qualified medical practitioners to 

delegate the performance of acts in the practice of 

medicine specified in the bylaws to other health 

professionals specified in the bylaws in accordance with 

section 82.1. 

 

And if we look at section 26 of this Bill No. 50, I think it is, 

you will see that there is a new section after section 82, and 

basically it’s section 82.1. The title of it is “Act not to prevent 

members delegating to other health professionals.” And I think 

it’s important to actually read it here so we can try to figure out 

what is happening. 

 

82.1(1) Subject to subsection (2), nothing in this Act 

prevents or limits a duly qualified medical practitioner 

from delegating, in accordance with the bylaws, acts in the 

practice of medicine that are specified in the bylaws to 

health professionals specified in the bylaws. 

 

And then subsection (2) of that: 

 

A delegation mentioned in subsection (1) may be made 

only if the health professional has the requisite 

knowledge, education, training and skill to perform the 

specified act”. 

 

Now I think what’s being intended here is that doctors can 

delegate to physiotherapists, to nurses, to other health 

professionals, certain acts which have traditionally only been 

performed by medical professionals. But the way this particular 

clause is worded, I think there may be some problems. And let 

me explain what my concern is. Subsection (2) says: 

 

A delegation mentioned in subsection (1) may be made 

only if the health professional has the [health] requisite 

knowledge . . . 

 

Now is the health professional in that subsection (2), are they 

referring to the health professional that the work is being 

delegated to, or are they referring to the health professional who 

is the medical practitioner? Now I think they’re . . . Because the 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

question becomes who decides whether that health professional 

has the requisite knowledge? Does the medical doctor do it? 

Does their health profession legislation do it? And I think the 

intention is that there will somewhere be a list of the kinds of 

things that a health professional can do that then the medical 

professional can transfer it to. But there may need to be some 

adjustment of the wording to make sure that’s absolutely clear 

in this particular section. 

 

Now what we’re talking about here is the team practice, the 

family health centre model that was part of the health plan of 

2001, which was still the one that’s being implemented in the 

province, where you would maybe have two or three doctors 

working and covering a whole section of the province, working 

together with a team of other health professionals. And it would 

be possible to have certain of those health professionals 

designated to do different things, whether it’s admit patients 

into the health facilities or declare death or a whole number of 

activities which can be quite difficult if you don’t have enough 

medical professionals. 

 

We know in the province of Saskatchewan that we have just 

under 120 medical professional vacancies, many of them in 

rural areas or in smaller communities. And there are a whole 

number of issues that arise when people don’t have access to 

medical professionals. And this particular section in The 

Medical Profession Act, we hope will provide some assistance 

in making sure that there’s no medico-legal problems in that 

delegation. So I think it’s absolutely crucial that the wording be 

very, very clear and that it does what is intended. 

 

So let’s continue to take a look at this. And I think it may be 

that we will be asking some more questions about that section 

26 of Bill 50, which is this new section 82.1 of The Medical 

Profession Act. 

 

Now getting back to the beginnings of section 6, and this is 

subsection 6(2), which is section 5 of Bill 50, has a third 

subsection (c) which basically is adding the following clauses 

after clause (u) and now clause (u.1) in The Medical Profession 

Act: 

 

“(u.1) requiring members to provide the college with their 

home addresses and any other information that may be 

specified in the bylaws, including information about 

themselves, the places where they practice and the 

services they provide at the places where they practice; 

 

And then under subsection (u.2), which is a new one: 

 

“(u.2) establishing restrictions on the disclosure and use of 

information obtained pursuant to clause (u.1)”. 

 

So what does that mean? Well basically this is a response to the 

Privacy Commissioner’s recommendation for the medical 

profession or the College of Physicians and Surgeons to get a 

better sense and control of medical records and what happens to 

them. This allows the College of Physicians and Surgeons, I 

think on my reading of it and looking at the explanatory notes, 

to make sure that members provide information about all the 

places that they’ve practised and where they’ve practised and 

gives the college the ability to keep track of where and what 

happens if they end up leaving the practice. 

Now we know that there was a whole report by the Privacy 

Commissioner after the medical files were found in the 

dumpster down by the Golden Mile and that there are a number 

of processes that need to be reviewed to make sure that there is 

an appropriate place for old medical files or that there’s a 

proper process of disposal of these particular items. And so I 

think this may be a piece of trying to fix that particular problem 

or at least take some steps towards fixing that particular 

problem. But I’m not sure it’s entirely clear from the legislation 

or from the explanation given by the minister. 

 

And so we will be asking some more questions about this and 

whether there actually should be some stronger powers for the 

college to make sure that there is someone within the system 

that has responsibility for these important documents for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that particular clause looks like it’s going in 

the right direction but whether or not it actually does the things 

that we all expect, or especially that the Privacy Commissioner 

recommends, I’m not totally certain we can tell from this 

legislation. 

 

[16:45] 

 

When we look at changes that are made in that area, we’ll be 

looking very carefully because there appears to be a gap around 

the responsibility for those records and who pays the costs and 

whether or not there’s some role for government in doing that. 

We know that the previous minister had a lot of difficulty 

answering questions in that area and we are hoping that we’ll 

get a proposal that will resolve some of that. 

 

Now there are a number of other clauses here. I’m going to 

concentrate my effort on one more clause before I sit down and 

that’s section 32. And section 32 of the legislation “is repealed 

and the following substituted.” So this is actually section 11 of 

Bill 50, but basically the heading is “Section 32 is repealed and 

the following substituted.” And when you actually look at what 

this particular clause does, it’s quite interesting because what’s 

happening here is that the wording is very close to what was in 

the previous legislation. 

 

But let me show you what the difference is and we’ll probably 

need to have some explanation for this. Under the existing 

legislation it says the title is, “Vesting of certain powers in 

event of emergency.” And then the new version says, “Vesting 

of powers in case of emergencies.” Event, case, I’m not sure 

what the difference is. 

 

But then you go to the existing legislation we have right now. 

First line says, “The Lieutenant Governor in Council may 

declare an emergency to exist and may order . . .” and then the 

rest of the clause is exactly the same. The new one basically 

says, “The Lieutenant Governor in Council may order that the 

powers vested . . .” So it goes right into what the other 

legislation says and effectively says that the minister can take 

over the role of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, and in 

the condition where members have withdrawn their services, 

the safety of Saskatchewan residents is being threatened, and 

the council is not adequately discharging the responsibilities. 

 

So the difference is, under our existing legislation the 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2012 

Lieutenant Governor in Council has to declare an emergency. 

Under the new legislation there’s no such declaration necessary. 

It can just order that it’s taking over the council when the same 

three conditions apply. I’m not quite certain why that change is 

there, but clearly this is legislation on the 50th anniversary of 

the doctors’ strike, 1962, that relates to a situation like a strike 

by the doctors. 

 

Now this . . . Is this a hint of the kind of legislation we’re going 

to be getting under the new labour code? I’m not sure. It may 

be that this wording is being drafted to give the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council power even without declaring emergency 

or without declaring some kind of special situation to have 

arisen before they actually do something. 

 

So I would very much appreciate an explanation of this. I know 

others and my colleagues will look at this because when power 

of the bodies that regulate the medical profession can be taken 

over by Lieutenant Governor in Council, basically at their will, 

in a situation where it looks like it’s like a strike, I think that 

that’s a very serious situation and we probably should have 

some declaration of an emergency before those special powers 

are granted to the minister by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council. 

 

So there’s a change here. We don’t know why. There really 

doesn’t appear to be any description of this, and we need to 

know why this is happening. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are some other areas in this particular 

legislation that I know I or my colleagues will want to comment 

on, but at this point I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 50. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 50, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 51 — The Public 

Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise today to speak to the proposed Bill No. 51, The 

Public Inquiries Act, 2012. And this appears to be an Act that’s 

coming out of a long series of work through the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada, and I think it’s a good example of how 

the machinery of government ticks along while we as 

politicians do our thing. But this is certainly a piece of work 

that’s been in the works for a long, long time and in fact 

probably at least 10 years before it’s come to fruition. 

 

We already have a public inquiries Act, Mr. Speaker, that is in 

place, but according to the comments of the minister and 

certainly the recommendations that have come out of the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada, it was antiquated and 

needed replacing, and so that’s what the minister has attempted 

to do in this bill. 

 

It’s a bilingual Act, which I think is appropriate for something 

like this type of inquiry, and I think there’s a long history of 

public inquiries in Canada that inform this type of legislation. 

And indeed the Uniform Law Conference of Canada civil law 

section released a paper in 2003 called A Public Inquiries Act 

Issues Paper. It was authored by Professor Alastair Lucas from 

the University of Calgary. And in there, there’s a nice 

introduction of lessons learned and why public inquiries have 

arisen in Canada and other jurisdictions and sort of how they 

serve a unique function within the Canadian legal system. 

 

And there’s been much written about the public inquiries, and 

what is known for sure is that the mechanism of a public 

inquiry has been used extensively by all levels of government. 

And certainly, I think, if you put your mind to it, you can think 

of a number of inquiries that have happened here in 

Saskatchewan or indeed in Canada — the blood inquiry, the 

Gomery Inquiry, and there’s ones related to criminal law as 

well, like the Milgaard Inquiry. These are often complex: the 

Walkerton Inquiry. I mean, you could just think of any of 

number of public inquiries that have happened that are fairly 

public and certainly receive a lot of attention from the press. 

 

So it appears that public inquiries and the way they’ve evolved 

in Canada have been the subject of much discussion, and The 

Public Inquiries Act paper sort of reviews a lot of that. I 

understand that there was a working group that got together to 

put this paper together, and Saskatchewan was represented by 

Mr. Darcy McGovern who is currently the director of 

legislative services for the Ministry of Justice. And we know he 

does fine work for that ministry, and certainly again it’s another 

example of hard-working public servants putting these things, 

going through, patiently through the process required to get 

these kinds of bills actually drafted in accordance with the 

recommendations of the Uniform Law Conference of Canada 

and ensuring that we’re up to speed with other provinces as 

well. So good for Mr. McGovern for representing 

Saskatchewan in this discussion on the working team, and I 

think his work has come to fruition now with the tabling of this 

bill. 

 

There’s many criticisms on inquiries as an institution, and I 

think some of that is addressed in this paper. There’s several 

topics that they addressed and there’s a number of 

recommendations that the Uniform Law Conference of Canada 

made. If I understand correctly, there was actually a uniform 

bill that was proposed but I don’t have that in front of me today. 

What we know is that public inquiries are very unique. They’re 

very flexible. They’re easily created. Often they’re independent 

or, as the paper indicates, they’re perceived to be independent. 

So a lot of that depends on, I guess, the choice of the 

commissioners and how the inquiry is instructed by the 

government of the day. 

 

There are other forms of inquiries, as I said, like criminal 

justice ones or inquiries by government officials into conduct of 

public business. But by and large, inquiries are more general 

than that — public inquiries — and for certain they are political 



November 14, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

instruments. The paper indicates, and I’ll quote this: 

 

Governments use them for policy advice, but also to 

insulate themselves from difficult or unpleasant issues or 

to seek vindication where government credibility has been 

attacked. 

 

And I’ll close the quote there. That’s on page 3 of this paper. 

And certainly I think the Gomery inquiry was a very notorious 

example of that type of need for government to insulate itself 

from the actual wrongdoings that were alleged in that instance. 

 

So what the minister has indicated is that there’s two types of 

inquiries that this bill outlines. Part two is what we would call 

the commission of inquiry, which is a standard type of inquiry 

that I think we’re familiar with as the public and the public 

would be familiar with. But the second piece of this bill is in 

part III, and in that part the ministry is suggesting a new type of 

inquiry called a study inquiry. And the minister indicates that’s 

a smaller scale type of inquiry, would have different terms of 

reference, and would be a more appropriate way to look into 

certain matters. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure I understand what types of 

matters the minister is contemplating with this type of “study 

inquiry.” That’s not something I’m familiar with. I don’t think 

it’s something you see in other jurisdictions, but I could be 

wrong on that. It seems to be like a mini-inquiry, or maybe a 

paper inquiry with less investigation and more research. Rather 

than having witnesses come in, perhaps research papers would 

be written and presented. Unfortunately there isn’t a lot in the 

minister’s comments in terms of what this inquiry would look 

like.  

 

And I think this is something that we will have questions 

throughout the debate period that we’re in and also when this 

bill is referred to committee. I think those types of specific 

questions are something that I would have, and I’m sure my 

colleagues will as well in terms of what does he mean by study 

inquiry? What is it? What will it look like? 

 

So we know that part II is the part that deals with the 

commissions of inquiry, which is the full-blown inquiry, and 

that part III is some sort of mini-inquiry that the ministry is 

calling a study inquiry. So again, when those would be 

appropriate, what kind of expenses we’re talking about, what 

kind of costs that they will incur on the public purse, how often 

they will be used — we certainly will have a number of 

questions for that as we go through the debate on this Bill. 

 

It seems like the Act deals with most of the recommendations 

of the Uniform Law Conference of Canada. I haven’t had an 

opportunity to fully parse that to see if all the recommendations 

are incorporated into this particular piece of legislation. I’m 

sure the good folks over at Justice will have made every effort 

to do that and if there are differences, there would be reasons 

for it. The minister hasn’t indicated in his comments whether or 

not they have deviated from the recommendations that came out 

of the Uniform Law Conference of Canada, so we will have to 

explore that a little further, and perhaps the minister will give 

us some edification on that at some point as he speaks to this 

bill. 

 

The things that you will find in the bill — certainly I said 

there’s the part II and part III; there’s five sections in the bill 

altogether — and there’s things that you will find, including the 

ability to establish joint commissions that certainly is one of the 

recommendations of the Law Conference. There will be also 

different reporting requirements, so the reporting that you see in 

the previous bill is now modernized. So there’s things like 

electronic dissemination of documents and live reporting that 

can happen at the inquiry, and also that there has to be a public 

report released, you know, by the minister within a certain 

period of time. 

 

There are other things. The Lieutenant Governor in Council 

will maintain, as they have in the current bill, the ability to 

appoint, or flexibility to appoint commissioners who are 

qualified and impartial. And the commissioners will continue to 

have powers to determine their own procedures. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s very important in this type of 

inquiry because every inquiry is so unique. So you can imagine 

that as we go through each inquiry the needs of the 

commissioners are going to be different. Certainly the reporting 

requirements are going to be quite different for the witnesses, 

and the type of report that is generated is all going to be driven 

by what’s happening in terms of the type of inquiry that’s being 

struck. 

 

Funding for the participants is another power of the committee. 

And they can also compel attendance for witnesses. So there’s 

new powers for the commission, there’s old powers. But I think 

at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think my colleagues are going to 

have a lot to say about this bill as well. We’re interested in the 

studies of an inquiry, but at this point I’m going to adjourn 

debate on the bill. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House stands 

adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1921 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1921 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1921 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1921 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1922 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1922 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1922 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1922 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1923 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Jim Sinclair 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1923 

 University of Saskatchewan’s Wall of Honour Inductee 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1923 

 World Diabetes Day 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1924 

 St. John’s Anglican Cathedral Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1924 

 International Education Week 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1924 

 Drug Awareness and Healthy Lifestyles Day 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1924 

 International Snowmobile Hall of Fame Inductees 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1925 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Information Services Corporation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1925 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1925 

 Prince Albert Bridge 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1926 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1927 

 State of Corrections System 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1928 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1928 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1929 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1929 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1930 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1930 

 Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1931 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1933 

 Bill No. 62 —The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1934 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1935 

 Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012/ 

 Loi de 2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1937 

 Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1937 

 



 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1940 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1940 

 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1942 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1943 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 

 Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 

 Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1950 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 




