




















































Hansard: March 06, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 10A TUESDAY, MARCH 6, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 323 

 March 6, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Presenting petitions. Oh, sorry. Sorry, I’m 

getting ahead of myself. I was just testing to see if you were 

ready. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, we’re 

ready, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce a young man 

seated in the west gallery. I’d like to introduce Michael 

Kindrachuk. I almost said Peter because that’s his dad. But 

Michael Kindrachuk is a young man, joins my staff as 

ministerial assistant in Finance, comes from the great city of 

Saskatoon, having gone to the University of Saskatchewan, 

obtaining a Bachelor of Commerce majoring in Finance. And 

I’d ask all individuals in this Assembly to welcome Peter . . . 

Michael Kindrachuk to — gosh, I am going to have trouble all 

the rest of these next few months — welcome Michael to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

Legislative Assembly, 24 students from Balfour Collegiate, 

here in Regina, and their teacher, Ms. Erin Harlos. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that our students are engaged 

in the democratic process first-hand, so we commend Ms. 

Harlos for bringing her students to the Assembly to experience 

our democracy. Further, Mr. Speaker, as our building turns 100 

years of age this year, it’s important to note that Balfour 

Collegiate will turn 82 years old this year and still going strong. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Almost as 

old. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 

welcoming our students from Balfour Collegiate to their 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — Okay, now we’re at presenting petitions. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot twice and died from his 

injuries early in the morning of June 20th, 2011. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. We know that armed robberies such as the one that 

took place in Regina on January 23rd-24th this year shows that 

Jimmy’s law is needed to give workers more protection in the 

workplace. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the poor management as well as 

improper, misleading, and inappropriate reporting of our 

finances by this government. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks of Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And the petition is about 

the need for a new school in their area. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatchewan can attend school in their 

own community. 

 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current regulations 

being enforced are creating challenges that are a concern for 

our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many trappers and many good people of northern 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Challenges in Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having spent some of 

my formative years in La Loche, Green Lake, Meadow Lake, 

and La Ronge, I have a soft spot in my heart for northern 

Saskatchewan. So it’s always a pleasure to head north for a 

visit. I recently joined the member for Athabasca in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, and Beauval to 

learn more about the health and education challenges facing 

that region. It was encouraging to meet dedicated community 

leaders, health care professionals, college instructors, and 

students who are so committed to improving the quality of life 

for northern residents. 

 

But despite their unwavering commitment to strengthen their 

communities, there are many significant needs that we as a 

province must not neglect. I heard much about the social 

determinants of health, the need to tackle inequality and 

poverty and ensure that basic needs like housing are met. I 

heard about the desperate need to improve mental health 

services, especially to deal with the significant challenge of 

youth suicide. I heard about the need for new facilities, for 

better recruitment and retention, and for more education and 

training opportunities. 

 

As the government finalizes its budget, I hope they will take 

tangible steps to better meet the health and education needs in 

northern Saskatchewan because, as a province, we must do 

better than this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Telemiracle 36 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in the House today to add a couple of notes to the topic of 

Telemiracle as it pertains to the Melfort constituency. 

 

During this weekend I noticed that every community in the 

constituency participated in this remarkable and noteworthy 

event. However, that is not unique to the Melfort constituency. 

That is unique to the province. And that happens right across 

the province, and that is the miracle in Telemiracle. 

 

But what is unique is that Telemiracle was first discussed at a 

district executive meeting under Melfort’s district governor Al 

Robertson. The city has a very strong tie to Kin, with four 

district governors coming from that one club in just over 60 

years. I myself had the opportunity to serve on a district 

executive under the late Dale Frier, my personal Kinsmen hero. 

 

I have very strong memories of Telemiracle 1, a time, Mr. 

Speaker, when I stood with my fellow Kin during the national 

anthem and realized how special and giving this province is 

when the total topped $1 per person. This year, Telemiracle 36 

topped $5.50 per person for every man, woman, and child in 

this province — a truly remarkable feat. The men and women 

of the Melfort Kin, the entire Kin family, and all the citizens of 

Saskatchewan should be justifiably proud. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

International Year of Co-operatives 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The United Nations 

has proclaimed 2012 as the International Year of Co-operatives 

to highlight the contributions of co-operatives to 

socio-economic development, in particular recognizing their 

impact on poverty reduction, employment generation, and 

social integration. In fact United Nations Secretary-General 

Ban Ki-moon says, and I quote, “Co-operatives are a reminder 

that it’s possible to pursue both economic viability and social 

responsibility.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is impressive that one-third of the province’s 

top 100 businesses are co-operatives with 1 million members in 

Saskatchewan alone. Now the Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Association has a lot planned in celebrating this year, including 

the official launch in January and the Co-operative Week of 

Volunteering from May 28th to June 3rd where co-ops are 

encouraged to adopt a community project. 

 

Later this year, there’ll be a week of activities in October as 

part of Co-op Week, and in November, the Saskatchewan 

Co-operative Association will be hosting the Co-operating to 

Build a Better West conference in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know when so many people are dissatisfied 

with an economic system dominated by profit-driven 

enterprises, the time has never been better for the promotion 

and growth of the co-ops. It is imperative we continue to 

support the co-operative movement here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I ask all members to join with me in celebrating the Year 

of Co-operatives, and I hope many are able to attend their many 

events throughout the year. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Physician Recruitment Success Story 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in the 

House to draw attention to a physician recruitment success 

story from my constituency of Biggar. Recently the Heartland 

Health Region and the town of Biggar have been able to 

successfully attract a young doctor from Ireland. 

 

Dr. Alison McKee, spouse Gareth, and their one-year-old son 

Duncan are set to arrive in Saskatchewan this summer. Dr. 

McKee will begin work in Biggar this June, joining Dr. Muller 

and Dr. Crane at the Biggar and district health centre. The 

choice to settle in our province was made very easy for Dr. 

McKee and her family after being invited to Saskatchewan last 

October and spending time in Biggar and the surrounding 

community. 

 

Dr. McKee recently passed her Saskatchewan international 

physician practice assessment and gave her 12-week notice to 

her job in Ireland. Her husband, Gareth, also reorganized his 

computer business to allow him to operate online from their 

home in Biggar. I’d like to thank the Heartland Health Region, 

Biggar health committee, Drs. Muller and Crane, and the town 

of Biggar for giving financial and technical support in 

recruiting Dr. McKee and her family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like all members of this Assembly to join me 

in welcoming Dr. McKee, Gareth, and Duncan to their new 

home and wish them the best in their future endeavours. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Canadian Challenge Sled Dog Race 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to speak 

today about the Canadian Challenge Sled Dog Race which took 

place between February 20th and 25th. The starting line for 

Canada’s premier mushing event was located in the RM [rural 

municipality] of Buckland in the Saskatchewan Rivers 

constituency. All 20 teams from all of the dogsled race 

categories successfully finished the 300-kilometre Canadian 

Challenge. Despite a storm in the Montreal Lake area that blew 

in the competition trail, the teams were in high spirits, 

reflecting the true northern grit and tenacity of dog mushing. 

 

The winner of the epic 12-dog race event was Gerry Walker, 

and the second place finisher was Stefaan De Marie. Stefaan is 

a resident of Christopher Lake in the Saskatchewan Rivers 

constituency, and he finished the race with an average speed of 

14 kilometres per hour. Stefaan has competed nine times, 

placing on four separate occasions in the top three finishers. 

The Canadian Challenge sled dog race is a qualifying race for 

the legendary 1000-kilometre Yukon Quest. 

 

The dedication of these athletes to their sport and to their 

animals is complete. The health of athletes and animals require 

careful planning regarding proper nutrition and proper 

preparation. Please join me in recognizing these dedicated 

athletes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Lymphedema Awareness Day 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to announce March 6th is now recognized as 

Lymphedema Awareness Day in Saskatchewan. 

 

Lymphedema is a chronic condition of localized fluid retention 

and tissue swelling caused by a compromised lymphatic 

system. Our government recognizes that people with this 

chronic condition cope with discomfort and disfigurement on a 

daily basis. At present lymphedema is not curable, but with the 

appropriate management and patient care, the condition may be 

alleviated. We understand the significant impact lymphedema 

has on its patients. 

 

Recently the Minister of Health convened a lymphedema 

working group to review best practices, services, policies, and 

procedures in the prevention and treatment of lymphedema. The 

working group consists of representatives from the ministry; 

regional health authorities; agencies that provide lymphedema 

services, supports, education, and prevention; the patients who 

receive lymphedema treatment in Saskatchewan. Right now this 

group is in its final stages of preparing its advice to the 

ministry. The working group’s findings will help our 

government and the regional health authorities to explore ways 

to improve health services for the lymphedema patients. 

 

Quality health and patient-first care remains this government’s 

top priority. March 6th is a day of observance and proclamation 

to raise awareness of lymphedema, demonstrate understanding 

of the condition and acknowledgement of the people who live 

with it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Pharmacist Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re fortunate in 

Saskatchewan to have pharmacists who are dedicated to this 

province. Pharmacists play an important role as important 

members of our medical teams, experts at answering your 

drug-related questions and determining if health issues are 

related to medication. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a recent Angus Reid poll, pharmacists were 

determined to be one of the most trusted professions. Mr. 

Speaker, March 4th to 10th is Pharmacist Awareness Week and 

this year their theme is, Your Pharmacist - Your Partner in 

Health. Saskatchewan’s pharmacists use awareness week to 

show patients how they could be more active partners in health 

care — prescribing medicine, providing emergency refills, 

renewing and extending prescriptions, and educating the public 

on expanded health care responsibilities. 

 

This week allows us to recognize the contributions that 

pharmacists make to the health of Saskatchewan citizens and 

the ability of pharmacists to improve health care delivery in the 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

province working with doctors and other health care 

professionals. Pharmacists are highly valued, and we support 

them working to their full scope of practice. They’re an 

essential part of any effective health care team. Pharmacists 

work hard in the province to provide our citizens with 

extraordinary care every day. 

 

Our confidence in this profession is demonstrated by providing 

pharmacists with certain prescriptive rights in an effort to 

enhance health care delivery to the people of Saskatchewan. 

This is an important step in recognizing the value we place in 

pharmacists. 

 

For that dedication, I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking 

our pharmacists for their ongoing commitment to the 

high-quality care that they provide and wish them all the best 

for this week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The mandate of the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission is to “promote and 

protect the individual dignity, fundamental freedoms, and equal 

rights of Saskatchewan citizens.” 

 

On January 25th, 2012, this commission escorted six highly 

skilled front-line staff from their building without any notice or 

chance to say goodbye to their colleagues. The resumés of these 

staff clearly indicate that they have the skill sets that the Chief 

Commissioner is looking for under his new vision. The 

commissioner’s actions are not in line with the mandate of the 

commission to protect individual dignity. To the minister: is he 

prepared to direct the commissioner to follow his own human 

rights mandate? 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the House and 

the members opposite that the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission is one of the leading commissions in the country. 

They have, under the leadership of Chief Commissioner David 

Arnot, taken great strides forward. They have amended their 

legislation. They have adopted a four pillars approach. As part 

of that, there was some staffing changes that were necessary. 

They are an independent agency and, Mr. Speaker, I understand 

that they worked through outside counsel as they made the 

changes. And I understand that things were done in accordance 

with all relevant law and in accordance with best practices that 

were adopted. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we fully support the actions that were taken 

by the Human Rights Commission. They were done 

appropriately, properly, and with dignity and respect for the 

employees that were affected. And I understand that packages 

were offered to the employees. The employees, I understand, 

accepted them. So, Mr. Speaker, the issue is one where it’s a 

situation where things change over time and the process is 

taking place as it should, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would say that the 

Human Rights Commission may have been the leading 

commission in Canada, but I think with actions that we’re 

seeing happening right now, that may not be the case any more. 

 

$1.7 million of taxpayers’ money is being spent annually on 

salaries at the commission. In December of 2011, the Chief 

Commissioner applied to the Saskatchewan Labour Relations 

Board to remove three in-scope staff out of scope. As a result of 

that application and the layoffs in January, there are now seven 

management positions supervising 10 front-line service 

providers, and two of those are retiring at the end of this month. 

So the ratio will then be seven management to eight staff as of 

April 1st. 

 

To the minister: do Ministry of Justice cutbacks and austerity 

measures apply only to front-line workers and not management 

salaries? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t direct or give 

advice to the Human Rights Commission as how to do their 

staffing. Chief Commissioner Arnot is a responsible, respected 

individual and works well with his staff, understands the law, 

seeks outside opinions where necessary; does not obtain legal 

services from the ministry, in fact uses outside counsel. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we receive notes periodically advising us as to 

what has happened. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, part of the transition that’s taken place is in 

keeping with the four pillars approach that’s been adopted so 

that there is better opportunities to do mediation and early 

resolution, to adopt an education and an advocacy model. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the other part of it is to ensure that complaints are 

referred to the Court of Queen’s Bench. We are fully supportive 

of that taking place, Mr. Speaker, and the process that is there, 

we understand, is done in full compliance with all legal 

requirements. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s disappointing 

when our minister won’t intervene even when ministry money 

is being misused in this way. Based on freedom of information 

requests, we have learned that $100,000 was recently spent by 

the commission on contracts for communications and a further 

100,000 was spent on curriculum development. Does the 

minister think it is appropriate for a commission under his fiscal 

responsibility to spend $100,000 on public relations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Human Rights 

Commission is providing services on a variety of educational 

measures through our school system and, Mr. Speaker, they 

have asked for funding for that. The province has supplied 

funding for that. Part of the initiative that they have taken with 

that requires them to use some of their resources for public 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

relations and to ensure that there is good public support and the 

public understands that. It is something that’s done within the 

scope of their budget and it is not something that we take issue 

with in government. We believe it’s something that they’ve got 

a role, dealing with advocacy and ensuring that the public is 

aware of what is taking place. And, Mr. Speaker, it is money 

well spent when they are using the money for purposes of 

advancing the causes of the Human Rights Commission and, 

Mr. Speaker, we are supportive of them in doing that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

First Nations and Métis Employment and Education 

 

Mr. McCall: — Lots of questions, Mr. Speaker, lots of 

questions. I rise to ask a question of the First Nations and Métis 

Relations minister, Mr. Speaker. It’s concerning the situation 

with unemployment in the province for First Nations and Métis 

people. For First Nations and Métis people, the unemployment 

rate is three times that of the rest of the province. For First 

Nations alone, it is four times the level in the rest of the 

province. The situation is so serious that the Premier even 

expressed concern on his way out the door to Ireland last week, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess my question for the government to start with is this: 

when are they going to get serious about engaging First Nations 

and Métis people in employment and educational opportunities 

in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question, Mr. Speaker. I think it took until the second last day 

of the last session to get a question. It’s nice to get one on the 

second day of session. 

 

I can assure the member, Mr. Speaker, that First Nations and 

Aboriginal employment in Saskatchewan is indeed a top 

priority for this government. Mr. Speaker, in fact, year over 

year stats bear this out, Mr. Speaker. In January 2012, 

Aboriginal employment was 40,600 — up 6,200, some 18 per 

cent — year over year increase, Mr. Speaker. Youth Aboriginal 

employment, Mr. Speaker, an important component in that 

regard, was up by some 1,400 people, again an increase of 17.3 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take credit as a government for those 

increases but, Mr. Speaker, where the real credit has to go is to 

the private sector in this province for the work that they have 

done. The Camecos, the Potash Corporation, the potash 

industry, the mining industry for example, Mr. Speaker — that 

is indeed who is making this great progress. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll 

agree with the minister on one score. When it comes to gains in 

First Nations and Métis employment and education, it certainly 

doesn’t have anything to do with the actions of that 

government. In fact the opposite is the case, Mr. Speaker. 

Their flagship initiative when it comes to improving 

educational and employment outcomes for First Nations people 

in particular, Mr. Speaker, they had a big MOU [memorandum 

of understanding] signing last May in this building, and part of 

that plan was to appoint a task force that was to go out and do 

the work on better engaging First Nations on the employment 

and educational front. That task force was to have been in place 

this summer. Can the minister tell us if that task force has yet 

been struck? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of First Nations and 

Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Indeed that task force is an important component 

going forward. It’ll involve people from the private sector; it’ll 

involve people from government; and it is something that we 

are moving forward on, unlike what members opposite did for 

16 long years in northern Saskatchewan and across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. Very shortly we will have more 

information to share with the House on the members of this 

commission and the good work that they’re going to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a situation 

that’s very serious. We’ve got a circumstance where First 

Nations unemployment is four times the provincial level. 

We’ve got a task force that was announced with much ballyhoo 

by the members opposite last year, Mr. Speaker. It’s coming up, 

in a few short weeks, the year anniversary of the signing of the 

MOU for that, and yet no task force. 

 

Professor Eric Howe has said that this is a $90 billion 

proposition for the province of Saskatchewan if we can fully 

engage First Nations and Métis people in the employment and 

educational opportunities of this province. And all we get from 

this government is plans to make plans. When is this 

government going to take this situation seriously? When are 

they going to work with First Nations and Métis people to 

ensure that they have the employment and education 

attainments just like the rest of the people in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of First Nations 

Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much to the 

member for that question. I have Mr. Howe’s report right here. 

And indeed what he does say is First Nations employment is a 

significant economic challenge in the province, but it is also our 

greatest economic opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the difference between this government and 

that party when they were in government, Mr. Speaker. We are 

providing the opportunity. When I meet with leaders in 

northern Saskatchewan, when I meet with First Nations people 

across the province, what do they say? Well they want to 

participate in the new Saskatchewan. They want to participate 

in the hope and vitality of what’s going on in this province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, be rest assured that’s what this government 

is going to do. We are going to make them part of the success 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

going forward in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Rural Women 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

government recently proclaimed March as Rural Women’s 

Month. We’re pleased to see this but, Mr. Speaker, actions 

speak louder than words. To the minister: what is your 

government doing to provide programs, supports, and resources 

to rural women since we know they are the lifeblood of their 

communities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to answer 

a question about rural women and the work that they’ve been 

doing, not just today but for many years as they grew the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year we had the opportunity to have the very 

first women’s build in Regina. And I can tell the members 

opposite that we had professional women come out from right 

across Regina, had the first ever trades, professional, business 

women standing together and saying, you know what? We can 

do the type of thing that was done in rural communities. We can 

do it in Regina, and we can have the fastest women’s build with 

the most labour ever in a women’s build. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, we also know that in 

rural Saskatchewan we have women working as farmers. And 

the education that is important for them, not only the basic 

education but farming education . . . We see women graduating 

from agriculture school, we see women in engineering, we see 

women in all of the trades, and we know that women continue 

to be the lifeblood of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately we learned from a 

recent national study that Saskatchewan has the highest per 

capita rate of domestic violence in Canada, and this of course 

includes many women who live in rural Saskatchewan. To the 

minister: other than issuing a news release about Rural 

Women’s Month, what is your government doing to assist rural 

women who are experiencing domestic violence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the issue is addressed on 

many fronts, and first of all, and one of the most important 

ones, is making sure that we have women employed and have 

an opportunity to live their own lives. We have 5,600 more 

women employed in Saskatchewan now than we did in 2008. 

Wages for women have grown by 11 per cent in the past two 

years. And we have the second highest rate of women in the 

workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there were 114,000 people that were 

taken off the tax roll. Fifty-nine per cent of those were women. 

Mr. Speaker, we increased the minimum wage and we 

increased the active families benefit and we introduced a grant 

for low-income students with dependent children — $200 a 

month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, women are part of a growing economy in this 

province, and we understand that making sure that they have 

the family support around them is important to us. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s more work to do, and we’re working with the women. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think the 

minister heard or understood the question around what this 

government is doing with respect to domestic violence. 

 

The organizations that work with women and women who are 

experiencing domestic violence have some very key things that 

they believe this province should be doing to address domestic 

violence. Front-line workers and women who have lived 

through partner violence tell us the housing crisis across the 

province is making the situation worse. Women are choosing 

not to leave violent situations because they have nowhere else 

to go given the desperate housing situation. We know that 

social housing and other options are in short supply, especially 

in smaller communities. 

 

To the minister: what is your government doing to increase 

social housing stock in rural Saskatchewan so that women 

facing violence do not feel that their only choice is to live with 

an abusive partner? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge that there 

is a need to ensure that women have a safe place to go to, so 

we’re dealing with them not only through social services but 

ensuring that they have a place to be referred to. Mr. Speaker, 

we have to be making sure that there is affordable housing and 

social housing in this province. That’s why we’ve invested 

$173.6 million into affordable housing to ensure there’s places 

for women to go to. That’s 1,924 units, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

available right across the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve 

invested money in to make sure that we’ve upgraded some of 

the social housing and affordable housing so they have places 

to go as well, Mr. Speaker. And besides the homes, we have to 

ensure that they have supports around them, the needed 

supports to ensure that they can continue their education and 

that they have the professional people around them to help them 

go through very complex situations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I live in rural Saskatchewan. I know that there 

are places that women can go to and should go to and that they 

are being supported by a government that knows that women 

are an important part of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With all due respect 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

to the minister, she’s saying that the organizations that work 

directly with women who are facing violence and those who are 

living it, who are calling for an increase of social housing, are 

wrong, that they are not imagining, this is not what . . . Social 

housing is what the Provincial Association of Transitional 

Houses in Saskatchewan is asking for. You should perhaps read 

the report. 

 

So we know that there are not enough social housing units 

available, particularly in smaller and rural communities. We’ve 

got emergency and transition housing, but these are only 

short-term solutions and are time limited. So where does she 

suggest women escaping violence should go to build new and 

healthy lives for themselves and their children in the 

communities that they consider home? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, many of the women know 

that if they are going to be escaping violence, they have to go 

away from their own small town. Because with confidentiality 

we know that you can’t move from a small town into another 

house down the street because that doesn’t give you the 

opportunity to escape the violence. 

 

We know that we have places like Nipawin and Humboldt and 

Melfort there that actually will be ensuring that they work with 

social assistance and bigger centres to take the women to 

adequate shelters. We know, Mr. Speaker, that we have built a 

number of shelters, that we have increased the number of 

shelters, that we increased the rates for them. And making sure 

that there is more money for the women who have dependent 

children is very important as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this area, ensuring that there is education on violence against 

women is important, and the agencies that are working with 

women are also in contact with our office. Mr. Speaker, this is 

an important part of making sure that women are a huge part of 

the province as we go forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Relations with Municipalities 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The recent 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

convention was a prime opportunity to consult with the 

municipal leadership. In fact in many ways it’s the point of the 

meetings. The Premier and the minister chose not to share their 

plans to off-load their share of the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] funding on to property tax payers. The 

Premier also told delegates that they would not be getting any 

more money in the budget for their crumbling infrastructure, 

money from the government over above the revenue sharing 

that’s already in place. But he neglected to mention that 

property tax payers will take another hit for their policing costs. 

 

To the minister: he didn’t tell us in the election and he didn’t 

tell us at the SUMA convention. Why did he choose not to 

disclose the government’s plans to cut services and off-load 

costs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 

municipalities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to the first 

part of the member’s question — thank you for the question — 

this year alone, in this budget, municipalities will see a 9.5 

increase in revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, 9.5 per cent. And 

next year, Mr. Speaker, 15 per cent increase being set right now 

today, Mr. Speaker. So they understand that. Under that 

particular government, that party when they were in 

government, Mr. Speaker, they saw clawbacks to the hundreds 

of millions of dollars across their term. This government 

provided predictability. What they wanted, they’re going to get, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we can hear those same old 

stories, but the members opposite keep putting out press 

releases that say the economy is booming. But municipalities 

are facing increased pressure. Little would explain the 

government’s attempt to now off-load the cost of the RCMP on 

to the already stretched property tax payers. 

 

Now SUMA vice-president of towns, Rolly Zimmer, had this to 

say, and I quote, “I am somewhat surprised to hear, surprised 

by the Premier’s statement, to hear that the government is in 

fact considering increasing the cost of RCMP policing to our 

municipalities.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, paying for crime and safety strategies 

should be a priority. Why did the minister fail in his duty to 

consult with Saskatchewan municipalities and inform them that 

their policing costs are going to be off-loaded to them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 

municipalities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since 2006 

there’s been an increase to policing costs to the rural 

municipalities and other municipalities in this province, which 

this particular government saw that in 2007 when we formed 

government. We absorbed that cost, and today we still are, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We also, with the good work of the Ministry of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing, and the policing community in this 

province, we’ve increased the police officers by 120 new 

officers in the first term, Mr. Speaker. And with the good work 

of my colleague in Wood River, there have been 

implementation of specialty task forces, specialty SWAT 

[special weapons and tactics] teams, other resources provided to 

policing services to ensure the safety of the public in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And those kind of cases, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to us 

taking on the responsibility of keeping taxes low, we will do 

that. We provide the money to the municipalities 

unconditionally and we ask them to just wait for the budget and 

see what other kinds of things we’ll be putting forth to support 

municipal services in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Some 

of those stats are cold comfort to the city councils, the town 

councils around the province, about how they are going to 

justify the rate increases that they are going to have to do this 

spring because of the off-loading. 

 

Yesterday in the rotunda, the member from Saskatoon Silver 

Springs had this to say in regards to the Saskatchewan 

economy, and I quote, “We do have one of the hottest 

economies in North America.” Well which is it? Which is it? 

The hottest economy in North America or a government that 

can’t or won’t pay for policing and safety? 

 

To the minister: how does this government go from one of the 

hottest economies in North America to off-loading costs to 

municipalities and property tax payers and potentially cutting 

protection in our communities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just for the 

member opposite to know, since we formed government, we 

have increased revenue sharing to the municipalities by 86 per 

cent. There’s going to be a $21 million increase in this budget 

alone, Mr. Speaker. And you know, when it comes to the 

municipalities asking for us to provide predictability when it 

comes to revenue sharing, they asked for it; we provided that. 

They are at the table now talking about revenue sharing and 

moving forward. We’re not off-loading costs, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re making costs sustainable for municipalities and for the 

taxpayers in general in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, he can rattle through those stats and we’ve heard them 

for a couple of years now but the fact is, municipalities will 

now be facing higher taxes for residents, or reduced safety or 

policing. It’s a choice that they are going to have to make. And 

in fact, Mr. Speaker, we read today that Swift Current is now 

raising property taxes. Swift Current, the home of the Premier, 

is raising property taxes by some 8 per cent to cover increased 

RCMP costs — and this is before, this is before the effects of 

the Premier’s promised off-loading plan. 

 

Municipalities likely will have the least budget flexibility of all 

levels of government, and I just have to ask the minister: what 

does he recommend to the municipalities? What do they do? 

Raise taxes to make up for his financial mismanagement or 

reduce safety and policing in our communities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. That 

member opposite is putting fear into the hearts of the women 

and men of this province by making those kind of statements, 

Mr. Speaker. Uncalled for right now. After we’ve increased, 

after this government took the police officers’ asks in this 

province for years — which I was a member of, Mr. Speaker — 

there was a shortfall in funding for police officers. They 

promised after two mandates, still never met their mandate 

promise — twice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We promised 120 new officers. We met that promise, Mr. 

Speaker. More RCMP officers in Saskatchewan than before 

working in the streets. More municipal police officers as well. 

 

When it comes to municipal leaders making tax decisions, they 

know full well that the revenue-sharing piece was predictable 

for them. They manage their own tax tools with autonomy. If 

they need to increase taxes, we would hope that they wouldn’t 

increase them to the point where it’s unbearable, but they see 

their needs as well, Mr. Speaker. Three levels of government — 

federal, provincial, and municipal governments — working on 

infrastructure and servicing costs across this province together. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I think the municipalities were hoping for 

predictability. They weren’t counting on cuts. They weren’t 

counting on cuts. And the minister opposite talks about fear, but 

it was his government who brought this up about police cuts. So 

what is it: the hottest economy or are they going to have to 

make some tough cuts? So the member opposite, the minister 

has to make up his mind. What is the message for 

municipalities? Are they going to have to raise taxes or cut 

programs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — You know what the people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, are going to see on budget day? They’re 

not going to see campaign promises that’s spending, spending, 

spending like those guys did over there, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

going to see a balanced budget. We’re going to see nothing that 

the opposition campaigned on. We’re going to see sustainable 

budgeting, sustainable spending, and partnerships and 

consultation with the municipal leaders, Mr. Speaker. Look 

forward to budget day. Thank you. 

 

[14:15] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 

of Bill No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Act. 

 

This legislation will replace The Crop Insurance Act. This Act 

provides the legislative authority for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation, SCIC, to administer the crop insurance 

and AgriStability programs. It also gives SCIC the authority to 

administer agriculture programs that may be implemented into 

the future. This would include livestock price insurance as just 

one example. This is an issue we have consulted with industry 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

on and continue to work on, Mr. Speaker. Authority for SCIC 

to deliver the AgriStability program was previously provided 

under existing legislation on a temporary basis. This was 

sufficient on an interim basis, but the preferable long-term 

solution is specific legislative authority for SCIC to administer 

AgriStability. Our government is simply bringing this authority 

forward into this up-to-date and forward-looking Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is continually working to improve 

programs and services for producers. That is why we have 

committed to bringing AgriStability home to Saskatchewan to 

be administered by SCIC in the 2008 Throne Speech. This 

commitment was fulfilled on January 1st, 2010, when SCIC 

began processing AgriStability applications for Saskatchewan 

producers. 

 

SCIC hired 110 new staff at head office in Melville and 30 new 

staff in local crop insurance offices throughout the province to 

deliver the program. These staff members are providing local, 

timely service for farmers and ranchers. Our goal is to create a 

more timely and responsive program for our farmers and 

ranchers. Since taking over the administration of AgriStability, 

we have made progress towards that goal by improving the 

application processing times. Producers are now receiving their 

AgriStability benefits quicker than they were in the past. 

 

We are taking steps to further improve service delivery. Earlier 

today SCIC announced a new online tool called AgConnect 

which will make it easier for AgriStability applicants to submit 

their program information. This will further speed up the entire 

application process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new Act will have no effect on the services 

already provided to producers. We will continue to work to 

improve the delivery of the AgriStability program for our 

producers under this new legislation. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

move that The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act 

be read a second time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved Bill 

No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to stand on behalf of the official opposition today 

to offer our initial comments on Bill No. 34, An Act respecting 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to those that . . . I know we have a lot of folks that watch 

the legislature channel and they’re asking what’s the Athabasca 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] doing speaking 

about a crop insurance Bill. What’s important, Mr. Speaker, is 

that as we research some of these Bills going forward, we must 

have somebody from the opposition respond to these Bills at 

the initial stage. And while we take the Bills back to our office 

and we contact the stakeholders, we find out more about what 

the Bill is all about and certainly offer our comments at a later 

date, probably more informed comments at a later date. And 

that’s one of the roles that I have as one of the MLAs in 

opposition, is I must be able to respond to a number of Bills 

that are coming forward, and some of them are agriculturally 

based, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, in the 

Saskatchewan crop insurance Bill that’s before us, I understand 

it’s a federal-provincial agreement that looks at providing a 

means and support to the agricultural community. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m going on my history in terms of being involved 

with the previous government as one of the members that sat 

around the cabinet table and we talked about, a lot about what 

the challenges were for rural Saskatchewan, for the producers, 

and so on and so forth. So any kind of Act that we have that 

talks about meeting some of the challenges of the agricultural 

community, of the farm families, and of rural Saskatchewan, it 

is always, always important to note that many people on our 

side and certainly on their side understand what agriculture is 

all about. It’s always advantageous for the people of 

Saskatchewan and of course for each of the political parties. 

 

So it’s important that we engage ourselves in these Bills. It’s 

important that we try and understand what they mean. It’s also 

important to be able to stand up and speak on some of these 

Bills even though you don’t have much of a history with the 

agricultural community, being from northern Saskatchewan and 

being a hockey player. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would want to point out that some of the 

issues that we dealt with when we were in government that had 

a lot of challenges with the agricultural, from the agricultural 

sector. I can remember the days of the mad cow challenges that 

we had and how a lot of the discussions around the cabinet 

really talked about some of the critical need for us to focus on 

meeting some of those concerns. And that’s why it’s nice to be 

able to get up here to speak about some of the impacts and the 

benefits and some of the Bills that affect and impact the 

agricultural community and of course rural Saskatchewan and 

many in northern Saskatchewan. We also have a few people 

that do a little bit of farming with cow-calf operations and 

haying operations as well. 

 

In that sense, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that we 

want to make sure is that we give the opportunity to the 

stakeholders that are out there, people that are familiar with the 

crop insurance program, and to give us some of the information 

that is necessary to ensure the Bill meets its stated goals. 

 

There’s no question that there are many people out there that 

are much more astute in the agricultural sector than I am, Mr. 

Speaker, and fair enough. And that’s kind of what I think is 

really important: that we send a message out, in relation to this 

Bill, is that there are many organizations and groups of people 

out there in rural Saskatchewan that have great knowledge and 

have the great ability to dissect some of these Bills and bring 

some of those concerns — not necessarily what the Bill is 

involved with, but certainly what the Bill may not bring 

forward, some of the omissions in the Bill. We think those are 

important because every Bill has its strengths, and certainly 

every Bill has its weaknesses. And every Bill certainly has 

some of its shortcomings as well. 

 

So that’s one of the messages that we want to give is that 

certainly, from my point of view, getting up and speaking on an 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

agriculturally based Bill is important for all of us to understand 

what agriculture’s about. And even though we are from 

northern Saskatchewan, we must do our part to understand what 

southern Saskatchewan, what the eastern part of the province, 

and the northern part of the province all have in common. And 

one of the biggest things is that people, a lot of people, live off 

the land and work off the land. And they make a great living off 

the land. And this is one of the common themes that I think I 

want to touch on when it comes to this particular Bill. 

 

There’s no question that the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation I believe operates with the wild rice industry of 

northern Saskatchewan. So you can see the connect, you can 

see the connect when it comes to the northern perspective. And 

that’s something that’s always important is that as you begin to 

understand more of these Bills, you’re certainly . . . it makes 

you a bit better and I think a bit stronger MLA over time, and 

certainly it’s something that I want to continue to undertake in 

this office. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of questions on the Bill itself. 

There is, as I mentioned at the outset, I believe it is a 

federal-provincial Bill or a federal-provincial agreement that 

provides all these types of services. And the minister alluded to 

some of the changes that he wants in the Bill. 

 

And certainly I would maybe ask the minister himself at a later 

time to give us some of the descriptions of the meetings and 

some of the groups that he may have met with and what were 

some of their points and some of their concerns. Like, who did 

he consult with when it came to the drafting of this particular 

Bill and certainly also the questions of how much dollars were 

committed to this? Is this going to improve the efficiency of the 

crop insurance program? Like, these are some of the questions I 

think we need to undertake and that we need to certainly ask as 

time permits. And that’s one of the reasons why we’re getting 

up today and making our initial comments to ensure the public 

out there knows that we are watching this Bill. And we’re 

asking for their timely advice and their participation to make 

sure it not only meets its goals and objectives, but we are able 

to point any glaring omissions that the Bill may have missed or 

may have ignored. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the points I would raise at the 

outset, we talked about the hog industry, Mr. Speaker. We 

talked about the cow-calf operation and cattle industry. And I 

can remember how difficult it was at times for some of these 

industries when we were in cabinet, some of the great 

challenges that they encountered along the way. And I can 

remember where there was a lot of concern when we started 

operations in the Big Sky hog operations where there’s some 

concerns that the government shouldn’t be investing in these 

kind of operations. And of course you know the challenges 

when it came to the mad cow issue. There was a lot of money 

and a lot of issues and a lot of awareness that I certainly came 

to hear while I was sitting in on cabinet. And it is a very 

interesting industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why it’s important that I said at the outset we do our 

part to try and understand all of Saskatchewan. And even 

though we are elected from specific regions, I think a good 

MLA and a good opposition will make every effort to 

understand all of how Saskatchewan operates. And that’s one of 

the things that I think that’s really, really, really important. 

 

That lesson, Mr. Speaker, I learned, in terms of trying to 

understand what the Bill is about and broadening your horizons 

so to speak, was the point that I raised one day when we were 

talking about highways construction with the then Premier 

Calvert. And we talked about Highway No. 1 and all the money 

we were putting into No. 1 to avoid the problems that we had 

with our Trans-Canada Highway, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

going back to the point of why talking on this Bill is important. 

And the question we had is that we have all these pressures 

from all different sources. Why are we committing all the 

resources on that particular area? And the premier at the time 

said, it’s important you understand that region. The premier at 

the time said, it’s important that you understand the fatalities 

attached to the bottleneck on that particular highway. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we spent a lot of money, a considerable amount of 

money on highways and highways improvements in southern 

Saskatchewan because it was the right thing to do. Because you 

don’t just govern for one area; you govern for all. 

 

And that is one of the important lessons that I have learned as 

an MLA, and that’s why today I’m getting up. And I’m very 

proud to be able to get up and offer a few comments about the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation and some of the 

changes and some of the ideas that the minister has. Because as 

we learn these things and as we understand these things greater, 

it makes the Assembly much more functional and, I would hope 

at the end of the day, much more intelligent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s one of the things that people out 

there ought to know, is that we’re going to offer comments on 

every single Bill as opposition members and certainly myself as 

an MLA. And it’s not to purport to know everything, but the 

whole exercise is to try and understand as many things as you 

can in your capacity as MLA. Because what you eventually 

want to do is become knowledgeable in areas that you’re weak 

in and of course to strengthen your skill in areas that you’re 

strong in. And one of the areas that I can clearly note that I am 

weak in is understanding the agricultural community as best I 

can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do intend to travel quite a bit this summer, 

health willing and God willing. And one of the things that we 

want to do is we’re going to make sure that we go to as many 

rural parts of the province as we can as our effort to understand 

rural Saskatchewan a lot better as a northern and as an 

Aboriginal MLA. I think people are much willing to share 

information, that people are very proud of their community, 

very proud of their farms. They’re very proud of their 

operations. And they’re willing to share some of the success 

that they’ve had. 

 

And during that exercise, Mr. Speaker, it’s one of the things 

that I think is important that we try and do as MLAs is to go out 

and do this outreach as much as we can. And I know some 

people would be amused that we’re making speeches on an 

agricultural Bill. But again I would reiterate the point that I 

made earlier, that it’s important we understand how all of 

Saskatchewan works, as MLAs, and that’s just as kind of a 

constant effort that must be undertaken. And I will certainly 

continue doing that type of work. 

 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

Mr. Speaker, the minister talked very quickly about how this is 

going to improve services and how it’s going to help the 

agricultural community. And that’s something that we’re not 

going to argue too much about; we know that it’s always a 

work-in-progress. The agricultural part of Saskatchewan has 

been the mainstay of our provincial economy for years. And 

we’ve got to find ways and means in which we can strengthen 

that agricultural community, not just for the short term but for 

the long term. And that’s what I think the crop insurance 

corporation Bill talks about and how we can make the 

necessary changes to become more effective out there in terms 

of supporting the agricultural community. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the issues just around in 

my area. What does the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation have to do with northern Saskatchewan? As the 

member from Cumberland will certainly attest to, there is some 

involvement of the crop insurance program under the wild rice 

program, and there’s a lot of folks that make an incredible 

amount of money. And I want to kind of centre my comments a 

bit on the wild rice growers of Saskatchewan. It’s not only 

northern. It’s not only Aboriginal, as you know, there’s a lot of 

forest fringe operations. There’s a lot of the activities in the far 

north and I’m just hoping that some of the activity that 

identified in this Bill are able to . . . does include the wild rice 

farmers in northern Saskatchewan and in central Saskatchewan 

as well. 

 

And what the minister should know is that there is different and 

varying degrees of insurance rates. But I don’t know about the 

services per se because there’s a lot of farmers, wild rice 

farmers, out there that are asking not only for the crop 

insurance aspect of it — so if they do have a bad crop one crop 

that they’re covered — but to be fair in terms of the insurance 

rates and to also offer other programs for them because it is a 

good industry in northern Saskatchewan. We’re seeing 

evidence of that in many, many communities.  

 

And people should know that what happens in northern 

Saskatchewan is you have people that have, typically they may 

have seasonal employment, perhaps maybe as a forest fire 

fighter. But in the wintertime they could do things like trap and 

they can fish and in the fall they can do wild rice. There’s a 

variety of things that they do. And what they do is they do three 

or four different things at once, and it really makes them, you 

know, be able to help their families and pay their bills and so on 

and so forth. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So the wild rice program itself is incredibly important for the 

North. And I’m just hoping that this particular Bill, the crop 

insurance corporation, the Act to amend the crop insurance 

corporation does have the understanding that, from our 

prospective and from the northern prospective, that the wild 

rice industry is actively involved with any kind of determining 

of benefits and whether they are able to participate in some of 

the programs that the minister alluded to. I’m hoping, I’m 

praying that they are included because this is an important part 

of the agricultural community per se. And there’s hundreds of 

wild rice growers in northern Saskatchewan and in central 

Saskatchewan, and they employ a lot of people to help them do 

their harvesting and so on and so forth. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would assume that one of the things you 

want to do when you’re looking at protecting Saskatchewan’s 

interests as it relates to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation is I really need to also determine under the crop 

insurance program which people are going to benefit from this 

particular funding, from this particular change in the Act. Is it 

going to be people based in Saskatchewan? Because we now 

know . . . I can remember the time when we kind of released the 

foreign ownership of lands Act where we allowed more and 

more people to come in and buy agricultural lands in 

Saskatchewan. Are they also eligible for some of these 

programs? Because I know that was a big issue when we 

announced it; there was a lot of people out there wondering 

when this was going to be done. And I can remember the . . . I 

believe the minister at the time was Clay Serby, and if my 

memory serves me correct — and a lot of times it doesn’t, at 

certain times in the day, but if it serves me correct, Mr. Speaker 

— I can remember Serby talking about this issue of trying to 

loosen up the foreign land ownership problems that we were 

perceived as putting in place for people to come in and buying 

land in Saskatchewan. 

 

So we kind of tackled that particular issue. So I think over time 

as an MLA, as a northern MLA, we get subjected to a lot of 

issues, Mr. Speaker, a lot of issues that are based on the 

agricultural community, on the economies of some of our 

producers out there, and it’s just an incredible world. There’s 

no question. 

 

As I mentioned at the outset, in Saskatchewan I think 

agriculture has been the mainstay of our provincial economy for 

years and years and years. We’re considered by the world as the 

breadbasket of the world, and I think it’s important that we 

embrace that role. And a lot of people take great pride in that, 

not only the history of the agricultural base in Saskatchewan 

but the future of how we can really make a big difference in 

trying to build on this economy and build on the hard work and 

sweat of our rural communities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that another good pointer 

to raise on this Crop Insurance Corporation Act is, as I 

mentioned, it would be nice to know who is going to be 

receiving some of these benefits. Because as we know, land 

changes; the ownership of land changes on a constant basis. I 

know many farm families struggle with a transition strategy 

because right now the prices are good, and things are going not 

so bad, and they do what they have to do. They work very hard. 

But eventually, you know, as prices will drop — as they rise, 

they’ll certainly drop as well — you begin to wonder about the 

future. And the crop insurance Act I think needs to reflect that 

in how they’re providing the service. 

 

When I say you need to look at the future, is how many of these 

farm families will survive 20, 30 years from now if they don’t 

have their children or their grandchildren willing to take over 

the farm? We know there’s a lot of people that aren’t willing to 

take over farm operations, and that of course creates a 

significant problem in two ways. Number one is the base of the 

farm family is further eroded and the quality of rural life, not 

having families, like children and grandchildren around, it 

certainly is threatened in many ways. 

 

So I think that’s one of the things that I observed over time in 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

some of the discussions I have been privy to around the 

agricultural community. We want to make sure that whatever 

we do, whether it’s this particular Act, No. 34, is that it’s got to 

be done with a lot of thought and certainly a lot of commitment 

to the future of agriculture in the community. And part of that 

basis of that future is of course the farm family foundations. 

 

Now I think one of the things that I would ask in terms of the 

benefits and the programs that are within the Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation now and what the minister is 

hoping to do, who are the benefactors of that? Is there a specific 

effort to make sure that any programs, any spending, any 

services, any support mechanisms that are housed within this 

particular Act, is it intended to help which particular groups? Is 

it the farm families? Is it the large multinational corporations 

that may own farms? Or is it the foreign owners of some of the 

operations? 

 

Like these are some of the questions we need to break down 

under the crop insurance program because these are questions 

that are really important not only to me as a northerner but of 

course to many people all throughout the province, in urban 

Saskatchewan and of course the small towns and villages 

throughout our great land. And that’s one of the things I think is 

really important, Mr. Speaker, is we need to find out exactly the 

makeup of our agricultural community. Where it was 20 years 

ago is radically different to where it is now, and 20 years from 

now, it’s going to be even more radically different. 

 

And there’s all these discussions, Mr. Speaker, on how we can 

make sure that we protect Saskatchewan’s interest. That’s first 

and foremost in a lot of people’s minds. And I look at 

everything from the big hog operations to some of the corporate 

farms that are popping up all over the place and of course some 

of the other aspects of foreign ownership of some of our farms. 

These are some of the things that there’s a lot of questions 

about. And I as an observer of the agricultural community from 

a distance, these are some of the things that pop up into my 

mind because it’s something that I think any person that has any 

kind of support towards the agricultural community should be 

asking. 

 

So the point I would ask the minister under the Crop Insurance 

Corporation — we need to know these things as part of our role 

as an opposition — is to try and find out all the programs that 

are available, the dollars attached. Who is your intended 

audience? Who will be the biggest benefactor of some of these 

dollars and some of these programs? Because while at the 

outset we think we are going to be supporting farm families, 

that intended target is admirable. 

 

Of course any government wants to do that. But a lot of times 

we don’t ask the pivotal questions, is that how much of the 

percentage of support that we’re putting under the crop 

insurance corporation Act, how much of those benefits are 

actually going to farm families as we understand it, Mr. 

Speaker, as a mom and a dad or grandpa and grandma and the 

sons and daughters helping or the grandchildren helping? 

That’s what we perceive as family farms. Is that the way of the 

past, Mr. Speaker? Does this Act support them or just simply 

ignores all those arguments and all those processes and just 

simply says, the crop insurance program is for everyone. It 

doesn’t matter who owns the land or the farm or who applies, 

we’ll give them the money anyway. I think it’s one of the things 

that we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, that’s really, really 

important to the future of how I view Saskatchewan agriculture 

in the next 10, 15 years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been again being able to travel to a 

number of operations and joining other MLAs in touring hog 

barn operations and being at family farms. You ask a lot of 

questions because you want to know about their way of life. 

And it’s an amazing experience because a lot of these farm 

families are very friendly. They want to feed you right away, 

and they want to show off their farm, and they also want to talk 

about the history of their family, the history of their farm. 

Those are the three things I found really amazing in some of the 

trips that I took with some of my NDP [New Democratic Party] 

colleagues when we were in government because it was 

important that we all understood that. People like Mr. Serby 

and people like our former Premier Calvert made sure as many 

of cabinet folks went on these trips to understand what this was 

about, and that’s something I’m pretty happy with today. 

 

Now as I mentioned at the outset, when you go to a typical 

family farm, there’s three things that happens right away. 

They’re very hospitable — like I said, they want to feed you — 

and they’re very proud of the history of their farm, and they 

also want to show off their operation. And there’s mixed 

farming of course, and there’s grain farmers, and there’s 

cow-calf operators — there’s all these different entities out 

there. And they all do a lot not only for the land, Mr. Speaker, 

but they also do a lot for the neighbouring community and of 

course for our province as a whole. 

 

So these are some of the things I think are really important that 

we as MLAs do, is we travel to places that we had never been 

before and to learn of industries we’ve never been exposed to 

and to meet people that have been involved with lifestyles that 

we would never know had we not become MLAs. And that’s 

why it’s important that as opposition members, and even as a 

northern MLA, that you get up and you speak to these Bills 

because in the long run it helps you not only as an individual 

but as an MLA. 

 

I think in the long run it does great service to the agricultural 

community to know that people from all regions of the 

province, including from the northern communities, from the 

Aboriginal communities are taking the time and the effort to 

understand what the crop insurance Act’s about, time and effort 

to understand what their family farm structure is about, time 

and the necessary attention to understand what their way of life 

is about. And that’s really important for a lot of the farm 

families, Mr. Speaker. So I think one of the things you want to 

do in The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act is 

again reach out to the groups and organizations that are out 

there to say yes. 

 

A lot of times we sit up and we talk about a lot of things that 

we’re comfortable with, we’re knowledgeable about, but in the 

instance where you’re unsure about any particular Act, it’s 

important to get up and ask the questions. It’s important to get 

up and try and understand the Bill. It’s important to travel to 

understand the industry. And that’s part of the ongoing work 

that an MLA does, and certainly that’s part of our ongoing 

commitment as the New Democratic caucus, is to understand 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

rural Saskatchewan and do a lot of work that we’ve been 

prompted to over the years by people like Clay Serby, to try and 

understand that and to try and make a difference for the people 

out there. 

 

No question that any changes to any Acts, you know, as the 

minister’s bringing forward this particular Bill, Bill No. 34, that 

there’s always reaction. And like as I said at the outset, some of 

the people might like the changes; they might be happy with the 

efficiency. But others might say it’s not going far enough. 

Others might say this is what they omitted. This doesn’t do any 

good for our region. These are some of the things that we’ve 

got to try and determine and some of the things that we have to 

understand better. And that’s why it’s important that we take 

the time to understand these Bills and we take the time to make 

sure that we try and make them relevant not only to our life but 

certainly to our region. 

 

And that’s why I made reference, Mr. Speaker, to the wild rice 

industry in northern Saskatchewan and central Saskatchewan 

because I know that they are impacted by the Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation, and any Bill that comes forward, 

that they have an impact. But the greater challenge and the 

greater opportunity for me, Mr. Speaker, is to understand how 

this applies to rural Saskatchewan, to the producers and to the 

farm families, and to see whether the benefit is there in the long 

run, but more so to see who benefits and to see what challenges 

lie out there for the future of our agricultural communities, of 

our towns, and of our families. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people . . . There was a lot of 

discussion one day on the future of farm land ownership and 

whether we should allow foreign ownership of farm lands in 

Saskatchewan. There was a thought process within the NDP 

that was to try and keep farm land ownership in Saskatchewan 

to the Saskatchewan people. That was one of the things that I 

think the NDP were known to try and do, is to protect 

Saskatchewan people’s interests. 

 

And there was a lot of pressure from the right wing, at the time 

the Saskatchewan Party, to try and loosen up the restrictions of 

foreign farm landownership. And at the end of the day, in an 

effort to try and stimulate the agricultural community and to try 

and make rural Saskatchewan stronger by having investment 

come into their region, the NDP certainly to a large extent 

softened up their position and allowed foreign landownership, 

you know, to increase. And that was a very difficult discussion 

at the time because, I think in general, we wanted to protect 

Saskatchewan people’s interest, and we wanted to make sure 

that the farm family model, so to speak, of operating our 

agricultural lands was something that we would want to protect 

and we’d want to enhance. 

 

And all these questions came into play, Mr. Speaker. And at the 

end of the day, I think what’s important is, as the Saskatchewan 

Party would say, let the markets prevail, whether it’s a large 

multinational corporation that end up owning all our farm land 

and we are simply bystanders and applauding the economy and 

then the riches that they make. Well that’s their position, you 

know. And that’s one of the things that’s important for people 

to know is that, where do we stand on some of these issues? 

What’s our position? What’s our fundamental principle behind 

foreign landownership? 

And at the time, as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of 

struggle within cabinet as to whether that was a good idea in the 

long run or whether it was something that we should do to 

stimulate the economy in the rural parts of our province. And at 

the end of the day, I think there was some loosening up of our 

philosophy. Not so much giving up or anything, but certainly 

saying well, let’s try it this way. It’s important for the area. 

They’re asking for it. And I think that’s what we had done to 

reach out to the rural part of Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So there’s no question that as the summer is going to be coming 

in a few short months that we’re going to take every effort to 

try and understand how the agricultural community works, and 

in particular how this Bill affects or impacts some of the farm 

families, but also to see whether there’s really true benefits 

here. Because if we have a great program and a great spending 

budget here, what happens is that, if it’s all going out of 

province to all people that may own some of the operations that 

are impacted by the Crop Insurance Corporation, if it’s all 

going out of country or another province, then what’s the use of 

putting this money in if there’s no Saskatchewan farm family 

benefit? 

 

I think the majority of those benefits within the Crop Insurance 

Corporation should be going to farm families that live and have 

a tradition and a history of calling Saskatchewan their home. I 

think that’s a fundamental belief that we have and a 

fundamental belief that I have, that if you have any of these 

programs and investment, that we shouldn’t be shooting this 

money off to some foreign ownership in some foreign lands and 

they get the lion’s share of all the benefits that we as 

Saskatchewan taxpayers have put on the table to support our 

agricultural communities. That is one of the main reasons why, 

and I hope I was able to briefly explain to the people that are 

listening, one of the main reasons why we need to take a role in 

understanding these Bills even though we’re not familiar with 

these industries, but more so to point out our philosophy and 

our position on why some of these programs need to answer 

some of the questions that we have as an opposition. 

 

I think that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 

reason why I’m standing up today as a northern MLA, as a 

northern Aboriginal MLA, asking questions about this crop 

insurance Bill that the minister just presented. It is important we 

do that. Part of the due diligence that we want to undertake as 

an opposition is to understand these industries greater. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think in the long run that’s going to serve us well and 

the people of Saskatchewan very well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we want to make sure that we look at 

the benefits and the benefactors and we ascertain whether these 

are going to philosophically support what we think is right, 

which is a good, solid support for the farm families out there. 

And to again make sure that the monies and the programs that 

are within this Act will benefit agriculture for years to come 

and strengthen the mainstay of our provincial economy so that 

we can say 20 years from now that we’re not worried about 

Saskatchewan’s interests being maintained when it comes to the 

agricultural base, that certainly that that particular aspect has 

been met with as much vigour and intelligent spending as 

possible. That’s the most, that’s the key thing, Mr. Speaker. 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

So I know I have a few more things I want to add but certainly, 

as I mentioned, taking the time to understand the Bill and 

reaching out to the impacted communities, the impacted people, 

and the organizations that are involved. Mr. Speaker, I move at 

this time that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 34. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 19 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 19 — The 

Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise this afternoon to provide an assessment and 

perhaps a bit of an appraisal of The Assessment Appraisers 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Act sets out to do chiefly three things. And if I might, Mr. 

Speaker, the second reading speech on the part of the minister 

was particularly well done, so for those that helped out with the 

speech, I’d like to say cogently argued and the arguments were 

quite well laid out. So congratulations on that to whoever held 

the pen in this speech, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps they could have 

helped out in the question period for the Minister as well. 

 

But to the Bill itself. Again, one of the . . . In terms of the 

professional designations — clearing up issues around 

registration, licensing as opposed to membership of an 

accrediting body — these things are important obviously when 

it comes to the proper conduct of a professional designation. 

And this is certainly the case with the assessment appraisers. It 

builds on regulations that have been in effect since November 

1st, 2002. It again does chiefly three things. 

 

First, it’s clarifying the Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers’ 

Association role in certifying or licensing all assessment 

appraisers involved in valuing property for municipal property 

tax purposes, whether or not they are members of the SAAA 

[Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers’ Association] or not, 

thereby ensuring the credentials of all assessment appraisers are 

verified. 

 

Secondly, amendments are put forward to remove requirements 

related to the residency, employment, and membership 

including one that exists in The Agrologists Act of 1994, which 

ensures that accreditation is based on knowledge, skills, 

education, and experience to better comply with the province’s 

commitments and obligations regarding labour mobility. Again, 

I would presume that there’s been a fair amount of work done 

not just with the representative bodies there, Mr. Speaker, but to 

make sure that this jives with the interprovincial trade and 

labour mobility requirements; you know, be it under what we 

have in TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement] or with the New West Partnership or what have 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Thirdly, amendments to update the Act to the current model 

used for professions Acts in Saskatchewan continuing the 

government’s practice of refining and updating professions 

legislation, thereby ensuring it meets the needs of the 

profession, the association, and the public. 

 

So again to recap, it’s about clarifying the role that the SAAA 

plays, again membership not necessarily being required to be 

registered and licensed by the SAAA, but very clearly 

delineating or more clearly delineating the line between those 

functions; the situation around particularly residency, 

previously various professional designations that insisted on a 

residential requirement in the province of Saskatchewan in 

these times of much greater labour mobility. This is a trend that 

we see in a great number of professional designations and that 

need to go to an extra-provincial basis as opposed to one 

particular province, but again, ensuring that the mandate of the 

representative body is still clear and enforceable. And thirdly 

again, refining and clarifying the provisions of the Act to ensure 

that it meets the needs of the association, the public, the 

profession. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, this is one piece of 

legislation that largely fits under the heading of what might be 

deemed housekeeping. 

 

I note that in making these three points, the minister has stated 

that we plan to have the regulations developed in further 

consultation with the SAAA, with SAMA, the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency, as well as the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Agrologists, and the Ministry of Agriculture and 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

There’s a claim made in the speech, Mr. Speaker, of 

consultation that has come previously and consultation yet to 

come as the Act is further brought forward and developed 

around its regulations. So if the Bill can live up to its claim of 

assuring the Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers’ Association 

with clearer direction regarding accreditation, certification, and 

membership issues, that would seem to be on the face of it a 

positive thing, Mr. Speaker. We’ll see what other members 

have to say in this debate, particularly our critic for Municipal 

Affairs. But this seems to be a positive measure brought 

forward, and we’ll see where it winds up and how the new 

Licensed Assessment Appraiser of Saskatchewan, the new 

accredited title under the legislation, work out, work out for 

people. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I think I would be approaching the 

conclusion of my remarks. And as such, I would move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 19, The Assessment Appraisers 

Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 19, The 

Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 20 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 20 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join in on the debate and the discussion in 

adjourned debates as I prepare to speak to Bill No. 20, The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

When looking at this piece of legislation, my thoughts first go 

to the importance that individuals in this province place to their 

communities. Whether we live in one of the larger cities, 

whether we live in a smaller city, whether we live in a town or a 

village or a hamlet or whether we’re on a farm, wherever we 

may be living here in the province, what is certain is that people 

love their communities. They love the people, their neighbours, 

and their family members in a given area. And there’s a strong 

attachment to the place that we live if the people identify with a 

certain neighbourhood or a certain community. And so we have 

a real strong interest in what occurs in that community when 

there are potential changes. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, when considering the types of 

changes that can occur in a given area, the type of action that 

people in the province want is an action that is forward-looking, 

also one that is responsible and keeps a proper long-term view 

in perspective so that decisions being made when it comes to 

the planning and the development of particular areas, that the 

decisions aren’t short-sighted, that they’re not being made for a 

short-term gain with potentially long-term consequences that 

individuals would not want, that would’ve not been good for 

our children, for future generations, and also for neighbouring 

communities. It’s important to have the necessary 

communication between areas in order to ensure that proper 

decisions are being made. 

 

So this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is an amendment to 

the Act, as the minister responsible identified in his second 

reading speech. For followers at home, the minister gave his 

second reading speech on December 14th, 2011 where he 

outlined some of the goals and some of the objectives that he 

sought to accomplish with this piece of legislation. And I think, 

Mr. Speaker, it is a useful speech in the sense that it highlights 

areas of attention, and it highlights some potential concerns that 

I think we as an opposition have some questions about as well 

as people in the province who care about their neighbourhoods 

and their larger communities. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, of my own constituency, which is quite 

varied in the types of neighbourhoods that are present there — 

going from very older neighbourhoods, some of the first 

neighbourhoods in Saskatoon like Caswell and Mayfair; going 

down 33rd Street, down through 1960s neighbourhoods like 

Hudson Bay Park; as well as Westview into the ’70s; and then 

into the ’80s and the early ’90s, in neighbourhoods like 

Dundonald; and now with the brand-new subdivision of 

Hampton Village which is to the north of Dundonald and just 

south of the airport lands. Most of this area is now built out. 

There’s a few developments that are ongoing in a few pockets. 

 

But between the ’07 election and the 2011 election, there were 

certainly a lot of new homes there and individuals that were 

new to the constituency, a good number from the west side 

already, maybe an older neighbourhood. And these individuals 

wanted a bigger or a newer house or perhaps they wanted to . . . 

well, they wanted a newer house but also wanted to be close to 

family members or grandparents for child care in a 

neighbouring community neighbourhood. Or they simply liked 

the familiarity of having the shopping and the businesses that 

they’re used to going to on the west side. 

 

I say that, Mr. Speaker, simply as an example to show how 

important community development is for people, how strong 

the attachment is that people have to their local area, and that 

when we are making decisions about the look and the feel of 

neighbourhoods and how neighbourhoods fit into a community 

and how that community relates to other communities within a 

region, it’s important to remember that our decisions have to be 

based on the best interests for the people living in those areas. 

And yes, there will be a give and take required between 

communities as planning occurs. 

 

[15:00] 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, many of those hurdles can be 

overcome through proper communication, through compromise, 

which is a hallmark of the Saskatchewan way, and through 

strong leadership at the municipal level which has been, as I 

said, the way that Saskatchewan has developed for many years. 

 

So this, Mr. Speaker, as the minister says, is an amendment to 

earlier Acts to do with The Planning and Development Act, 

going back to 2007. And we see some changes here, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister has chosen to enact. And he states 

that this has occurred through extensive consultation, and he 

goes to some effort in his second reading speech to list some of 

the groups that he has consulted with. And he says that . . . I’m 

quoting from page 215 of Hansard on December 14th, and it 

says: 

 

The consultations involved municipal governments and 

associations, industry sector groups, agricultural and 

environmental agencies, the heritage sector, planning 

districts, the transportation sector, professional 

associations, and provincial ministries. Mr. Speaker, the 

input from these consultations has been instrumental in 

developing these amendments and will make a substantial 

contribution to building the future of Saskatchewan’s 

communities. 

 

So I say that, Mr. Speaker, because I do want to emphasize the 

importance of consultation and the value that comes from it. 

And it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the discussions that 

occurred with these groups by the minister and/or with his 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

officials and the agencies, I hope that the information that was 

given, Mr. Speaker, was well received, genuinely listened to, 

and then incorporated into the decision-making process. And 

the minister does make some reference to some of the changes 

in the legislation that he made based on the feedback that was 

received, and that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, if that has in 

fact occurred. 

 

But it’s important to also remember or it’s important also to, I 

would say, remind members opposite that when consulting with 

these types of groups, it’s also important to truly listen to them 

and take their views into consideration and not simply go 

through the exercise of consultation for the sake of being able 

to say in a second reading speech that it occurred. But it’s my 

hope with the minister having said that the consultations 

occurred with these groups, it’s my hope that it was genuine 

and a very thorough consultation. 

 

There are a number of goals that this piece of legislation 

attempts to accomplish in some of the different aspects. And as 

the minister identified in his speech, he said that: 

 

The amendments are designed to provide additional 

flexibility for municipalities to jointly plan and manage 

areas of common interest, improve the mechanics of 

decision making for large district planning commissions, 

provide the minister with the ability to delegate approving 

authority status to a district planning authority, provide 

dispute resolution processes for district planning 

commissions and district planning authorities, increase 

municipal flexibility to effectively service and cover the 

cost of development, and address incidental housekeeping 

items. 

 

So I provide that list, Mr. Speaker, to give the listeners at home 

an idea of what this Bill seeks to accomplish, and it is a fairly 

broad set of objectives that . . . a broad set of changes or at least 

amendments that are attempting to be made through this piece 

of legislation. And I would at this time, Mr. Speaker, like to 

touch on some of those different goals that the minister has 

identified to see where some of the strengths in the decisions 

may be but also to identify some of the problems or pitfalls that 

may be coming through some of the decisions that the minister 

wants to make through this proposed amendment to the Act. 

 

I’ll first address, Mr. Speaker, the one area where it speaks of 

flexibility for municipalities to jointly plan and manage areas of 

common interest and to improve the mechanics of decision 

making for large district planning commissions. So this is the 

idea, Mr. Speaker, as I read it and understand it, is that we 

would move from a state where each municipality, each order 

of government within a local specific geographical area is doing 

its own planning. But it’s an approach, Mr. Speaker, that would 

allow for better communication, better co-operation, better 

compromise between groups in a specific area, geographic area, 

that have a common interest in the area of doing well. 

 

And I think when I say doing well, there’s many components to 

what that looks like. Yes, doing well economically, that is a 

very important aspect because it provides a tax base so that 

services can be provided. It allows for jobs so that families, 

parents can provide for their children. So there’s certainly the 

economic component which we need to keep in mind, but 

there’s also how we do well from a cultural perspective, from a 

recreational perspective, and from a social perspective, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there’s a number of components there, and it’s my hope that 

through this process that is being designed that allows for 

geographical areas to get together and to do regional planning, 

my hope, Mr. Speaker, is that it would not solely take a 100 per 

cent economic focus. I think it needs to be broader than that. It 

can be a discussion about how services can be provided in a 

given area perhaps. Perhaps a discussion about how some 

efficiencies can be gained between different groups so that 

there is not unnecessary duplication. But I think also, Mr. 

Speaker, when you involve more people together in an area, it 

allows for communication to occur between groups, and it’s 

through communication that a better understanding of specific 

needs and concerns can be realized. 

 

In one of the examples that’s given in this legislation, it also 

talks about the interplay that municipalities have with the local 

First Nation. And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s a good thing to 

incorporate groups that maybe haven’t traditionally 

communicated to the extent that they should by having more 

people together under one banner within one region talking, 

discussing about what they want the future to be in their local 

area. That’s a positive thing because it allows for co-operation, 

and it allows for sound decisions to be made. And I think it 

allows for sound decisions to be made because there’s a greater 

understanding and appreciation of the local reality that 

individual pockets within the community may be facing. So if 

groups that don’t normally communicate a great deal are 

suddenly put together and have the opportunity to share views 

and see where both sides can benefit from a positive 

relationship, that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ve addressed how it’s important when taking a regional 

perspective on development, how it’s important to have an 

economic focus with development, and how maybe it’s 

important to have a social focus as well in terms of having 

organizations and groups communicate with one another. 

 

I think it’s also important from a cultural perspective, and I say 

that with respect to our buildings and the way that our 

communities look and feel. I think we can all think of areas in 

the province or in our own backyards, Mr. Speaker, where there 

hasn’t been the proper kind of planning or maybe the planning 

has proven that maybe a little more could have been done at 

one time in order to ensure that the decisions being made aren’t 

having a negative effect. And from a cultural perspective, the 

way our communities feel, the way that buildings look, the way 

that streets and highways are designed has an influence on the 

local culture. And it’s important, Mr. Speaker, within that 

regional context to also take into considerations of culture. 

 

And as I was saying, we can think of areas where the planning 

in an area may not feel as tied together as it could be. Maybe 

there’s different types of development or it maybe has a bit of a 

staggered feel. And I think, Mr. Speaker, by having a regional 

focus, as the minister identifies in this piece of legislation, that 

might allow for good types of decisions to be made in the 

present and going into the future. 

 

And so I do think that is a positive thing to have local people on 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

the ground who are involved, local municipalities who know 

their communities better than anyone else much of the time, 

coming together and talking about what they want their 

community to look like from an economic perspective, from a 

social perspective, and from a cultural perspective. 

 

So it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker . . . And the minister talks about 

this in his second reading speech. He says that: 

 

Joint initiatives set the stage for more formal partnerships, 

and we are pleased to see the beginnings of 12 potentially 

new district planning commissions as a result of incentive 

funding from the planning for growth program. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to provide that type of 

support to allow local initiatives to take root. 

 

Now that’s some of the positive comments that I’ve made about 

it, Mr. Speaker, because I do think that gains can be realized by 

having a co-operative approach. But as with any decision, when 

there are positives, there also may be some negatives. So while 

there may be this regional activity, Mr. Speaker, I think it is 

also very important for the ministry to have the proper 

oversight still, to still be involved, to still be cognizant of what 

is occurring in the local areas so that things stay on the rails as 

they ought to be. Not to question the knowledge and the 

wisdom of local areas, but, Mr. Speaker, it’s always important 

to have proper oversight because that’s the way that a 

democratic system works, is that there be proper oversight to a 

situation. So it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the minister is 

aware of that, that the minister is taking proper steps to ensure 

that that is occurring and is not unnecessarily devolving 

authority in a way that is not appropriate and still doesn’t have 

checks and balances that may be needed. That leads to another 

point, Mr. Speaker, where the minister in his remarks talks 

about how the proposal also provides the opportunity for 

district planning authority to be granted approving authority 

status. 

 

So as I read it, Mr. Speaker, it would appear that there is a 

devolving of responsibility to these organizations in terms of 

allowing them to make decisions, and that may be appropriate. 

But it’s important to have the necessary checks there as there is 

with any order of government or needs to be with any order of 

government or any local authority, one should say, when 

making decisions. 

 

It’s also important, Mr. Speaker, while the idea of co-operation 

between many groups is a good thing, that you have 

co-operation at a regional level, I think, is a strength of 

Saskatchewan and is a positive step. It’s also important to 

understand and realize that not all of the time will everyone get 

along with everyone, have a decision of what the plan should 

be, of what the future should look like. From time to time, Mr. 

Speaker, it may be a reality that within these planning 

authorities that there is a dispute and I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important that there is a route to resolve that. 

 

It appears that the minister has touched on that somewhat in the 

planning of this Bill. I’ll just provide this for listeners at home 

where he says: 

 

Where a municipality and a planning district is unable to 

resolve a dispute with other members and has requested 

withdrawal or where a planning district has requested 

dissolution, the Minister of Municipal Affairs may refer 

the matter to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 

 

So it appears, Mr. Speaker, that there is an avenue there to deal 

with issues that come about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another section that is addressed in this piece of 

legislation, as identified by the minister, has to do with the fees 

that are associated with development and how development in a 

local area is paid for and the rules around how a local authority 

may recoup some of the costs associated with the development 

that is occurring in an area. 

 

This is an interesting discussion, Mr. Speaker. And it actually 

touches on some of the topics that we’re talking about today for 

example with who pays for RCMP and what sort of off-loading 

there may be. So we have heard in recent days and recent weeks 

a lot of mixed messages from members opposite. We’ve heard 

messages where, on the one hand, it said that there’s prosperity, 

and the other hand that there needs to be austerity. And we’ve 

heard mixed signals. And I think this is being recognized in the 

broader public as well in how some of the decisions and 

proposals that members opposite are making don’t always make 

a lot of sense or aren’t consistent in a way that they should be, 

in a way that would indicate there’s the proper forethought and 

planning occurring. 

 

When we look at the issue of fees, this is being set up in such a 

way that local authorities and municipalities can recoup some 

of those costs. And, Mr. Speaker, it ties into a larger policy 

discussion that perhaps can be had on another day as well to do 

with who is responsible for paying these types of fees. What is 

the best source of income for these types of fees? What is the 

best approach to ensure that people are paying their fair share, 

to ensure that municipalities are not unnecessarily burdened but 

also to recognize that there may be constraints from the 

provincial government. 

 

But what we’ve heard from members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

are very mixed signals when we talk about high revenue, but 

then there’s also talk about large, large cuts. And so it’s left 

many people, and I would imagine some people in 

municipalities, wondering what is the plan? What is the way 

forward with this government when such mixed signals are 

being given to Saskatchewan people? 

 

[15:15] 

 

As with any piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, there is the 

regular types of housekeeping details that are addressed and 

that are fixed or tuned up. And, Mr. Speaker, as the minister 

suggests in his speech, this piece of legislation, this amendment 

does have that aspect as well which . . . Normally housekeeping 

matters aren’t of a significant nature. And sometimes they’re a 

result of other pieces of legislation being changed, either 

provincially or sometimes federally, and then therefore it has a 

domino effect where other pieces of legislation need to be 

brought up to speed. And it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the 

housekeeping changes here are simply of that nature, that they 

aren’t controversial and they aren’t an attempt to hide anything 

untoward. And I wouldn’t accuse members of that, but it’s just 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

my sincere hope always with any piece of legislation that it is 

what it is and that one does not need to read between the lines 

for something else that may be there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I briefly made some remarks about the notion of 

fees and how this type of development can be paid for or how it 

ought to be paid for. And the minister identifies a tension here 

based on the consultation. So in my earlier remarks I said that 

consultation needs to be thorough, consultation needs to be 

sincere, and that the minister and his or her officials need to 

listen to the feedback that is received. 

 

Identified in the minister’s second reading speech is a real 

tension that is identified. And it would appear to me that the 

minister, at this time, has decided to listen to one group and not 

listen to the other group to the same extent. Or maybe he’s not 

favouring one over the other but is choosing to park the issue 

for now in a holding pattern and simply not address it at this 

time, either because he feels that it’s not appropriate to handle 

at this time or he doesn’t have the political will to address the 

issue at this time. 

 

And I’ll read the paragraph from his speech to you to give 

members and listeners at home an idea of what I’m talking 

about here. And it has to do with this issue that he has parked 

for the time being. And so I’m curious as to whether or not it 

will be coming at a later date or if it will just be sitting there 

indefinitely. And quoting from page 216 of Hansard on 

December 14th, 2011, it says: 

 

Amendments requested by municipalities and the 

development industry which have not been addressed 

within this proposal include the request by SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], 

and the cities of Saskatoon and Regina to expand the list 

of fees and levies to include fire suppression infrastructure 

and facilities. Home builders and developers opposed the 

provisions which they believe do not account for the 

impact on current and future homeowners, renters, 

consumer spending, housing affordability, or economic 

investment into major centres and more broadly 

Saskatchewan. They also oppose the shift from funding 

this type of infrastructure and facility through new 

development rather than general taxation. As a result, this 

provision has been removed and will be considered in 

future discussions with the sector and development 

industry. 

 

So what we see in that paragraph provided in the minister’s 

speech, and as the previous member from Regina Elphinstone 

stated, complimenting the ministry officials who worked on 

drafting the speech, I too would like to thank them for their 

work in outlining this component because I think it is an 

important tension. And it speaks to a larger policy issue that I 

don’t think members opposite have fully wrestled with and 

come to a conclusion as to how they want to handle it and who 

they want to be listening to and what is the best approach. If 

they were at that position, if they did know what they wanted to 

do, I think it would’ve been addressed in this piece of 

legislation. Because we’ve seen in other situations on different 

pieces of legislation, even when there has been opposing views 

on something, they’ve been more than willing to plow ahead. 

So they’re not afraid of ignoring people, but it depends who 

they’re ignoring, and that’s the catch. And I think this 

paragraph here indicates who they’re willing to ignore and who 

they’re not willing to ignore. So it has to do with how the 

infrastructure in a community is paid for and whether or not 

municipalities are expected to provide for or pay for that type of 

infrastructure out of general tax levies, or whether the onus 

should be placed on the developer of an area to provide the 

infrastructure needed in that area . And as the minister stated in 

his speech, it’s the list of fees and levies to include fire 

suppression, infrastructure, and facilities. 

 

So we know, Mr. Speaker, as communities grow, it’s necessary 

and important to have fire halls built in the various 

communities throughout the province, but this is especially the 

case in the larger centres. And I think of, Mr. Speaker, the 

neighbourhood I often speak to during the petitions portion of 

the day, Hampton Village. And this is one such community, 

Mr. Speaker, where a fire hall is slated to go in right off 

McLaughlin Road behind the Shoppers Drug Mart, very close 

to the land that is designated for a new elementary school or 

schools, I should add. 

 

And so it’s this question, Mr. Speaker, how this necessary 

infrastructure is going to be paid for. I think all homeowners in 

an area when they move into a specific, into an area, they 

expect that they have services and that may be, I’ll think of 

Hampton Village, they expect that there’s a Shoppers Drug 

Mart or whatever store. I don’t mean to endorse one company 

over another. They expect that there’d be some basic 

conveniences there, some larger shopping centres in the area. 

They expect that they have a decent police presence in the area, 

and they expect that they have fire services. 

 

And as individuals will know, or at least as I’ve been told, it’s 

actually . . . There’s a requirement for fire halls to be built in 

expanding areas so that the response time by emergency 

vehicles like fire is within a certain time frame, so that 

homeowners are eligible for insurance coverage in the area. 

Otherwise there are questions about whether or not they qualify 

for insurance. So it’s not really a debate up for question as to 

whether or not a fire hall should be moved into a specific area; 

it’s something that needs to occur. 

 

And here we have a tension, Mr. Speaker, where the cities, it 

sounds like the city of Saskatoon, Regina, and at least certain 

individuals within SUMA and SARM are asking that when a 

large developer moves into an area that a lot of that cost would 

be borne by them. On the flip side, the homeowners’ 

association and the builders, it sounds as though they are 

saying, well actually this would be an unfair, an unnecessary 

burden placed on homeowners which would affect the cost of 

our homes, which would be passed on to the purchasers, and 

would affect purchasing power that individuals may have in a 

given area and not be a wise step. 

 

The catch is the money has to come from somewhere, and it’s 

not clear to me that the members opposite have decided where 

they want to get the funding to provide the infrastructure that is 

required in order that we have appropriate number of fire halls 

in a growing neighbourhood in a growing city. 

 

So it is interesting to me because, as I said before, members 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

opposite have been very willing to ignore groups, have been 

very willing to brush off criticism or brush off opposing 

viewpoints, whether that’s wildlife habitat land, whether that is 

some of the labour legislation that has been ruled 

unconstitutional. Whatever the case may be, members opposite 

are willing to go down that road, but in this instance they 

paused. And they decided to simply park the issue and to shelve 

it. 

 

In the meantime, in the meantime in Hampton Village people 

are moving in. In other communities people are moving in, and 

they need a fire hall. And so the members opposite, the minister 

can choose to park the issue if he wants to. But as I said before 

earlier on in my comments talking about the forward-thinking 

approach that is needed with development, I’m not sure simply 

putting one’s head in the sand is going to take us to the point 

where we have the type of outcome that we want and that we 

need in order to have a strong province. So to me it has been 

interesting, that tension. 

 

Just connected to this point of providing infrastructure through 

what source it is paid for and what different communities are 

doing, I’ve actually been told that in the new subdivision in the 

city of Swift Current, the area of land beside the hospital there 

sort of tucked by the hospital and where Wal-Mart is, I’ve been 

told actually in that area that because of the response times to 

the fire hall, that the codes there within the city, they’ve 

determined that there needs to be sprinklers built into the homes 

in that area which is a fairly clear statement. And if I’m 

incorrect on that, I’m happy to be corrected. But that is what I 

have been told by individuals who were involved there on the 

ground in Swift Current. 

 

And I think it points to an example where, if there isn’t the 

proper type of forward thinking that is there in terms of how 

we’re going to pay for these types of things — if the 

government isn’t willing to make up its mind on how they’re 

going to pay for the things like fire services in a community — 

municipalities, cities, and towns may in some ways chart their 

own course by changing codes like that to require that there be 

sprinklers in homes as opposed to the traditional view that 

people would want is to have a fire truck show up with a team 

of highly trained individuals who are serving their community 

and to extinguish the blaze that way, because it’s more effective 

for actually extinguishing the fire properly and well. But 

moreover it takes into consideration the saving or the protection 

of human life in a different way that a sprinkler cannot, and 

that’s why we have professional and volunteer fire services 

throughout the province. 

 

So again if I’m wrong on that statement, I apologize to 

individuals, but the source is reliable that told me about it. So it 

is an interesting point and something I think that the minister 

should take into consideration as he just parks this item for now 

and doesn’t address it or chooses not to address it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do thank you and I thank all members for the 

time and the opportunity to speak to Bill 20, An Act to amend 

The Planning and Development Act, 2007. In my brief remarks 

this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I’ve identified a number of things. 

I’ve identified how much Saskatchewan people love their 

communities. And everyone in the province, wherever we’re 

from, we love where we’re from, for the most part. There’s 

always the exception of people that want to live somewhere 

else. You know, Regina’s a great place, but I really love 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. But Saskatchewan is a great place 

because of our communities and the people that live in them. 

And because we love our communities so much, because we’ve 

come from great places, it’s only appropriate and necessary that 

the proper types of decisions about our local communities are 

being made. And that requires a very long-term view of things. 

It requires co-operation and it requires communication between 

the different players and the different stakeholders in a given 

area. 

 

Some of the talk that the minister has identified in the 

amendments to the Bill which would allow for regional 

planning, which would allow for some regional co-operation at 

basic level, I think, Mr. Speaker, those are good things. Those 

are good steps. There are the questions, Mr. Speaker, about 

proper oversight. There are questions about duplication with 

other regional organizations that may be at work, and so it’s 

important that there still be . . . It’s important that there still is a 

role, I think, for the ministry in this type of work. 

 

It’s important to have consultations, and it would appear, Mr. 

Speaker, that on this piece of legislation that the ministry has 

discussed it with a good number of stakeholders. And out of 

that, Mr. Speaker, came a decision, as the minister openly states 

in his second reading speech that he’s simply going to park the 

issue for now because he’s not sure which direction he and/or 

the government wants to go. I find that puzzling, Mr. Speaker, 

because as I’ve said before, it’s not atypical for this government 

to ignore contrary views. They will plow ahead if they want to 

do something. So clearly here they’re listening to someone, or 

they’re listening to one group over another, which perhaps 

opens up a number of questions and a larger discussion that 

speakers after me may want to address. 

 

There are a number of goals. As I said, some of them appear to 

be quite good, some of them appear to be housekeeping, some 

of them do have some concerns and some problems, but I do 

thank the minister for a thorough second reading speech and 

providing the piece of legislation. And I have enjoyed the 

opportunity to say a few remarks because it has caused me to 

think about my own community and my own home, and when 

you’re away from home it’s always a good thing to think of 

home. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 

debate. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 20. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Next Bill. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Bill No. 21 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 21 — The 

Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s with 

great pleasure I rise this afternoon to speak to the Assembly 

about Bill 21. This is the Bill, An Act respecting Commissioners 

to administer Oaths and making consequential amendments to 

other Acts. Sorry, Bill 20. Sorry, 21. Got the right one. Thank 

you. 

 

This was introduced in the earlier session in December, on 

December 14th by the Minister of Justice. And he, in his 

remarks, gave the indications why the government is 

introducing the Bill at this time. In his opening remarks, he 

indicates that this is a modernization of the legislation for 

appointing commissioners for oaths. 

 

Looks like the Bill was really first introduced in the 1970s and 

has been amended a number of times since. So I think the 

proposition here is to replace the original Act with a new Act. 

It’s now ordered somewhat differently with some different 

features, but essentially it’s just concerning how commissioners 

for oaths are appointed. And he’s indicating that it’s removing 

provisions that are outdated or unnecessary and there’s an 

attempt to update the language in the Bill. 

 

As many of the members here present know, commissioners for 

oaths are officials that administer oaths, affirmations, and 

statutory declarations for many uses in Saskatchewan. Indeed 

all the members here are commissioners for oaths, and I suspect 

that it’s a common part of their constituency work to assist 

constituents by signing such declarations and witnessing, I 

guess, such declarations. 

 

The Commissioner for Oaths . . . It even goes back as far as the 

1940s, and I think the idea here is that the modernization that’s 

required really goes in terms of how people outside of 

Saskatchewan can be appointed as a Commissioner for Oaths. 

The ministry apparently has gone through a review. I’m not 

sure what kind of consultation they’ve done with the legal 

society and the Law Society or other people that use the . . . or 

get appointed, but he’s indicated that they have reviewed the 

processes related to appointments and have tried to correct 

several inefficiencies and felt that more could be done with 

legislative amendments. So he indicated the big distinction in 

the Bill between appointments for commissioner for oaths in 

and for Saskatchewan and without Saskatchewan, he’s 

indicating those concepts are unnecessary in today’s mobile 

society. So by removing the distinction, he’s indicating that 

that’s following a lead that’s been started in other provinces 

like British Columbia, Manitoba, and Ontario. 

 

So what the Bill does is it removes, the proposed Bill removes 

the requirement to be a Canadian citizen or British subject as a 

qualification for appointment — and a fairly significant change 

to the requirements in that virtually anyone on the planet could 

be qualified to be appointed as a Commissioner for Oaths in 

Saskatchewan. These concepts . . . He said the idea of requiring 

a Canadian citizenship or being a British subject are outdated 

and indicated that it may violate the equality provisions of the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms. I’m not sure what kind of 

legal research he’s obtained on that and he isn’t quite very 

definitive in his comments to the legislature and only is willing 

to say that it likely violates equality provisions, but he doesn’t 

indicate on what basis he believes that to be true. So that’s 

something that we might want to take a look at and find out 

whether indeed the restriction for Saskatchewan citizens and 

Canadian citizens and British subjects is in fact a violation of 

the equality provisions of the Charter. 

 

It’s funny that this Bill, his remarks in this Bill, are about 

human rights. As we saw today, there is some question about 

the operation of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, 

and the minister declined to make comment on that. However 

that is the commission that does keep an eye on human rights in 

Saskatchewan, and certainly when people’s rights are being 

violated, that’s the place of first instance for people to go. It’s 

well known that the Human Rights Commission exists, and it’s 

important for people to be able to have easy access when their 

rights are being violated. 

 

Quite often people whose rights are being violated are 

vulnerable people in society. They are suffering racial 

discrimination or sexual harassment and are in very vulnerable 

position because quite often they are in a working relationship 

where they need their job to feed their family, and in order to 

have their rights upheld, they have to complain against their 

employer. So the people whose rights are being violated and 

that need the Human Rights Commission and easy access to a 

tribunal, which doesn’t exist any more, but some sort of 

assistance from the Government of Saskatchewan, are finding it 

more and more difficult to access help when their rights are 

being violated because of the firings of front-line workers in the 

Human Rights Commission. 

 

So it’s interesting the minister is talking about violating 

equality provisions of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 

when it comes to the definition of a Commissioner for Oaths 

but he isn’t quite as concerned about that when it comes to 

access to human rights assistance, when people’s rights are 

actually being violated. 

 

I guess that also ties into some activities of a couple years ago 

where the previous government tried to pass Bills giving 

marriage commissioners freedom to refuse to marry gay and 

lesbian couples. And again the same thing applies. These are 

people who are vulnerable because of discrimination through 

human rights discrimination, and it was unfortunate that the 

government saw fit to attempt to restrict gay and lesbian 

marriages and that the marriage commissioners were going to 

be given the right to refuse to marry gay and lesbian couples. 

Fortunately our Court of Appeal saw through that and when it 

was referred to the Court of Appeal, the minister was required 

to step down from that proposal, and indeed chose not to go to 

the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

I’m hoping that the same kind of thing occurs with the appeal 

that was recently filed yesterday with the Court of Appeal in 

relation to workers’ rights — again another Charter issue that’s 

importance to a number of Canadians and particularly 

Saskatchewan people and particularly workers who need the 

right to assemble as protected by our Charter as it was set out in 

1982. And those rights were being challenged and are 

continuing to be challenged by this government, which is truly 

unfortunate, Madam Deputy Speaker. So again it’s interesting 

that there’s a need for consequential cleanup of technical 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

aspects of the Commissioner for Oaths Bill but that human 

rights may be trampled in other areas of our society with 

attempts by the minister to continue to impede access to rights 

through this appeal that was filed yesterday. However the 

modernization of The Commission for Oaths Act is probably in 

order and overdue, so this is what I’ll continue speaking on at 

this point. 

 

One of the things he indicated in his introductory remarks on 

December 14th was that it also provides a modernized 

appointment process with as much as possible being done 

online and electronically. And that’s a no-brainer, Madam 

Deputy Speaker. I think it’s really important that we modernize 

a lot of the processes that we have. The systems are there, and 

indeed perhaps even some systems of this legislature could be 

more modernized in a significant way. 

 

He also wants to introduce a concept of more rigorous 

screening of applicants. And one of the things that I read about 

when I was looking at the concept of a Commissioner of Oaths 

is that there is a moral obligation on a Commissioner for Oaths 

to do the right thing, and indeed there is penalty provisions for 

those that don’t follow. 

 

The minister’s indicated that he will also introduce regulations 

to enable training and evaluation processes before an 

appointment is issued. 

 

And one of the things that’s really difficult when we look at 

these new Bills where there’s additional regulatory control is 

that we don’t know exactly what the regs are going to look like, 

so then it’s difficult to understand how the Bill is going to be 

implemented. And if you look at the previous Act, there were 

no regulations, no regulatory powers at all that were addressed. 

In fact everything was found within the Act. 

 

In this particular proposed Act, this Bill, Bill 21, we find 

section 13, which is entirely new, and it delegates a lot of 

authority to the regulatory agency. In fact it’s suggesting that: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council . . . [can] make 

regulations: 

 

(a) defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of any 

word or expression used in this Act but not defined in this 

Act; 

 

That’s section 13(a) of the proposed Bill. 

 

I find that’s very broad and it gives a lot of power to Executive 

Council to really alter the meaning of the Act itself. And again, 

I mentioned this earlier but the idea of having the Executive 

Council have the ability to change words or expressions and 

definitions is something that I think we need to take account of 

here on this side of the Chamber because we have to now watch 

orders in council very closely to make sure that meanings of 

Acts aren’t being altered significantly by Executive Council 

actions in the passage of orders in council. 

 

Other things that are in this particular section are things like in 

section (b) that establish “when an appointment as a 

commissioner expires.” So again, Executive Council would 

have the ability to change the term of a commissioner, 

unbeknownst to them. And I expect there would be notification 

procedures in that regulation if in fact the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council chooses to do that. Other things that are in the 

regulations are the application fee. That’s not something I have 

as much concern about because that’s typically what you find in 

regulations, would be things like fees and costs for certain 

licences. 

 

One other thing the Lieutenant Governor in Council can do 

under the regulatory section as proposed in the Bill is under (d), 

where they could establish “eligibility requirements that must 

be satisfied by a person who applies for appointment as a 

commissioner.” This does raise some concern for me mainly 

because of the minister’s attempt to do that through the 

marriage commissioners Act. So that’s something that we’ll 

have to keep an eye on on this side of the House as well, is to 

ensure that if any orders in council are passed which restrict 

eligibility to become a Commissioner for Oaths for things that 

may impact on people’s human rights, we need to be vigilant 

and watch out for that. 

 

The regulations are also “requiring prospective commissioners 

to successfully complete an examination.” This is a new feature 

and it wasn’t one that was present, I don’t think, in the previous 

Act, at least not on my cursory view of the Bill. Yes, even the 

fees were found within the Act. They’re now being devolved to 

the regulatory level. 

 

The other requirements that are listed: there is a criminal record 

check, which makes total sense. I think that’s the way of the 

world these days, is to have a criminal record check. And then 

of course there’s the always ever-present catch-all for the 

Lieutenant Governor prescribing any other requirement that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council considers appropriate. Again 

that’s a typical type of boilerplate regulation which opens up a 

pretty wide range for Executive Council to make rules that 

don’t always follow the scrutiny of this particular Chamber. 

 

Finally there’s a couple more, actually four more regulatory 

provisions in the proposed Bill. One is prescribing government 

employees or classes of the government employees who are 

commissioners by virtue of their office or status. So again this 

could be the entire public service of Saskatchewan or certain 

classes, but we have no idea what that class is going to be 

because we don’t see the regulations. So it’s really difficult to 

understand the scope of the Bill without knowing what kind of 

regulations the Lieutenant Governor in Council will be passing. 

Again our side is going to have to be vigilant as all these orders 

in council come through and perhaps raise concerns at those 

points, but we normally don’t see them until after they’re 

passed. So it’s a bit of a different world. 

 

And then finally there’s the ability to make regulations 

prescribing persons or classes of persons who are 

commissioners by virtue of their office or status. Again no 

description in the Bill of what types of status or office would be 

considered by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, so again it’s 

difficult to know exactly what that’s going to look like. 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council will also have the ability 

to pass a regulation prescribing the words that a person 

prescribed pursuant to clause (f) shall display below his name. 

So once they decide who those classes are and who those 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

officers are, then there will have to be regulations saying how 

their name is going to be filled out on the oath or the 

affirmation. And then the boilerplate closes out that proposal, 

that particular clause where anything, “any other matter or thing 

that the Lieutenant Governor in Council considers necessary to 

carry out the intent of this Act.” So again a broad power being 

devolved down to Lieutenant Governor in Council and the 

Executive Council, and one that is more difficult to provide 

comment on and hold the government accountable to because 

it’s not being discussed here in this Chamber. 

 

The new Bill is set up in five parts, Madam Deputy Speaker, 

and the first part is of course just the preliminary matters. The 

second part is the appointments themselves, and in that case 

now the language is much broader. It doesn’t limit to 

Saskatchewan citizens or British subjects but indeed appoints 

any person of at least 18 years of age that the minister considers 

necessary. So although there’s a very broad scope here, it’s still 

limited by the minister’s own opinion of whether it’s necessary 

for them to be a commissioner, and again the regulations will 

determine when they expire. So that’s a new change to the Bill 

as well. 

 

Going on, the evidence of appointment that’s being proposed 

now is under section 5, and a commissioner appointed pursuant 

to section 3 is to be called a Commissioner for Oaths for 

Saskatchewan, that hasn’t changed. And they, under every 

affidavit, declaration or affirmation that they witness, they have 

to display those words, a Commissioner for Oaths for 

Saskatchewan, which again is the usual process and is really 

adopted from the previous Act. 

 

The other thing they have to do which hasn’t changed is 

indicate when their commission expires — as long as they 

know because the regulations may have changed it, of course. 

So what they do is they need to apply to the minister. There has 

to be a form provided by the minister, and then if they wish to 

be appointed, they have to go through that process. They have 

to meet the requirements for appointment as a commissioner. 

Again, those requirements are going to be prescribed in the 

regulations, so we don’t know what they’ll look like at this 

point until we see the regulations. 

 

And the minister can issue any document to indicate that 

they’ve been appointed. So the minister has to decide what kind 

of form he will use or she will use that they consider 

appropriate to indicate that that person has been appointed as a 

Commissioner for Oaths in Saskatchewan. The document 

issued pursuant to subsection (3) is admissible as evidence. So 

whatever the minister decides to use — it could be the back of a 

napkin, for all we know — but that’s sufficient if the minister 

says it is, and that can be admitted in court as evidence of their 

appointment. There’s no other proof required. 

 

[15:45] 

 

One of the things that the Bill does is it updates the fines for 

misbehaving if you are a Commissioner for Oaths. And that’s 

found in section 12, the offences and penalties. Under the 

previous Bill, it was a whopping fine of $500, period. At this 

point the first offence is for $500, but the amendment in this 

case is for a second or subsequent offence, the fine is doubled 

to $1,000. 

And so what kind of offences would a Commissioner for Oaths 

commit? That’s described in the first part of the section, section 

12(1). So if you haven’t been appointed, and you purport to be 

a Commissioner for Oaths, that’s bad. You get fined $500. If 

your commission has expired or it’s been revoked and you 

purport to act as a Commissioner for Oaths, same thing — bad 

fine. The third thing is that you can’t make a material 

representation in your application. So if you lie on your 

application, you are also subject to a fine: $500 if it’s your first 

offence. 

 

And finally I think the most important thing is that no 

commissioner should subscribe his signature before it’s fully 

completed. And I think there is a temptation, having signed a 

number of these, that often people don’t understand they’re not 

supposed to sign it until they are in front of a Commissioner for 

Oaths. And it’s very important for a Commissioner of Oaths to 

understand that you don’t sign it if a person’s already signed it. 

They have to sign it in front of you because you are witnessing 

their signature. As all the members here are often asked to sign 

them, it’s probably due diligence and wise to ensure that if 

you’re asked to sign an oath on behalf of one of your 

constituents you need to make sure that they haven’t signed it 

before you witness it — easily done. And as I say people don’t 

often understand how to fill out these forms. So it’s helpful for 

people to read through the requirements here.  

 

But again it’s clause 12(4) that says you cannot sign your 

signature “. . . to an affidavit, affirmation or declaration before 

it is fully completed with respect to all the particulars being 

deposed to, affirmed or declared and before the jurat . . . has 

been completed as to place and date of swearing . . .” 

 

So just a word of caution to all MLAs and everyone else who’s 

been appointed as a commissioner for oaths that that is an 

offence under the Act, and you could be subject to a fine of 

$500. 

 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I think at this point I’m just going to 

go back to the minister’s final comments in his introduction to 

the Bill in December 14th. And he’s talking about the updating 

of the designation of the types of people who can apply for the 

appointment and the list of people that are already appointed 

simply by virtue of their stature or office. Again, as I 

mentioned, the power to designate someone has been devolved 

to the regulatory level, but in part 3 there are a number of 

sections that identify who is by law a commissioner for oaths 

and not one that needs to apply for the appointment. 

 

So in the first part of the section they describe court officials, 

and those are people who hold offices of the registrar of the 

Court of Appeal or the registrar of the Court of Queen’s Bench 

or their deputies. It also applies to local registrars or deputy 

local registrars of the Court of Queen’s Bench for 

Saskatchewan and the local courts; a clerk of the Provincial 

Court of Saskatchewan; a sheriff or deputy sheriff; or the 

inspector of legal offices or a deputy inspector. This doesn’t 

describe our clerks here as court officials, but I assume they 

would be covered under other clauses. 

 

The second part is of course government officials which will be 

determined by what the regulations say. So we don’t know what 

that’s going to be yet, and we have to wait for the regulations. 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

Other automatic commissioners for oaths include officers in the 

Canadian Armed Forces — and they have a description here of 

the ranks that are required before they would be considered to 

be an officer, or a Commissioner for Oaths — and then finally a 

police officer, so in this case, a member of the Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police or member of any police service as defined in 

The Police Act. Those are automatically commissioners for oath 

under this proposed Bill, and that’s very similar to the previous 

Bill. 

 

Now there are other ones who also are automatics, and they’re 

commissioners by virtue of their office or status and they don’t 

have to apply. So this extends to Provincial Court judges, 

lawyers, and Members of the Legislative Assembly — so the 

members present here and all our members — officers in the 

Canadian Armed Forces, court officials, police officers, 

government officials, and any other person prescribed in the 

regulation. 

 

So again what I read earlier in section 9 was the definition of 

court officials — so they’re in there — definitions of officers in 

the Canadian Armed Forces, definitions of police officers. 

Those are the ones we’re certain of. The ones we don’t know 

much about are government officials or the catch-all phrase in 

10(1)(h): “any other person prescribed in the regulations.” 

 

So overall it appears that this is a modest modernization of The 

Commissioner for Oaths Act. The concerns of course are that 

much of the ability to or the authority under the Act has been 

devolved to the Lieutenant Governor in Council under the 

regulation authority. And again it’s difficult for members on 

this side of the Assembly to ascertain the extent of that because 

we don’t know what they’re going to look like. And until we 

see the regulations, it’s going to be hard to make a full 

assessment of this Act. 

 

And further these types of positions are positions of public 

trust, and the concerns about vulnerable people and people that 

are having human rights abuses being subject to these positions 

of public trust. And when we see what happened with the 

marriage commissioners’ attempts to have them violate 

people’s freedom of sexual orientation and also the current 

things we see happening with the labour rights Bills and the 

Court of Appeal, the appeal to the Court of Appeal to restrict 

workers’ rights to assemble, which is a right protected under the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms in 1982, we will continue to 

look to these things as the opposition. And certainly we’ll be 

looking closely at the regulations to ensure that there is no 

further impingements or infringements on people’s rights. 

 

Indeed the minister’s concern about the violation, the quality 

provisions of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms in his 

opening comments on this Bill is encouraging. However I think 

yesterday’s actions maybe take the wind out of those sails a 

little bit. So we’ll keep them and monitor the progress of the 

regulations as we go along. 

 

So I think with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I know there’s 

other members here who will want to comment on this Bill. 

And I think at this point I would like to move to adjourn Bill 

21, The Commissioner for Oaths Act, 2011. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 21, 

The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. Next Bill. 

 

Bill No. 22 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 22 — The 

Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 portant modification corrélative à la loi 

intitulée The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure again that I rise to speak to this Bill. And I’m 

impressed by its brevity. I must say there’s only two, three 

sections in this proposed Bill, and it’s an amendment to The 

Evidence Act resulting from the Bill I just spoke to, The 

Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011. 

 

So according to the minister when he introduced this Bill on 

December 14th, he just indicated that it goes hand-in-hand with 

The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011, Bill 21. And this one 

is bilingual because it’s amending a bilingual Act, so that’s the 

reason you see it in English and French. And the only item 

that’s being changed in this particular Bill is the reference to the 

Commissioner for Oaths for Saskatchewan pursuant to The 

Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011. So again it’s comforting to 

see the minister respecting freedom of language and the human 

rights associated with freedom to language and respecting the 

bilingual nature of that. 

 

So just looking at the actual amendment itself, the name of the 

Bill is obviously The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential 

Amendment Act. And what it does is it changes clause 27(2)(a) 

of The Evidence Act which was repealed, and what they’re 

substituting there is “a Commissioner for Oaths for 

Saskatchewan pursuant to The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 

2011.” So we know that then this Bill will come into force on 

the same day that The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

comes into force. 

 

There’s really not a lot more to say about this Bill, Madam 

Deputy Speaker. Again we’ll watch to make sure that the 

language rights are protected, and this is one of the Bills where 

it’s obviously being respected and protected, so we’re cognizant 

of that. And I think at this point I am going to say that I would 

like to adjourn the debate on this particular Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 22, 

The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. Next Bill. 

 

Bill No. 23 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 23 — The 

Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure to enter in on debate as it relates to Bill No. 23, 

The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 here 

today and examine some of the changes that are being brought 

forward, and certainly through a thorough process in this 

legislature, be able to examine much of the consultation that’s 

gone on as well with this piece of legislation, both on the side 

of government but also on this side of the Assembly. 

 

When we’re looking at occupational health and safety or OHS, 

Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re talking about something of 

great importance to the people of this province. And when 

we’re looking at the ability to improve workplace health and 

safety, this should be of paramount importance and a main 

priority of any government. And certainly the Act that’s put 

forward here today and some of the changes that stem from the 

review are certainly some aspects that should serve the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

When we look at damage that has occurred by way of injuries 

in the workplace and the damage that occurs to families and to 

workers, Mr. Speaker, their families, it’s simply unacceptable. 

And our best abilities to address this kind of hurt and damage is 

significantly important. And I guess when we look at the record 

here in Saskatchewan, it’s not a record for which we should be 

proud of, Mr. Speaker, and that’s that we — or Madam Speaker 

— and that’s that we have the second worst record in all of 

Canada and in fact have 40,000 injury reports annually or 

claims annually. And simply that’s unacceptable, and we need 

to do better on that front. 

 

That’s why this sort of legislation and these sorts of 

improvements are certainly important. And done so in broad 

consultation is vital, and I understand that that may be the case 

on this piece of legislation, and broad consultation across 

labour and across business, with workers, that’s vitally 

important. And I highlight the aspect with labour significantly 

on this piece of legislation, and it’s important that labour and 

working people are involved in the construct of these sorts of 

changes. I understand that they have had some involvement on 

this front, and I think that serves us well in putting forward a 

meaningful piece of legislation or bringing forward meaningful 

changes, and I hope that’s what we have here today. And 

certainly I do see some encouraging aspects contained within 

this piece of legislation. And we really simply just need to do 

better. 

 

The one thing I will reference is that I see some comments of 

the minister in his speech that focus an awful lot around 

productivity within the economy, Mr. Speaker. And I guess on 

this front, Madam Speaker, productivity, from my perspective, 

shouldn’t be the driver of these sorts of changes; it should be 

the unacceptable hurt and damage caused by workplace injuries 

and the impact on families. 

 

And I know, Madam Speaker, in those harshest circumstances 

where we have loss of life, that’s what should serve us as 

motivation to recognize the unacceptable circumstance that 

exists and resolve us all to commit to do better. I’ve sat in many 

and participated and spoke and been witness to many Day of 

Mourning ceremonies where we’ve seen those sad stories and 

heard those sad stories and seen those families that have lost 

loved ones while in the course of conducting business or 

conducting their own work, Mr. Speaker, in their workplaces. 

And those stories are sad; they’re unacceptable. And that need 

be our only motivation and most important motivation for 

making changes. 

 

[16:00] 

 

I’d like to recognize the Occupational Health and Safety 

Council, the members of that council, and the work that they 

provide in review of the Act. They provide a fundamentally 

important role in reviewing legislation and putting forward 

recommendations, and I know they don’t take that work lightly 

at all. And I want to thank them for the work that they have 

undertaken on this review and on the recommendations that will 

be driving some of the changes in that Act here today. And the 

members of that committee certainly sacrifice an awful lot of 

their own time to participate in that activity, but it’s certainly in 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people that they do. And I’d 

like to simply say thanks to them. 

 

When we’re looking at this piece of legislation and some of the 

changes that are brought forward, there’s some different areas 

that have been addressed. And I see that in the area of 

enforcement there’s some changes increasing the investigative 

authority of occupational health inspectors. I think that’s a 

positive step and something that’s important. 

 

I recognize that there is increased training and supervision 

requirements within this piece of legislation. And of course, 

that’s so important as it relates to the understanding of workers 

of those workplace risks and their competence and skills in 

being able to perform the duty that’s before them. And I 

couldn’t stress enough the importance of that aspect as well, 

and I’m pleased to see some attention paid to that in these 

changes. 

 

And, Madam Speaker, I recognize that there’s some changes to 

increase fines and penalties with an attempt to create a deterrent 

from creating unsafe workplaces. And certainly I look forward 

to examining those deterrents and making sure that those will 

serve their purpose as well, Madam Speaker. 

 

So when we’re looking at this piece of legislation, we need to 

look at what the intended purpose of the legislation is. What is 

the problem for which this is the suggested solution? What are 

the objectives of government on this front? And then does the 

legislation succeed in finding an effective way to meet those 

objectives and challenges? And further to that, in our 

consultation and in our examination and in our scrutiny of this 

legislation, are there any unintended consequences of this 

legislation, any problematic aspects that weren’t considered in 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

the construct of this Act or these changes that we should be 

addressing through this period of time? 

 

On that front, it’s going to be so vital that we continue to work 

with all stakeholders. When I say we, certainly we as the 

official opposition will engage with stakeholders on that front, 

but also I say we in a general sense as we as the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and certainly that of the 

government to continue that consultative process to ensure that, 

as this Bill moves forward, that if there’s any areas of 

improvement or any unintended consequences or any 

opportunities to strengthen this piece of legislation as it relates 

to health and safety of workers and workplaces in 

Saskatchewan, that we take every opportunity to do so. 

 

I would like to say again that I think that a different culture may 

have existed in the creation of this piece of legislation with 

respect to working people and with labour. I hope that’s the 

case. What I understand is that there was some consultation and 

working together to make sure that this legislation and its 

changes, its impacts, were understood. So I hope that that’s a 

culture that we can support going forward, Madam Speaker, on 

many other fronts as well and certainly as this Bill continues to 

move forward. And it’ll serve all Saskatchewan people to 

handle legislation in a fashion like this and if we can continue 

to have that sort of culture. 

 

We’ve seen in the past this government really move forward in 

unilateral fashion, creating legislation for which the 

government hadn’t fully understood the consequences and that 

certainly the stakeholders, the people on the ground that are 

impacted by changes, certainly not being consulted in that 

process. And we could of course list the numerous times that 

that’s occurred in education and with the lack of understanding 

of how it’ll impact prospective stakeholders or students or 

parents, Mr. Speaker. But just the same we can look at it as it 

relates to labour legislation and a very flawed approach that this 

government had deployed in the past, Madam Speaker, and in 

where the result was a sad one, Madam Speaker, where we 

ended up with a piece of legislation that’s been ruled 

unconstitutional, an awfully, awfully shameful circumstance for 

this province and for this government and an ugly, an ugly 

spotlight on a province that I believe prior to this government 

has had a history of working with Saskatchewan people and 

with workers and with those individuals and stakeholders who 

are impacted in constructing legislation and programming in a 

consultative fashion and with an understanding of those 

consequences, Madam Speaker. 

 

So if this Bill has, and this Act and these changes have 

employed or the government has employed a different culture 

of consultation, then I would say that’s a good thing. Now we 

need to see that continue on through the process of this Bill 

moving forward. We need to see that applied to other pieces of 

legislation, the construct of other pieces of legislation in all 

ministries, and certainly as it relates to other aspects of 

government, as it relates to formation of budgets or programs or 

services here in our province. 

 

But the importance of this legislation and making effective 

change couldn’t be, couldn’t be more important. It should be a 

first priority of government. It’s a incredibly important priority 

to the official opposition New Democrats, and to see this sort of 

substantive changes and effective changes that bring about the 

kind of health and safety improvements in workplaces and for 

workers that all Saskatchewan people deserve. And it’s a place 

that we should always be leaders in the field, as a province, 

leaders in as it relates to our provincial jurisdiction. And 

certainly we need to see more on this front. 

 

I do want to just reference that the Provincial Auditor has 

weighed in as well on this piece of legislation or actually not on 

this piece of legislation, I should say, but on workplace safety 

in Saskatchewan and has put forward various recommendations 

and I think that that’s important as well. Now my question to 

the minister would be and questions through this process would 

be, has that been considered in the formulation of this Act? 

Have those recommendations and concerns been addressed 

through these changes or are they outstanding? And that’s an 

important process for us to understand here at this point in time 

as we’re considering this Act and potential improvements. But 

we really need to make sure that we take every opportunity 

before us right here and now as this Bill is here, to make sure 

that we enhance or strengthen the piece of legislation before us 

if in fact some of those concerns haven’t been addressed. 

 

I’ll highlight just a few of the pieces from the Provincial 

Auditor’s report, and this is a chapter, specifically chapter 18, 

labour relations and workplace safety, and this is from the 

Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan, 2011 report volume 2. 

What I want to maybe just highlight here from this report is 

some of the statistics that we have on workplace injuries in 

Saskatchewan, and like I say, this is a very disappointing area 

for Saskatchewan when we look that we’re second worst in 

Canada and 40,000 injury claims annually in this province. 

That’s not the kind of record that we wish to occupy and 

certainly the impacts that occur to those being injured and their 

families are simply unacceptable, Madam Speaker. 

 

So the industries in Saskatchewan with the highest number of 

injuries as reported by the Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan 

in the 2011 report volume 2 would be the health authorities, 

hospitals, and care homes. And in fact in this case we see 5,034 

incidents that were reported in that field, the health field if you 

will, Madam Speaker. In construction we see 3,928 incidents 

reported. We see in grocery and department store and hardware, 

1,617 incidents reported. In municipalities we see 1,399 

incidents reported, and in transportation, courier, and 

commercial bus, we see 1,385 injuries that have been reported. 

 

Now we talk about these numbers. We start looking at them in a 

sense of statistics, and I certainly see bar graphs here on the 

page that highlight the significant number of injuries in 

Saskatchewan, but we need to also remember the real 

circumstance that’s been felt and experienced by families that 

have been affected by these thousands and thousands and 

thousands of injuries in the workplace. How that connects back 

to individual families, of course we highlighted the gravest 

circumstance where we have the Day of Mourning recognition 

where we’ve had lives lost in the workplace, but we also have 

many other individuals that have been injured and their 

well-being and quality of life impeded and compromised in a 

significant fashion and their relationships hurt and damaged and 

their livelihoods affected. And that’s what we need to picture 

when we’re looking at the many thousands of individuals who 

have been hurt, who have been injured on the job site. And we 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

need to of course recognize the statistics but we need to look 

and think of the stories that go beyond the statistics on a file 

like this. 

 

Some industries have a higher rate than others of time loss due 

to injuries, and I would highlight light agricultural operations 

are actually the leader on this front. An unfortunate category to 

lead but 2.8 times the provincial average. If we’re looking at 

dairy products and soft drinks that comes in at 2.7 times the 

provincial average. And in the production of iron and steel, the 

fabrication of iron and steel, we see an average of 2.3 times the 

provincial average. Mills and semi-medium manufacturing we 

see 2.2 the provincial average as it relates to time loss injuries. 

And then looking again at the transportation sector — 

transportation, couriering, commercial bus — twice the 

provincial average on this front. 

 

But again, we’re speaking of statistics at this level, talking 

about rates that are two times this or three times that, the 

provincial average. What we need to recognize is the individual 

stories behind those and the people that are affected, the 

families that are hurt and the stress and strain that is placed on 

so many by way of these statistics that we read on these pages 

here. And we should be motivated by these stories, by these 

circumstances, by the unacceptable rates we see in this 

province, for all of us to do better, Madam Speaker. 

 

Moving along in the report, and it’s fairly comprehensive and I 

would urge the minister to make sure that his ministry has been 

fully engaged with these recommendations as well and that 

they’ve been addressed by way of this legislation that’s before 

us. We do see some new recommendations and findings that 

have been brought forward by the Provincial Auditor on this 

front, and one of the pieces hinges around a need for structured 

response to workplace non-compliance, so the circumstance of 

where a workplace itself is not providing that safe and healthy 

work environment that should be expected and deserved to all 

workers in this province. And I’ll just quote from the report 

here. I quote: 

 

We expected the Ministry to establish a documented, 

comprehensive risk-based approach for addressing 

workplace non-compliance. Such an approach would 

assist the Ministry to consistently: 

- assess risk of harm (likelihood and impact of injuries) 

- set priorities to address non-compliance  

- communicate priorities 

 

Just moving along a little further in the report, “We found the 

Ministry set and communicated priorities but needed to assess 

risks using a more comprehensive, systematic approach.” 

 

It’s important information that’s put forward and provided by 

the independent Provincial Auditor and information that should 

be acted upon by the minister, Madam Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

A recommendation that comes forward, and I quote, “We 

recommend that the Ministry of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety document and use a comprehensive, 

risk-based approach to address workplace non-compliance with 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 and related 

regulations.” 

 

Now it would be our hope, Madam Speaker, that this is 

addressed in this legislation. We’ll be seeking that sort of 

clarity from the minister in the days and weeks to come, and 

certainly we’ll also be reviewing and scrutinizing this in the 

Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Moving along, there’s also recommendations as it relates to the 

need to identify causes of workplace non-compliance. 

Important aspects about communication again and following up 

on guidance with non-compliance and identifying key causes of 

non-compliance, and a host of recommendations that stem out 

of this area that could provide us a better circumstance for 

workers here in Saskatchewan. These are the kinds of actions 

and recommendations that we hope are addressed and reflected 

in this piece of legislation. 

 

There’s recommendations as it relates to what’s termed the 

graduated approach is used inconsistently. So when we’re 

looking at this here, what we’re looking at is identifying factors 

influencing the appropriate level of enforcement. That’s an 

important piece, selecting the appropriate level of enforcement 

and then implementing enforcement. And certainly we see 

some aspects of enforcement reflected in these legislative 

changes. What we need to gain is a broader understanding of 

whether or not those changes in fact are the most effective way 

to move forward and address some of these concerns and some 

of the information that’s been brought forward in this report. 

 

There’s a discussion and recommendations as it relates to more 

evaluation of results that are required. And specifically this 

relates to reporting enforcement actions to senior management, 

the importance of that activity of having that sort of 

enforcement actions being reported, assessing the effect of 

enforcement promptly, and following up with further 

enforcement action as needed — all important areas that we’d 

like to make sure are addressed in this legislation. 

 

So we have a lot of information that’s put forward in this report. 

We have recommendations that have been put forward to serve 

Saskatchewan people as well. We’ve had a consultative process 

with stakeholders as it relates to workplace safety, and that’s 

something that we’re going to continue to follow up on as it 

relates to this piece of legislation. We’d urge the government to 

keep an open mind to recommendations that are moving 

forward. We would refer them to the auditor’s report and to 

make sure that the legislation that’s before us here and now is 

in fact as strong and as effective as it can be and that it responds 

to the very specific recommendations that are put forward. 

 

And as we go through reports such as the auditor’s report and 

we look at statistical representations of injuries in 

Saskatchewan and bar graphs and percentages and numerical 

representations, we need to think as well of those individual 

lives that are unacceptably impacted by workplace injury across 

Saskatchewan unfortunately. And we’re not talking about a few 

people. We’re talking about thousands and thousands of 

individuals and of course the hardship that that brings to 

relationships, to family circumstances, to financial 

circumstances, to building a future for individual families, and 

for the many people that when we look at one worker, the loss 

or the injury of one worker, how many other people are 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

impacted with that. 

 

And it’s an area that should be a top priority for government. 

It’s an area of great importance and of great priority for the 

official opposition New Democrats. We look forward to 

continuing to work to better workplace safety and health in 

Saskatchewan. And certainly this Act steps forward to do that. 

 

It’s important for us to recognize that as it relates to workplace 

health and safety, and occupational health and safety, that we 

have in fact been leaders for the world on many fronts, Madam 

Speaker, and some of the development of processes that have 

served us well that were developed in the 1970s and instituted 

in the 1970s and that relationship with employees and with 

employers, with workers, with the individuals that are affected 

that have allowed us to strengthen legislation. We need to make 

sure that we continue to push to be leaders on this front and not 

to accept the unacceptable statistics damage and hurt that we 

see when we talk about 40,000 injuries in Saskatchewan on an 

annual basis. 

 

So there’s definitely more work to do. It’s an important Bill. I 

want to thank the Occupational and Health and Safety Council 

and its members for its time and its energy to conduct the 

review that occurred. And I want to thank those that have been 

consulted for their contributions as well, Madam Speaker. I 

want to thank, whether that be unions and labour and working 

people or whether that’s been businesses that have put forward 

constructive, effective solutions on this front. An important 

process and the kind of collaborative consultative process that 

would serve Saskatchewan well to employ on this front, but 

many other fronts as well, Madam Speaker. 

 

And if we can move forward in that sort of a process in a 

consultative environment, it should serve us well in 

understanding the impacts of legislation. Like I say, so many 

decisions of this government, Madam Speaker, have had 

impacts on Saskatchewan people that could have been 

addressed had a consultative process been engaged from day 

one. And we see that with no consultation going on in the 

education sector and then direct consequences back onto 

students and in the classroom, consequences which we could 

have addressed if we had derived policy in a consultative 

fashion. And then of course as it relates to a glaring example in 

labour legislation where this government forged ahead with no 

consultation on a piece of legislation that was intended to limit 

and attack the rights of working people, that’s now been 

deemed to be found unconstitutional, Madam Speaker. 

 

Not only an embarrassment for all Saskatchewan people to have 

a piece of legislation deemed unconstitutional, but egregious in 

what it’s set out to do in its overreach in taking away workers’ 

rights. So this is an opportunity for us to get right the culture of 

constructing and deriving and building legislation to serve 

Saskatchewan people, and let’s take that opportunity. And I say 

let’s. I say that to the government. I hope that they move 

forward with this piece of legislation with an open mind, with a 

continued consultative process to make sure that this piece of 

legislation is as strong as it can be, that it’s as effective as it can 

be, and that it’s serving Saskatchewan people’s best interests, 

Madam Speaker. 

 

So with many more meetings on this front, and I know with 

many more speakers that will want to weigh in to this debate, 

and a lot more consultation on so many fronts and with many 

stakeholders, and with many more questions that we have of the 

minister as it relates to this piece of legislation, in general we 

see some positive aspects of this piece of legislation that 

certainly we will be supportive of. And when we’re talking 

about expanding the capacity for enforcement, increasing the 

ability to have workplace health and safety enforced, and 

making sure that we have that tool to make workplaces comply 

with health and safety regulations, and to create those 

workplaces of safety that all workers should expect and deserve 

in this province — that’s a positive step. Is it as effective as it 

can be? That’s part of the consultation that will continue the 

discussion. That will continue, Madam Speaker. 

 

As it relates to the increased training and supervision 

requirements, well specifically as it relates to training, Madam 

Speaker, this is vital for any role that a worker is going to 

fulfill, whether that’s in a manufacturing shop or whether that’s 

on a farm, or whether that’s in the duty of the public as a police 

officer, or whatever capacity somebody’s fulfilling in their line 

of work, we need to make sure that the proper training is 

provided to make sure that that individual can fulfill that duty 

with confidence, has the adequate skill or the skill that’s 

required to make sure that safety’s there, but that they also are 

trained and understand the risks within that workplace so that 

we can minimize, reduce, and eliminate workplace injury in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As it relates to strengthening supervision requirements, well 

this is fundamentally important when we’re looking at 

legislation and when we’re looking at changes to make sure that 

that adequate supervision is provided in workplaces and to 

make sure that, of course, then we have built-in aspects of 

enforcement here to make sure that that supervision is in fact 

occurring as well to the level that it should be. Supervision 

certainly does assist in reducing workplace injury and is an 

important part of making sure that’s the case. So when we’re 

looking specifically at increased training and supervision 

requirements and those are both important. On the training side 

it’s about competence. It’s about adequate skills. 

 

And with some of the concerns as well with another piece of 

legislation that was foisted upon Saskatchewan people with no 

consultation by this government, being Bill 80, which 

specifically lends itself to a potential deskilling of individuals in 

the construction industry and the host of safety risks that could 

be associated on that front. And what we should be striving for 

is not to deskill industries and to reduce workers’ safety. We 

should be making sure that on all fronts and that we’re 

consistent on this front, that we’re making sure we have 

strength and capacity to train and ensure the skills that are 

required are there, and that risks of the job site are understood 

by all workers, Madam Speaker. 

 

So this legislation sets to strengthen certain aspects and sets to 

strengthen some legislation, and that’s important. But we need 

not look at this in silos and as one piece of legislation. We need 

to look at some of the previous pieces of legislations that have 

been put forward, such as Bill 80, that have served in some 

ways, lent themself to doing the opposite. And those are 

concerns, valid concerns that should also be considered when 

we’re looking at sorts of legislative changes on different fronts 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

as we move forward to correct irresponsible decisions and 

unilateral actions that have occurred by this government over 

the past few years. 

 

When we look at some other aspects of this legislation, we look 

at another area of putting in place deterrents by way of penalties 

or by way of fines, and certainly those pieces are important to 

have in place. We need to make sure that we’re using the best 

information available to us as to what the best deterrents are to 

ensure that we’re creating workplaces that are as safe and 

healthy as we can. And hopefully the fine and penalty structure 

that’s put forward is consistent with that sort of research and 

evidence, and that’s the sort of process that we would then 

support. But certainly looking at those kinds of deterrents are 

important. 

 

General comments on this piece of legislation and just a 

highlight to all individuals that this should be a number one 

priority of this government and certainly it’s a top priority for 

the official opposition New Democrats, providing those healthy 

and safe environments. And I think that we need to make sure 

that it’s the unacceptable loss of life, the unacceptable harm to 

individuals and to families and well-being and quality of life 

that drives these sort of policy changes, that motivates these 

kinds of policy changes and less the discussion around 

productivity. Because while that’s an important economic 

discussion at a business case level somewhere else, the 

unacceptable damage and hurt and consequences of workplace 

injuries are motivation enough for a government to act. 

 

So on that point, Madam Speaker, I believe I’ve covered off 

some of the comments that I had as it relates to workplace 

health and safety, the societal . . . and damage that occurs as it 

relates to workplace injuries, and certainly that we see this as a 

top priority, that we thank all that have been involved in 

providing recommendations and input to make sure we have a 

piece of legislation that’s as strong as it can be, as effective as it 

can be. And we call on the government to work in a 

consultative fashion as we move forward with this Bill and 

others, Madam Speaker, to improve it where we can if those 

opportunities present themselves, and to make sure that as it 

relates to the safety of workers in Saskatchewan that it’s a top 

priority driven by government in consultation with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

But at this point in time, Madam Speaker, I will move 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 23, The Occupational Health 

and Safety Amendment Act, 2011. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from Regina 

Rosemont has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 23, The 

Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker: — Carried. Next Bill. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 24 — The 

Advocate for Children and Youth Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

once again to stand in the Assembly and have the opportunity to 

make a few comments during adjourned debates this afternoon. 

And, Madam Speaker, it’s a pleasure and honour to be able to 

speak to this piece of legislation which I see as an important 

piece of legislation because it addresses an issue that is near and 

dear to everyone in the province, and that, Madam Speaker, is 

the issue of our children and youth. 

 

There’s not a member in this Assembly, whatever our political 

stripe, who does not care about the children in the province and 

care about the outcomes and the futures of youth in 

Saskatchewan, recognizing that there are some issues, Madam 

Speaker, that truly do transcend partisan lines, and the 

well-being of our children and the well-being of youth in the 

province is one of those issues. 

 

Certainly, Madam Speaker, from time to time there may be a 

partisan aspect and a partisan element to a particular issue 

arising in this field, arising in this area. And of course in our 

political system we express ourselves through a partisan means 

and debate in this Assembly happens within a partisan 

framework, and that is a good system that’s evolved over many, 

many years and an effective system, I believe, most of the time. 

But when dealing with an issue like the well-being of children 

and youth, I know members on both sides of the House see it as 

an important one. I know members on both sides of the House 

want a strong future for youth. 

 

And I know members on both sides of the House want to ensure 

that children are protected and kept safe in this province. And 

while, Madam Speaker, that is our goal, we know that too often, 

because once is too often, too often we as a collective have 

fallen short of that goal. And there have been instances, Madam 

Speaker, when children and youth aren’t protected as they 

ought to be. But it’s important, Madam Speaker, that we work 

together. It’s important that we have an approach that does put 

the interest of children and youth first and it’s important, 

Madam Speaker, that the legislative changes we make within 

the Assembly respect that and reflect that desire that we have in 

promoting the best interests of children and youth in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is not a unique scenario that . . . It’s not a unique situation 

to Saskatchewan of course. This is a common thing around the 

world and especially throughout democracies and especially in 

Canada. 

 

And I give those introductory comments, Madam Speaker, and 

on a high level we know that it’s important. On a local level we 

most certainly know it’s important and I know members in the 

House know that from our own personal experiences, whether 

we’re parents ourselves, whether we’re an aunt and uncle, 

whether we’re a grandparent. We know how precious children 

are and we know how vulnerable they can be in many 

situations. And so we know from a personal level because we 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

all have little ones that we love more than anything. 

 

But we also, Madam Speaker, know it from a professional level 

because in our constituency offices . . . I’ll speak for myself but 

I know other MLAs have had this experience as well. We’ve 

had people coming into our offices with a troubling situation. 

And the situations vary. Sometimes it’s a health concern with a 

child. Sometimes it’s an issue around children in care. 

Sometimes it’s about an educational consideration for a child. 

Sometimes it’s something like bullying. Sometimes it’s 

something like abuse, unfortunately, of all different types. 

 

And I know when I’ve been placed in that situation as a local 

MLA when someone has come to me with a problem, I want to 

do what I can. And at times that can mean reaching out to 

authorities, law authorities that have a role to play. At times it 

can mean reaching out to the ministry to ensure that due process 

has been followed. And at times, Madam Speaker, I think also 

it involves referring people to the Children’s Advocate in order 

to ensure that due process has been followed, that a child has 

been treated well, that a child has been treated properly, and 

children whom we love are in fact treated with the type of care 

that our society ought to be doing. 

 

And so, Madam Speaker, members will know and individuals 

will know that as our democracies and parliamentary systems 

have evolved, there have been many different types of services 

that are provided to the public by the government. I think that is 

appropriate, and I think there’s a very constructive role that the 

provincial government will — I’ll speak in that context since 

this is the provincial Assembly — there’s an important role that 

the provincial government plays in serving the needs of people 

and meeting the needs of people. 

 

And as I identified earlier on with the type of casework that 

often comes into the Assembly — there are issues to do with 

health care; there are issues to do with education; there are 

issues to do with social services — and within all of these areas, 

Madam Speaker, there are expected policies. There are 

expectations that families have, and there is a responsibility for 

the deliverer of the care to be following the rules to ensure that 

the child’s interest is put first and to ensure that mistakes have 

not been made. And in situations where there is a mistake or 

where abuse has taken place of some type, it’s important that 

that be identified, that people be held accountable, and that the 

situation be corrected so that repeat mistakes are less likely and 

that that individual can have a sense of justice. 

 

So as our system has evolved, we’ve provided for services to 

people. And this is what the expectations of Saskatchewan 

people are in this present day. We expect good schools. We 

expect — and rightfully so — good medical care. And in 

situations when a child is in care, we want a proper foster 

system in order to care for children who may be not in the care 

of their biological parents or their parents who have custody of 

them or their caregivers who do. 

 

And so as our systems have developed, so too have the policies 

to ensure that the proper care and the proper watchdog, so to 

speak, the proper oversight is in fact in place. And this, Madam 

Speaker, brings up the issue of the Ombudsman and the role 

that the Ombudsman plays in ensuring that there is due process. 

 

The idea and the notion of the ombudsman, the origin of the 

word actually is in Scandinavia, and the root is an old Norse 

word, believe it or not. And so the term ombudsman is I believe 

Swedish, or it’s at least from the Nordic countries. It has been 

adapted in some ways to be used in English more appropriately. 

Sometimes it’s ombudsperson or a different ombuds-office and 

ombuds-something like that. And there are different options. 

And members are going to be wondering why I’m talking about 

ombudsmen on a Bill that is addressing the advocate for 

children and youth, but I mention it because it ties into the 

evolution of how this office is operated and the types of duties 

that it has traditionally had. 

 

Originally, Madam Speaker, as the minister identified in his 

second reading speech, and for listeners at home who are 

following, this is Bill 24, An Act representing the Advocate for 

Children and Youth. So at one time, as the minister identified in 

his speech, when the Ombudsman’s office was being 

established, the legislation that enabled it had different 

components. And the one component was to establish the 

Office of the Ombudsman. But then within that office, within 

that legislation — almost as a subset — there was the necessary 

legislation that made for, that created and bestowed the rights 

and the role for the advocate for children as well. So while it’s 

two separate offices, it’s traditionally been under the same 

piece of legislation. 

 

And what this piece of legislation is doing is providing unique, 

stand-alone legislation for the two offices. And I think that’s an 

important step and a good step because both offices, the Office 

of the Ombudsman and the Office of the Children’s Advocate 

and youth — and I’ll get into some discussion about the 

terminology and the name of the office in a little bit — but both 

offices serve a unique role because they are addressing a unique 

population within the general public. And accordingly it’s 

important I think to lend the type of oomph — that might be 

hard for Hansard to spell — but to lend the type of credibility 

and to show that it’s a serious matter, the Office of the 

Children’s Advocate, in order to have stand-alone legislation. 

So from my perspective, in my view, Madam Speaker, I think 

it’s fine and appropriate to have stand-alone legislation. 

 

But I made those opening comments about the role of the 

Ombudsman because I think, as we look at the separation of 

these two offices from a legislative perspective, it’s important 

to remember the roots of the organization, the roots of the 

office, and the original mandate. And that, Madam Speaker, is 

to provide the oversight, to provide that arm’s length, 

stand-alone voice in order to ensure that the rights and the 

interests of individuals — in this case children and youth — are 

being considered, are being promoted, and in a sense to right 

any wrongs that may have occurred, at least by looking through 

reflection and retrospectively that things could have been done 

differently. And it’s through the mistakes that may occur from 

time to time that we’re able to improve the system for all 

children in the province. 

 

I think, Madam Speaker, of some of the incidents I’ve had 

when individuals have come to my office when it’s a concern 

related to a youth. Sometimes, Madam Speaker, it’s a parent 

who may have once upon a time had custody of their child but 

don’t at present. Sometimes, and this has happened a few times 

in my situation, it’s a family member, often a grandparent 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

who’s had a role with the child, a grandchild, and they’re aware 

of things occurring and they want to ensure that the proper care 

has taken place. Of course all parents love children, but perhaps 

the only group that loves children more are grandparents 

because they’ve gone through the experience already once 

having their own children. 

 

Anyway, Madam Speaker, I know when confronted with these 

types of situations, I could think of sitting in my office and 

talking to people or I can think of visits I’ve had to people’s 

houses, either through times of door knocking or different visits 

for different purposes and hearing these stories. At times, 

Madam Speaker, as an elected official I want to give good 

advice, and I want to be able to do so in a way that is most 

effective to help the situation from all perspectives in order to 

promote the interests of the child, first and foremost, in order to 

consider the interests of the family member, and as well to look 

at how the system can be strengthened to provide better care for 

that person. 

 

And so, Madam Speaker, there’s a number of components here 

with this piece of legislation that I think are positive steps and 

steps in the right direction in order to carry on down that path of 

improving the system. Because we know, as with anything in 

life, the system is not perfect, but we need to strive for 

continual improvement and we need to look for ways that the 

interests of children can be put first and foremost. 

 

There are a number of pieces to this legislation, as the Minister 

of Justice identifies. He talks about the different components. 

His opening remarks in his second reading speech did address 

the issue of how the legislation has evolved and the goals of the 

institutions where offices have evolved so that it’s come to the 

state where it is now. And I think most certainly that the 

stand-alone authority of the organization is important because 

in instances when I’ve referred people to the Ombudsman, 

whether it’s a parent or whether it’s someone else in the 

community who has a concern, it’s important that that 

individual going to the office feels as though the investigation, 

the work that will be done by the Office of the Children’s 

Advocate or the Ombudsman, is free from political 

interference, is a true airing of the facts, is a true and earnest 

investigation, and is in no way a whitewash. 

 

And that’s why I think it’s very important that we take time to 

look at the legislation. It’s very important that we emphasize 

the autonomy and the role of these independent officers of the 

legislature and the role that they play. That’s not to say there 

won’t be interplay, Madam Speaker, in certain situations 

between the Legislative Assembly, and that is appropriate. I can 

think of the fiasco that we’ve seen at St. Mary’s in Humboldt 

with many seniors being treated the way that they were in terms 

of losing their accommodation on very, very short notice and 

essentially being told in days that they had to pack their bags 

and find a new place to live. 

 

Yesterday the minister identified that this issue would be going 

to the Ombudsman for review. I say that, Madam Speaker, 

because it shows that whether it’s senior citizens or whether it’s 

young people or children, these two offices, the Office of the 

Children’s Advocate and youth, and the Ombudsman, are there 

for the vulnerable. They’re there for the people who may have 

received mistreatment by government in some way. They’re 

there to examine situations where individuals have been let 

down by the system in some way. And it’s important, it’s so 

important, that there be the independent oversight, there be the 

independent review, there be a stand-alone separate entity that 

individuals can take their concerns to where they could be 

treated in a fair way and whether the facts can be reviewed and 

a decision can be made. 

 

So whether it’s the senior citizens in Humboldt at St. Mary’s 

who deserve to have a better understanding of what took place 

in their situation; or whether it’s a youth in care, a child in care 

who has not received the type of care they deserve; or whether 

it’s a child who’s not received the type of medical attention, 

they’re having their medical needs addressed in a proper way; 

whatever the situation may be, however the individual in 

Saskatchewan may be vulnerable in some sense, it’s so very 

important that the independent office be there to clearly and 

thoroughly look into their concerns and provide a ruling and to 

provide advice through the annual reports that are submitted to 

the Assembly on ways that the situation can be improved. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So I know, Madam Speaker, with the separation of the two 

offices in a legislative context, I think it is good that reports will 

continue to be tabled in the legislature because while it needs to 

be arm’s-length, there also needs to be the appropriate oversight 

of this Assembly. And that’s the role of, or that’s the 

requirements for an independent officer of the legislature which 

they must do, and I think that that is a good thing. 

 

And it’s also appropriate, Madam Speaker, that when we as an 

Assembly select the individuals who serve in these offices at 

the highest level that it be free from political interference. And 

I’m not suggesting that has occurred with the Ombudsman or 

with the Children’s Advocate. But unfortunately with other 

independent officers, I can think of the debacle with the Chief 

Electoral Officer, and when the decision was vetoed by the 

Sask Party caucus on who that individual would be. We’ve seen 

troubling aspects in the past, past short years where members, 

especially on the opposite side in the Sask Party, have not 

respected the role of an independent officer of the legislature 

and have played politics. And while that occurred with the 

Chief Electoral Officer most recently here in the province, the 

fact that it occurred with our elections and we’ve seen federally 

some of the funny business that Conservatives are willing to do. 

 

The fact that it also, there was the political meddling with the 

endorsement of the Chief Electoral Officer here provincially. It 

causes me and it causes Saskatchewan people to still want to be 

on guard for actions that may be taken by members opposite 

specifically with other independent officers of the legislature 

because when a pattern of action and behaviour is established in 

one area, it’s not outside the realm of possibility that members 

opposite would want to carry on that behaviour in other areas. 

 

And so I raise that and want to put that on the official record, 

Madam Speaker, because we have seen troubling things when it 

comes to the independent officers of the legislature. We have 

seen troubling things when it comes to political interference 

that Sask Party members are willing to meddle with and 

interfere with in the process. And it’s my sincere hope that 

when it comes to children, when it comes to youth, the 



March 6, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

members opposite would realize that it’s simply not 

appropriate. 

 

It’s not appropriate for a democracy, that is for certain. Whether 

it’s in a federal context with Conservatives, or in a provincial 

context with small “c” conservatives. But Madam Speaker, 

when it comes to children surely, surely there ought not to be 

the type of political interference in the process and in the 

offices. And so it’s my hope, Madam Speaker, that members 

opposite, if they feel the urging to be involved in that sort of 

way, if they think back to the type of interference that they did 

with the Chief Electoral Officer and if they think they want to 

do that with either the Ombudsman or with the Children’s 

Advocate, I hope they would pause. And I hope some of the 

more moderate voices in the caucus would speak up and not be 

willing to go down that path because I think that would be a 

path that would not be in the best interest of youth here in the 

province. Not in the best interest of children in this province. 

 

This piece of legislation, Madam Speaker, does a number of 

things. Since it’s replacing a piece of legislation, as identified 

by the minister and his second reading speech was on 

December 14, 2011, and it’s on page 233 of Hansard if anyone 

cares to go to it and look for the record. 

 

Madam Speaker, the piece of legislation accomplishes a few 

things as identified by the minister. And I’d like to make a few 

comments based on the piece of legislation as he sees it. An 

interesting component . . . Well first and foremost as I’ve 

touched on it already, I want to tell you it states that the 

legislation accomplishes the separation of the two groups so 

that within the public there can’t be the confusion that they are 

the same organization. Because, as I’ve already covered in my 

remarks, on an issue as important as children and youth, it’s 

important to have a stand-alone organization looking after their 

interests. So that is one step that this legislation accomplishes 

or will accomplish when and if passed. I’m pretty confident that 

it will pass. 

 

Madam Speaker, it’s important also . . . I’ll just note that there’s 

an accompanying piece of legislation because we’re dividing 

two organizations from a legislative perspective. The 

accompanying piece, I believe, is Bill 25. So for people that are 

doing research on this now or in the future, if they want to 

know what the accompanying piece of legislation is, it’s The 

Ombudsman Act, 2011, Bill No. 25. And the two pieces of 

legislation do need to be looked at together because they 

accomplish two different things. But with one piece of 

legislation being divided into two, quite naturally it would 

provide two pieces of legislation. 

 

A very important component, an interesting component, and 

perhaps a different component, Madam Speaker, is the aspect of 

the Children’s Advocate office and youth conducting research. 

And this, in the minister’s remarks, is identified as a new 

avenue of activity. It’s a new avenue and so I am curious as to 

the type of research that will be practised by the office; what 

the nature of it will be; what the scope of it will be; what the 

purpose of it will be. I think it’s a positive development. I think 

it’s a good thing. I think that the Office of the Children’s 

Advocate and youth ought to be informed by good research. 

 

And there’s different types of advocacy that the office can do. 

Of course, there’s advocacy that originates from a specific 

complaint from an individual, from a caregiver, or a child. Then 

there’s also the advocacy that can take place in the larger 

context in reporting to the legislature about positive research, in 

reporting to the general public about positive developments. 

And so I think that is an important step, and I’m interested to 

hear more. I would like more of the detail, and perhaps in 

committee it can be fleshed out somewhat in terms of the type 

of research that the minister would like to see occur or that the 

commissioner would like to conduct. 

 

But you know, research is important and it’s important that the 

parameters will be set for it, and that individuals in this 

Assembly and in the public know what in fact is being 

researched and what the goals are and what sort of reporting 

mechanism may in fact be in place. This legislation also, and 

this would be similar to, I would assume, provisions that are 

within the existing Act for the advocate or for, I should say, the 

Ombudsman’s office, and that is that allows for jurisdiction, as 

the minister states: 

 

. . . jurisdiction of the advocate over publicly funded 

health entities. The Bill more clearly defines the 

advocate’s authority to include regional health authorities, 

health organizations and affiliates and the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency. 

 

So, Madam Speaker — or pardon me, Mr. Speaker — well we 

see, Mr. Speaker, is that with the change in the separate 

stand-alone legislation for it, it’s also a change here that the 

Children’s Advocate will have overview of health-related 

issues. So on the seniors aspect, when we saw the mistreatment 

of seniors at St. Mary’s Villa in Humboldt, and the advocate is 

looking into that — so it’s happening for that group of 

vulnerable people, for seniors in the province. This legislation, 

this provision as it’s proposed by the minister would allow for 

investigations and examinations of what has occurred in the 

health care sector for children. I think that’s an important thing 

and something that people would be mostly pleased with, I 

would imagine. 

 

Another component allows for the sharing of information, I 

would imagine to facilitate investigations that may be taking 

place, so the sharing of information between ministries and the 

advocate’s office. 

 

Another important part, Mr. Speaker, which I think is a good 

step, a positive step, and I’ll read the paragraph so that if there 

are any individuals involved in service delivery who are 

listening now or reading later on, so that they’re aware of this. 

And the minister stated this in his second reading speech and I 

think it’s an important point to highlight. So I’ll read the 

paragraph. It says: 

 

This Act also ensures children and youth the greatest 

possible access to the advocate. Operators of group 

homes, foster homes, and other facilities will be required 

to provide the children and youth in their care with 

information on how to contact the advocate. They must 

also provide a means for them to do so in private. All 

communication between child or youth and the advocate 

are privileged. 

 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 2012 

So we have an important step here, Mr. Speaker, which I think 

is a good development. Children will be better informed, one 

hopes, through this legislation of the avenues they have for 

clear . . . avenues they have for a review of a situation if they 

feel they’ve been mistreated in every way. And when we think 

of the organizations or the entities that are listed here by the 

minister such as group homes, foster homes, and other 

facilities, especially it’s important for those youth, for those 

children to be aware of the Office of the Children’s Advocate 

and youth as a route to address any concerns that they may 

have, as a route to address any concerns that may arise. 

 

Another component in the minister’s speech that is important, 

and this is to do with the naming of the office. And I think it’s a 

good step. And I would, from my perspective — I won’t speak 

on behalf of all of my colleagues — but I think it’s a decent 

step, and that’s changing the name of the office to the advocate 

for children and youth. And it expands the scope of who is 

accessible from a perception perspective, I suppose, if I can say 

that awkwardly. It expands the understanding of who may 

access so that when information is being shared with children, 

and if that individual is still a youth but doesn’t see themselves 

as a five- or a six- or seven-year-old child, then they know that 

this is still an option. So I think it’s an important name, it’s an 

important step, and I think it’s a positive development. And I 

think that that reflection is important. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when we’re looking at this piece of 

legislation, there’s a few important things to consider. And as I 

said from the beginning, we most certainly, on both sides of the 

House, know that children and youth are so very important to 

our province. They’re important to our families. They’re 

important to our communities. And when we think of how 

precious children are, we as legislators should do everything 

that we can do in order to ensure that children receive the type 

of treatment that they deserve and that they need in order to 

develop into fully functioning and productive humans, people 

contributing to society. I think that’s so very important. 

 

I think by separating this legislation it is important to recognize 

the traditional roles that the organizations, the two offices have 

had and the relationship between the two offices, but at the 

same time to recognize the distinct roles that the two offices 

will serve in the future. I think that’s very important. 

 

So I appreciate the chance to say a few remarks on this, Mr. 

Speaker, and I look forward to hearing what some of my 

colleagues may have to say about it. I thank the minister for his 

second reading speech. I want to thank the work of the Office 

of the Children’s Advocate and youth for the work that they 

have been doing and will continue to do in meeting the needs of 

our constituents. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate 

on Bill 24. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of Bill No. 24, The Advocate for 

Children and Youth Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being close to 5 o’clock, this House 

will stand recessed till 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 323 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 323 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 323 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 323 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 323 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 324 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Challenges in Northern Saskatchewan 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 324 

 Telemiracle 36 

  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 324 

 International Year of Co-operatives 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 324 

 Physician Recruitment Success Story 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 325 

 Canadian Challenge Sled Dog Race 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 325 

 Lymphedema Awareness Day 

  Doke ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 325 

 Pharmacist Awareness Week 

  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 325 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 326 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 326 

 First Nations and Métis Employment and Education 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 327 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 327 

 Support for Rural Women 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 328 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 328 

 Relations with Municipalities 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 329 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 329 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 330 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 331 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 19 — The Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 336 

 Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 337 

 Bill No. 21 — The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 342 

 Bill No. 22 — The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 

 Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 346 

 Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 350 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


