




















































Hansard: May 17, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 48A  THURSDAY, MAY 17, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1545 

 May 17, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today 

to introduce many guests here today from the film and 

television industry. They’re here because they hope the 

government recognizes the short-sightedness of its decision to 

cut the film employment tax credit. These are people who want 

to continue to work in Saskatchewan and stay in Saskatchewan 

and invest in Saskatchewan. Actually I’m going to do a Health 

minister here, and I’m going to read the names from my phone 

this morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today I’d like to welcome Janet Robinson, Carmen Kotyk, 

Tracy George, James Lague, Crystal Van Pelt, David 

Cormican, Terry Silva, Lori Lumax, Jerry Paul, Warren St. 

Onge, Jackie Dzuba, Kim Wall, Rob King, Terry Mialkowsky, 

Noah Draper, Kristie Patterson, Layton Burton, Marshall Burns, 

Mike Burns, Stacey Caldwell, Matt Yim, Allan Roeher, 

Brendan Olenick, Sheree Fondeur, and I see Alan Bratt there as 

well. 

 

So with that I’d ask my colleagues to welcome these folks to 

their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to welcome a school group here today, Mr. Speaker, 

from Hillmond, Saskatchewan. As members will know, in my 

first four and a half years as MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], I’ve never had a school group before. So I’m very 

pleased to have this fine group of 37 grade 7 and 8 students, so 

if members would help me with a round of applause to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Legislative Assembly, an individual seated in your gallery. 

I’m speaking of course of Elliott Bourgeault. Elliott is working 

with me this term in the Saskatchewan legislative internship 

program. He had worked a term previous with the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. They did a lot of snow sledding, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m going to have a hard time topping that in terms of 

the experience for Elliott working with me, but we’re going to 

give it a try. 

 

Elliott is finishing off a double major in terms of political 

science and German language at the University of Regina and 

knows his way around the world, knows his way around the 

province, is an accomplished musician and a quick mind and 

pretty quick on the research notes as well. So I’d ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming Elliott Bourgeault to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is also my pleasure to introduce a school group 

this morning here in the legislature. This is a group of grade 6 

to 9 students. There are 10 of them. They’re seated in the west 

gallery. And, Mr. Speaker, the interesting thing about this group 

is they are from the Riverdale School in Kenville, Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce those students along 

with teacher Darcy Wohlgemuth, parents Wendy Wohlgemuth, 

Verlin Barkman, Lana Barkman, Doug Penner, Kristi Penner, 

Lyle Penner, and Donella Penner. Mr. Speaker, many of the 

students live in the Canora-Pelly constituency in the area 

around Arran, Saskatchewan. So I want to welcome the 

students that reside in Saskatchewan to their legislature, but 

also extend a warm welcome to the students from Manitoba. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 

through you my intern for this session, and that’s Mr. Cody 

Gieni seated in the gallery, in the Speaker’s gallery. And Cody 

has been a wonderful student so far. We’ve been working 

together for the last month or so, and his enthusiasm and his 

excitement to be here is palpable. He’s a master’s student in 

political studies at the University of Saskatchewan, I think the 

Johnson-Shoyama school, and he is bound to be involved in 

politics at some point in his life, Mr. Speaker. So he’s getting a 

real education here, and I’m certainly learning a lot from Cody 

as well. So I’d like to welcome him to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce 

to the legislature the visitor services team for May 17th, 2012. 

This Victoria Day weekend, the summer hours go into effect at 

the Legislative Building. Beginning on Saturday, tours will be 

offered daily from 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. And these extended hours 

will remain in effect until Labour Day, Monday, September the 

3rd, 2012 and will accommodate the many visitors who will be 

touring the building this summer. 

 

In keeping with their tradition, we have the visitor services 

team in the gallery today. And it’s my pleasure to introduce our 

front-line staff to this Assembly today. The six information 

officers, they used to be known as tour guides, for the summer 

season of 2012 are — and if you would wave, please — Marita 

Clark, Brittany Love, Troy Smith, Allyssa Bredohl, Daniel 

Fortier, and the newest member to our team that just got sworn 

in this morning, Marie Digney. 

 

The second row is the permanent staff of the visitor services 

branch: Lorraine deMontigny, director of visitor services; 

Marianne Morgan, assistant director of visitor services; Arnold 

McKenzie, senior information officer; and Kelly Liberet, senior 

information officer. 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2012 

Following all the staff meetings this morning, this team will be 

enjoying birthday cake for our most senior information officer, 

Arnold McKenzie. I’m not sure if Arnold was here when the 

cornerstone was laid, but he was here when I came to the 

building. I ask all members to join me in welcoming the visitor 

services team, and wish Arnold a happy birthday. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition calling for greater protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know that 

Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station, alone and unprotected from intruders. 

But we also know that positive statistics show that convenience 

store and gas station robberies are down by one-third since 

1999, largely due to increased safety practices including two 

people working together on late-night shifts. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present this petition on behalf of many people 

who have signed this petition from across the province. I do so 

present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 

number of petitions that are raising questions about the number 

of politicians that the government plans to increase in 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to not increase the number of 

politicians in the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, 

and to continue including those individuals under the age 

of 18 in the determination of constituency boundaries. 

 

These people who have signed these petitions come from right 

across the province. And this issue, I think, will continue to 

resonate throughout the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Esterhazy and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Presenting a petition 

today signed by Saskatchewan people who are calling on the 

Sask Party government to support the Saskatchewan seniors’ 

bill of rights. The petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which will 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today 

to present a petition signed by citizens concerned about the film 

and television industry and the need, that this industry needs a 

competitive tax program if it wants to be competitive on the 

national and global stage, Mr. Speaker. But I think the petition 

speaks for itself: 

 

After 25 years of hard work and investment in the people 

of Saskatchewan, our province has become a national 

leader in film, television, and digital media. The success 

of acclaimed programs including Corner Gas, Little 

Mosque on the Prairie, Wapos Bay, and The 

Englishman’s Boy has contributed to our growing 

prominence on the world stage and brought renewed 

respect to our Prairie heritage. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan work with 

industry partners to develop a new incentive program 

which allows film, television, and digital media to 



May 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

continue to flourish in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Indian Head, 

Watrous, Nipawin, Saskatoon, Carnduff, and Beaver Creek. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to present a petition to keep open the Western Development 

Museum. And the petitions reads as follows: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that underfunding to the Western Development 

Museum has led to the Monday closing of the museum to 

patrons, an increase in admission fees, and the layoff of 

staff; that vacant positions at the Western Development 

Museum will not be filled as a result of a lack of funding; 

that the lack of support by the provincial government has 

resulted in unpaid leaves of absence by some staff at the 

museum. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to properly fund the Western 

Development Museum to ensure its branches are open on 

Mondays and its admission fees are affordable. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this is signed by citizens of the province from Moose Jaw, 

Regina, Cut Knife, Lashburn, Waseca, Lloydminster, 

Saskatoon, and Fort Qu’Appelle. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of improving Highway 165, a 

critical transportation link between Beauval and the English 

River First Nations. It’s a very busy road, Mr. Speaker, and a 

lot of industrial traffic on it as well. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Respectfully requesting that the legislature in the 

Legislative Assembly in Saskatchewan undertake to 

upgrade the section of Highway 165 between Beauval 

and the English River First Nations by adding proper 

lighting for pedestrian traffic, by adding space for 

pedestrians on the highway and its bridges, and by 

properly surfacing the road with material needed for a 

busy, heavy-haul road. 

 

This petition is signed by individuals from Beauval. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who wish this 

government to reassess the Saskatchewan wildfire management 

policy. Mr. Speaker, the policy has been in place for a long time 

without a review. Groups and individuals like trappers, 

fishermen, outfitters, northern leaders, and many residents of 

northern Saskatchewan have been asking for this policy to be 

fully reviewed. It is long overdue. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the provincial government to recognize that the 

people of Saskatchewan deserve the very best in 

protection services as it relates to forest fire management 

policy, and in so doing cause the provincial government 

to immediately implement a full review of the 

Saskatchewan wildfire management policy, as it has been 

years since this program was last assessed. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this day, May 

17th, I am proud to recognize the International Day Against 

Homophobia and Transphobia. 

 

Here in Canada, recognition for lesbian and gay communities 

has been first and foremost an acceptance brought about by the 

adoption of the Charter of Human Rights. However, until social 

acceptance of homosexuality is achieved and homophobia 

wiped out, there is still a long way to go. To achieve this goal, 

the Fondation Émergence of Quebec proposed in 2003, along 

with partners, to hold each year a special day dedicated to the 

social recognition of homosexual experience. 

 

May 17th, Mr. Speaker, is symbolic because of its significance 

in the improvement of the status of gays and lesbians. In 

removing homosexuality from its list of mental illnesses on 

May 17th, 1990, the World Health Organization put an end to 

over a century of homophobia in the medical field. After 

decades of political and legal battles, gays and lesbians have 

won important protection against discrimination in human 

rights law and legal recognition of same-sex couples in equal 

marriage. Despite these important victories however, lesbian, 

gay, bisexual, and transgendered citizens and their families 

continue to experience oppression and discrimination. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today I’m encouraging all members of the 

Assembly to reach out to those who are particularly vulnerable 

to homophobic and transphobic bullying and to acknowledge 

the dedicated organizations and community members who fight 

these injustices every day. We are proud in this caucus to 

recognize and affirm the fundamental rights of lesbian, gay, 

bisexual, and trans-identified people and their families. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Canadian Progress Club  

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

to draw some attention to an amazing group of women in our 

capital city, the Canadian Progress Club Regina Wascana, have 

been working hard to help people in all walks of life in Regina 

and area. 

 

Over the years, the Canadian Progress Club Regina Wascana 

has raised almost $1 million through things like a charity dinner 

and auction, with funds going to Camp Circle of Friends, the 

Plywood Cup where members build a boat and race across 

Wascana Lake, Special Olympics, Dress for Success. Perhaps 

they’re best known, Mr. Speaker, for the Festival of Trees, 

which celebrated its 21st year this past Christmas. The money 

raised by the Festival of Trees is donated to the Regina 

Palliative Care Inc. in the Greystone Bereavement Centre, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

At their annual general meeting this week, my administrative 

assistant, Ruth Gaura, who has long been a professional public 

servant in the province of Saskatchewan, was the recipient of 

the Outstanding New Member Award, Mr. Speaker. This past 

weekend, Ruth, along with several members of their group 

participated in Caring Hearts Camp at Dallas Valley Ranch, a 

bereavement camp and retreat for kids who are grieving the 

death of someone significant in their lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d ask all members to help me thank the Progress Club Regina 

Wascana for all they do and to salute a long-time professional 

public servant in the province of Saskatchewan, Ruth Gaura, 

who has a heart for service in government but also a heart for 

service in all of her volunteer activities. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Norwegian Constitution Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: —  

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 100 years ago there was a census 

held that was part of the Dominion of Canada census, and the 

numbers that we can look at show that 17 per cent of the people 

at that time who lived in Saskatchewan said they were of 

Norwegian ancestry. So, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan 

have the largest percentage of descendants of any province in 

Canada. So it’s very important that we continue to recognize 

that. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan there will parties and parades throughout 

the province as people remember their families, but here in the 

legislature, we’re also especially pleased to have a number of 

members who will join with me, as the member from Regina 

Lakeview, as Norwegian descendents. So we have the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place, the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats, the member from Regina Wascana Plains, 

the member from Saskatchewan Rivers, the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, and the member from Regina Northeast. 

All of us welcome the congratulations on this important date. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Art Work on Louis Riel Trail 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the past decade, 

Davidson area farmer and artist Don Wilkins has created 

several metal sculptures along Highway 11 related to his statues 

as the historic Louis Riel Trail. Recently Don informed my 

office that he’s completed another set of statues, those being of 

a Cree mother and her Métis son, an integral part of our early 

fur trading history in Saskatchewan. 

 

Don is currently working with Highways and Tourism officials 

to establish a new site for these statues near the town of 

Kenaston at the junction of Louis Riel Trail and Highway 15. 

This is yet another historic site of the many that Mr. Wilkins 

has made with his home-built metal sculptures along the Louis 

Riel Trail. 

 

Don started with a Red River cart; that’s his signature piece. He 

makes them 20 per cent larger than real life so they can be 

viewed more easily from the highway. Don just finished his 

12th Red River cart to be added to this new site at Kenaston. 

 

Don currently has five major sculptures positioned along 

Highway 11. They are one-eighth of an inch thick. The big ones 

have internal frames. One sculpture at Chamberlain represents a 

surveyor, an important figure in the context of Euro-Canadian 

settlement in the Plains region. Don also erected a cart and ox at 

Aylesbury. Craik has a sculpture of the Métis buffalo hunter 

holding a buffalo gun. Dundurn has a bone gatherer figure 

combined with a horse and cart. 

 

Don’s work certainly stands out because of the attention to 

detail. Most importantly for us, people stop for a moment and 

take in a bit of the significance of the events that took place in 

time over this territory. Other sites along the Louis Riel Trail 

include the buffalo at Girvin, the two-dimensional, open-framed 

buffalo at Chamberlain, another one at Buffalo Plains, 

Balgonie. I would ask that members join me in congratulating 

Don Wilkins on his continuing artistic contributions to 

preserving Saskatchewan’s history. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

National Early Learning Conference 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to commend the planning committee of the Imagine Our 

Future national early learning conference recently held in 

Moose Jaw. I had the pleasure of attending this event on each of 

the three days. The event was fantastic, the speakers first-rate, 

and the conference came off without a hitch with well over 600 

attendees. 

 

A nurtured, loved, and educated child has a far better chance of 

reaching beyond their potential as they reach adulthood. The 

immense return on proper early childhood development was 



May 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

explained by Nobel prize winning economist, James Heckman. 

 

Mosaic Place was a perfect venue for this conference, and 

Moose Jaw is indeed the welcome recipient of many events 

now that we have this remarkable facility. Having a national 

conference of this level held in the friendly city is a testament 

of our growth and prosperity. Local hotels, shops, restaurants, 

and other businesses have for years profited from a vibrant 

tourism industry and now are benefiting even further as these 

events occur more regularly in the heart of our city. 

 

The Imagine Our Future conference was a huge success, and I 

want to congratulate Christine Boyczuk, Joan McMaster, Gerry 

Turcotte and Melody Mitchell, along with the many volunteers 

on a job well done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

Natural Resources and the Canadian Economy 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP’s [New 

Democratic Party] national leader continues to diagnose our 

economy as a disease. The provincial NDP leader seems to 

come down with a sudden case of politically induced laryngitis. 

Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition was asked several times 

if he agrees that our resource sector is a disease. And time and 

time again, Mr. Speaker, he refused to answer and skirted the 

question. In fact one reporter said he didn’t think big guys 

could dance like that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the evidence against Mulcair’s position is 

mounting. Yesterday StatsCan said the resource sector is 

actually leading Canada’s manufacturing growth. The 

Conference Board said the resource sector is driving the growth 

in our economy. Mr. Speaker, Mulcair’s Dutch disease 

diagnosis is faulty economics, and it’s divisive politics. 

Economists and commentators and premiers have all said so. 

Yet when the NDP is given the choice between their political 

masters in Ottawa and Saskatchewan’s resource sector, they 

chose to side against this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s now very clear which leader in this House 

speaks for Saskatchewan and which one suddenly loses his 

voice when it is time to defend our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Appreciation for Caucus Staff  

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

take this opportunity, as the spring season nears an end, to 

thank our Saskatchewan Party caucus office staff. To Blaise, 

Enninyah, Kim, Patric, Terri, Steve, and of course Michael, 

thank you. And a particular thank you to caucus chief of staff, 

Gerald Proctor. He’s more than just their boss, he is a mentor 

and a friend to his staff. Mr. Speaker, this group of men and 

women don’t work for us, they work with us. 

 

They research, write speeches, develop communication plans, 

plot strategies, and occasionally over lunch, solve the world’s 

problems. At times, their work goes unnoticed or unused, not 

because it isn’t worthy, but because of the pace in which we 

work, it sometimes becomes yesterday’s news before it can be 

used. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, we know that we wouldn’t 

be able to do our jobs without them. And as this session is 

nearing its end, we know that the caucus staff will be working 

tirelessly over the summer to answer our questions, help with 

MLA reports, draft speeches for events, and work to prepare us 

for the fall session. And so to my colleagues, I would encourage 

you to take a moment to thank this fine group of people when 

you see them. And when you’re in the building over the 

summer, perhaps offer to buy them lunch. I understand they are 

particularly fond of poutine. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Performance of Government and Opposition 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, after this session is over, MLAs 

will be talking to thousands of people who have signed 

petitions, have made phone calls, and have written letters to say 

they didn’t want more politicians. But yesterday the Premier 

controlled his team, and they all voted to spend millions of 

dollars on more politicians. This wasn’t in their election 

platform, and it wasn’t what the people of Saskatchewan 

expected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how does the Premier and all of the members 

across plan on justifying the millions that they’re going to 

spend on more politicians when they didn’t campaign on this 

issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members will 

know, this province’s population is growing like it never has in 

the history of Saskatchewan. And so after the census, the 

election immediately after a census, we take the time to redraw 

the boundaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we made the decision not to go to the highest 

number of MLAs the province has ever seen, around 66; 

actually going to pull that back to about 61. Here’s something 

else, Mr. Speaker — here’s something else — we’re going to 

do this without increasing the cost to the taxpayers at all, Mr. 

Speaker. And so when we do break from this place for the 

summer, we’ll talk about that particular issue. We’ll also talk 

about a session where this side of the House kept the promises 

it made in the last campaign, and we’ll talk about the only 

balanced budget in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — So, Mr. Speaker, the legislation passed by the 

Sask Party excludes people under 18 from the electoral 

boundary count. The Sask Party doesn’t value the needs and 

concerns of Saskatchewan youth. Not only was excluding 

young people not part of the Saskatchewan Party’s platform; 

the Children’s Advocate said that it could be a violation of the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms under our constitution. When 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2012 

students come to the legislature, we say we value them. Why 

would the Sask Party government now count them out? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 

what we don’t need is any more NDP MLAs in this province. 

Mr. Speaker, I remember back in 1991 when there was all kinds 

of NDP rural MLAs across this province, and what did they do, 

Mr. Speaker? Well they closed the hospitals in rural 

Saskatchewan — 52 hospitals . . . No, that’s not quite right — 

53 hospitals, including the Plains that was very convenient for 

rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they ripped up GRIP [gross 

revenue insurance program] contracts for farmers and ranchers 

in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under their watch, highways fell apart across rural 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they slashed funding for RMs 

[rural municipalities] and raised property taxes right across this 

province. Mr. Speaker, that’s why I ran in ’95. That’s why I 

helped, assisted to support the forming of the Saskatchewan 

Party. Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to be part of a 

Saskatchewan Party government that values all of 

Saskatchewan, including rural Saskatchewan. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when that member got up instead 

of the Premier, I thought he was going to ask me a question in 

Norwegian. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the costs of more politicians is in the 

millions. The Premier doesn’t seem to think seniors are a 

priority because he’s charging them more for their health care. 

He doesn’t think students are a priority either because he’s 

forcing universities to raise tuition and pressuring school boards 

to make cuts to programs and services. Why is the Premier 

willing to spend millions on more politicians and not on the 

things that matter to Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the premise 

of the question is false. We’re going to achieve increased 

representation in the province for a growing population without 

adding any more money to the budget, without costing the 

taxpayers any more money. 

 

And in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, that member references 

seniors. In this budget, in the platform that we ran on and 

represented in this budget, will be the tripling of the seniors’ 

assistance plan, Mr. Speaker, a program for low-income seniors 

that was ignored by those members opposite for 16 years. We 

doubled it in our first term. We’ll get to tripling it by the end of 

the second term. 

 

He references students, Mr. Speaker. Just this week, this side of 

the House announced the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship 

— cheques in the mail to every young person graduating grade 

12 totalling $2,000 to come right off their tuition. This in 

addition to historic funding over our first four years for 

post-secondary, Mr. Speaker. All of that has been part of the 

growth plan on this side of the House, part of the Saskatchewan 

advantage that has this province leading the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier didn’t 

campaign on more politicians, and he certainly didn’t campaign 

on gutting the film and television industry in Saskatchewan. He 

did say last June in a letter to the industry that Saskatchewan 

“boasts globally competitive tax credit incentives through the 

Saskatchewan film employment tax credit program.” And he 

might want to take a look at page 35 of his platform where he 

boasts of increasing the funding to the film employment tax 

credit. 

 

Yesterday the Premier had a chance to clear things up and 

address his contradictory position. He walked away from the 

scrum and never returned with an answer. Will the Premier 

admit today he campaigned on supporting the film industry but 

has done everything since then to destroy it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that member 

asked that exact same question yesterday, and I answered that 

question yesterday. Mr. Speaker, the industry asked for a letter 

of support. They were going to go on a mission to attract more 

films. Yes, that one. We provided that particular letter because 

it was asked for by the industry. They went down and 

unfortunately the results weren’t very good. In fact one major 

picture had a look at this province and chose to go to Quebec, 

where they’re prepared to actually spend more in terms of a 

grant for the film industry. 

 

We’ve made another choice, Mr. Speaker. It was a difficult one, 

but we have said, no more grants. We’re not going to use 

taxpayers’ dollars in these kinds of bidding wars. Mr. Speaker, 

what we’re going to do is focus on health care, focus on the 

infrastructure needs of this province, focus on our plan to keep 

this province growing, focus on the only balanced budget in the 

Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party has 

done nothing but disparage the film and television industry and 

the reputations of those who work in it. They’ve claimed that 

those in the film industry don’t pay taxes when in fact they do. 

They’ve claimed that the industry wants nothing but handouts 

when in fact it’s an industry that brings much new money and 

jobs into our province, and so much more. They’ve called these 

hard-working people transients when in fact these are people 

who live, work, and raise their families in our province. And 

they’ve said this is an industry in decline when in fact already 

this year SaskFilm has over $50 million in production 

applications for the current refundable tax credit, which is a 100 

per cent increase over last year. 

 



May 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

Will the Premier press reset on his relationship with the film 

industry and get back to the table? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question as always. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there used to be growth in our film industry, as the 

Premier mentioned yesterday, much of it predating the old grant 

program. The whole environment for the film industry is 

remarkably different today, however. It’s in significant decline, 

with almost a 70 per cent reduction in production volumes in 

the last five years, almost 20 per cent in the last year alone. 

 

Certainly we’re proud of our industry professionals, just as the 

Premier’s letter states. We’ve been saying all along that we 

know that we have talented and skilled crews here in 

Saskatchewan. But we’re not prepared to go on with a program 

that is just a grant and isn’t cost-effective, and we’re certainly 

not going to continue in a bidding war with other jurisdictions 

that we just can’t win. We want our creative industries to 

succeed here in Saskatchewan and for their companies to pay 

taxes here. That’s what our new plan is about, Mr. Speaker: 

rewarding Saskatchewan-based companies, tax fairness, and 

increased emphasis on new technology and new opportunities, 

all within Canada’s only balanced budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — And the misinformation continues, Mr. 

Speaker. I asked the Premier on Monday a very simple 

question: does he want a film industry in Saskatchewan — yes 

or no? He didn’t answer this question, so I’d like to give him 

another opportunity to clear this up for all those who think this 

decision to gut an entire sector is both short-sighted and petty. 

If he says yes, then his government needs to get back to the 

table and work with the industry to come up with something 

that will in fact sustain and grow the industry. If the answer is 

no, then he needs to be straight with both the public and the 

people working in the industry, stop hiding behind a program 

that won’t work. Does the Premier want a film industry here in 

Saskatchewan — yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in yesterday’s Leader-Post there is an article about 

two University of Regina film students whose short film has 

made it to the student showcase at the very prestigious Toronto 

International Film Festival. Mr. Speaker, according to the 

article, this is the first time a U of R [University of Regina] live 

action film has actually made it to the TIFF [Toronto 

International Film Festival] showcase. 

 

What’s interesting about this of course is that the film didn’t 

begin shooting until after the announcement that the old film 

employment tax credit program was being discontinued. Mr. 

Speaker, we believe this demonstrates that the old grant 

program is not essential to producing high-quality 

Saskatchewan film productions and that there is indeed a future 

for Saskatchewan filmmakers in this province, particularly the 

coming generation. It looks like the little hillbillies, as actor 

Kim Coates called Saskatchewan residents on CFCR radio, are 

going to be all right after all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Review of Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been speaking 

a lot about sham consultations, and the Premier didn’t include 

his sweeping labour review in his platform either. We knew the 

Premier and his Sask Party government were going to war on 

organized labour, but we didn’t know until after the election 

they were also going to war on all working people. His 

sweeping labour review means putting at risk protections and 

rights that all working people here in Saskatchewan have 

earned and are entitled to. Why was the Premier afraid to 

campaign on his attack on the rights of working people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s always a worthwhile 

exercise to look at and review legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to do a brief quote from Hansard on May 8th, quoting 

the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 

 

All right, Mr. Chair. I think certainly the proposed 

changes to this, The Commissioner for Oaths Act make 

sense, and we know that modernization is always a good 

thing in terms of keeping things more efficient. And so 

thanks to the officials for work on this Bill . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same member on the same night talking about 

The Court Officials Act. “Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 

don’t have very many questions on this Bill either. Again I 

want to commend the minister and his officials and his staff for 

making these kind of change, modernizing the Bills as is 

necessary.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same member speaking again to The Court 

Officials Act said, “All right, again I think these types of 

modernization of these . . . makes a lot of sense, and that’s the 

only question I would have . . .” Mr. Speaker, modernization 

and moving forward is just plain common sense and I’d urge 

the members opposite to support it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I don’t think we’re talking about the same kind 

and size of changes that this government is proposing, you 

know. But what we are hearing is this Premier talking about a 

growing economy here in this province and that smart growth, 

we know, means a strong workforce, and that means fair wages 

and a safe working environment. 

 

But the sham of a consultation could take us back 100 years. It 

provides insufficient time for meaningful questions, and not one 

public meeting that’s open to the public anywhere in this 

province. Why has the Premier put his disdain and ideology 

ahead of common sense? 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is nothing more than 

petty politics on the part of the opposition. Prior to the last 

election, we brought forward legislation requiring voter ID 

[identification], a common sense solution to a problem that may 

or may not have been big or little but, Mr. Speaker, a good idea. 

The members opposite said the sky will fall in; the world will 

end. Mr. Speaker, a good election was had and a good result 

was obtained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also passed legislation dealing with the Human 

Rights Commission. We want consultation. We want this, this, 

and this. We now have one of the most progressive Human 

Rights Commissions in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, labour legislation is something that will move 

forward and will move upward, and it will protect the women 

and men in our province who work hard. They earn money and, 

Mr. Speaker, we want to value and protect everything that the 

working men and women in our province do. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the members on this side of the House are for the 

workers in this House and we will continue to support them. 

And I urge the members over there to do the same. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, from what we’ve seen from 

this government and this party, they have a strange way of 

showing that they are for working people here in this province. 

And this is not a petty issue. This is not a petty issue. And for 

example, this minister said that he will keep the submission 

secret. And we know, and we have a strong sense that they 

already know which proposals will be going ahead. It’s a sham 

of a consultation when the submissions are hidden and the 

outcomes are already predetermined. Considering that we’ve 

already established this consultation is a sham, will the Premier 

agree to scrap it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, a letter in the May 15th 

Leader-Post: 

 

The paper is the start of a process that is needed in our 

province. It will result in an up-to-date, 

employment-related legislative regime right for our time. 

Perhaps those engaging in fear-mongering would like to 

give the process a chance and concentrate more on the 

value and importance of the opportunity to participate in 

the consultative process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has produced the largest 

debt reduction in Saskatchewan history, the largest income tax 

cut in Saskatchewan, the largest property tax cut in 

Saskatchewan’s history. It’s providing a new children’s hospital 

in Saskatoon, a new bridge in Saskatoon, a new transportation 

hub in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is moving Saskatchewan 

forward and upward, and we are taking the working women and 

men in our province with us. And, Mr. Speaker, when you ask 

the women and men — and I’ve talked to a lot of them on their 

doorsteps — they’re happy that this is the direction we’re 

going, and they’re supporting this, Mr. Speaker, and the 

members opposite should as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Education minister has 

not allocated sufficient funding to school boards. When they 

raised concerns on behalf of students, she told them to quit 

crying — actually belittled educational leaders, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ve asked school boards to go into the classrooms and find 

places to cut; all the while that minister has dismissed and 

disregarded the concerns of teachers, parents, school boards, 

and educators. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, if this minister and this government 

isn’t willing to cut this idea of three more politicians, how does 

this government expect school boards to make cuts for 

students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I 

will go through the numbers of how we’ve increased, quite 

frankly, in the support for school divisions yet again for the 

member opposite. And if he wanted to give the quote in its 

entirety, I have said time and time again that we do not look for 

cuts in the front-line services within government and we do not 

want to look for cuts in front-line services in school divisions as 

well. But we all need to be looking for efficiencies, and 

although that newspaper article that he uses as his research is 

what he’s quoting from, he could also go the press release, quite 

frankly, where we talked about how we’re going to do an 

efficiency review within our school divisions. This is not a big 

surprise, although it might be to him. 

 

We’ve increased funding, operating funding only. This does not 

take in the capital funding which has also been substantially 

increased. We increased our operating funding to school 

divisions over the last five years of 21 per cent. In this past 

budget, it was an increase of 5. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, smart growth means 

having the right resources to place in education and to improve 

education in Saskatchewan. It’s about meeting the demands of a 

growing population. 

 

That government has cut literacy programs, cut in community 

education, not acted to improve First Nations and Métis 

outcomes, failed to provide funding for increased enrolments, 

and left new Canadians without adequate support for English as 

an additional language. 

 



May 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a prosperous time in Saskatchewan. This 

presents a tremendous opportunity. Why is this government not 

making education a top priority? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I will 

have to refresh the statistics that I’ve given to the member a 

number of times, both in estimates committee and also here in 

this House. We increased funding for our literacy programs by 

about 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker, which includes a very core 

funding for literacy camps. He has the information. He knows 

how effective those camps are, particularly in the northern 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have funding for just specific First Nations 

programming that school divisions can access when they like, 

over and above their budgets, of over $4 million, Mr. Speaker. 

We have invested about half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, in 

capital projects, something that never happened under the NDP 

— we just allowed our schools to crumble. We’ve made 

education a priority and we’re going to continue to do so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Surgical Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past week, the 

regional medical association held an extraordinary meeting in 

order to deal with the problems facing the operating rooms 

within the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. This is the 

second such meeting in the past five months, Mr. Speaker, and 

at this rate the extraordinary meetings will soon be called 

ordinary. 

 

Surgeons are rightfully frustrated that ORs [operating room] are 

sitting idle and patients are having surgeries cancelled. I’ve 

heard from families, Mr. Speaker, who have had specific dates 

set for surgeries. The dates have been cancelled; the reason 

given is that the ORs were not available. And no new date was 

given for the surgery. The minister cannot deny this. 

 

My question to the minister: in this spring session, how many 

surgeries in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region have been 

cancelled or delayed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways . . . 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m certainly glad to answer this Health question. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to start by talking about a news release that 

was sent out by the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] 

yesterday. And the statement says that neither the SMA or the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Regional Medical Association are accusing 

the health region of intimidating physicians, Mr. Speaker. That 

was the premise of the members’ questions opposite a couple 

days ago. 

 

And I said I didn’t believe that that was the case, Mr. Speaker, 

because what we need is the physicians to be involved to find 

solutions. That’s why there was a meeting last night. That’s 

why there have been meetings the last couple of weeks, Mr. 

Speaker, to help the health region deal with the surgical wait 

times in Saskatchewan. Yes, Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle 

hasn’t met its target this year, but I can report that it is a mile 

ahead of what was left under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not only the 

surgeons who are having extraordinary meetings to deal with 

this issue. Yesterday there was an emergency meeting by nurses 

to discuss the issues facing the ORs in the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region, that being the fact that operating rooms are not 

operating at full capacity. Many are sitting idle, Mr. Speaker, 

and surgeries are being cancelled. 

 

What nurses have told me, Mr. Speaker, is that the inability for 

the ORs to operate at full capacity is due to the shortage of 

nurses as well as anesthesiologists, and what they have told me, 

that at least part of the blame for this problem, Mr. Speaker, is 

the fact that the minister’s for-profit approach with the surgical 

clinics is draining resources from the existing operating rooms 

within the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. In fact right now 

on saskjobs.ca, Mr. Speaker, the Sask surgical centre is 

advertising positions for nurses. 

 

As surgeries are cancelled, Mr. Speaker, patients are frustrated 

and families are worried. My specific question to the minister 

which he didn’t answer in the first question: how many 

surgeries have been cancelled and delayed in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region in this spring session? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I have said all the way 

along that there are some challenges in Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region. That’s why we’re working on it. Part of it, the 

issue is not enough OR nurses due to maternity leave and some 

injury, Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon had anticipated that, trained 

more operating room nurses, and that’s what Regina 

Qu’Appelle is doing right now. 

 

But I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that if we ever go back to the 

NDP days, they will shut those private clinics down. That 

would be 2,000 more people on the wait-list that got their 

surgery done in Saskatchewan that never would have got it 

done because of ideology from the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people waiting 12 months are down by 80 per 

cent, the number of people waiting, Mr. Speaker. And I can 

report today, the number of people waiting for surgery today in 

Saskatchewan is the lowest it’s ever been since 2004, since 

records were kept, Mr. Speaker. This government is proud of its 

surgical care initiative. Mr. Speaker, we’ll never go back to the 

NDP days. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Government’s Record 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been hearing from people 

time and time again that the Premier doesn’t listen to the 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2012 

people. Leadership is about listening to everybody, even to 

those who may disagree with you. And there have been literally 

hundreds of people in the legislature this week raising issues 

like the immigrant family nominee program, child care, film 

industry. The Premier’s refused to go out and see them, meet 

with them. 

 

Now there’s a whole number of choices that the Premier has 

made during this session, and there was no warning that these 

choices would be presented to the people. He’s abandoned the 

film industry; he’s been attacking working people; he’s 

spending millions on more politicians. The Premier said this 

session, “The best indicator of future behaviour is past 

behaviour.” Based on his past behaviour, who’s next in the 

province to be blindsided by the Premier’s bad choices? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this side of the House listened 

very carefully to the people of this province during the election. 

They sent some strong messages to all members of this House. 

They sent a message that we don’t need a $5.5 billion promises 

we can’t afford that’ll drive us into deficit. They said we 

wanted STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] to proceed, 

the helicopter ambulance program. It’s happened this session. 

They said we wanted the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship 

to be, that promise to be kept. It’s in the budget. They wanted 

500 new child care spaces — it’s in the budget. They wanted 

$10,000 tax credits for new homeowners — that’s in the 

budget. They wanted a balanced budget, and obviously that’s 

part of the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here’s one other thing they said they wanted. They wanted 

to keep this province moving forward. They wanted to keep it 

in leadership in the country. Yesterday the Conference Board 

released a report and said we’ll have the lowest unemployment 

rate again next year. We’ll have the lowest rate the year after 

that. This province will lead the country in economic growth. 

The greatest threat to working people in this province and to 

families sit right over there and sit in Ottawa in their federal 

counterparts. Mr. Speaker, this side of the House will always 

take a stand in favour of our economic interests in this 

province. The question is, where are the NDP? 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the NDP we’ve been asking 

lots of questions, but I’m pleased to say that we got some 

answers this morning. And so in accordance with rule 15(2), I 

request to withdraw items in my name. On day 42 I gave notice 

of written questions no. 406 to 449. I request that these items be 

withdrawn. I hope I get a lot more answers as the days proceed. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Written questions no. 406 to 449 are 

withdrawn. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’d like to make a few comments before I ask leave to adjourn 

this Assembly. This day marks the end of the fifth legislative 

session of the Sask Party government. I’d like to take this 

opportunity to thank both you and the Clerks at the Table for 

your guidance and wisdom while guiding members through the 

procedures of the Legislative Assembly. There are many other 

people who rarely receive the credit they deserve for allowing 

the House to proceed seamlessly, such as broadcast services, 

library services, Journals, and Hansard. 

 

I’d also like to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms and the 

commissionaires for the duties they silently perform in the 

House and the building. The building staff, the cafeteria staff, 

the Pages, the interns and the tour guides, Mr. Speaker — you 

truly help to make our jobs as legislators that much easier with 

your hard work, positive attitudes, and friendliness. I would 

also like to offer my thanks to the media for keeping the public 

up to date on what’s happening in the legislature and the work 

that happens here. I would also like to thank the Opposition 

House Leader for his co-operation as we both work to represent 

the interests of our respective parties. 

 

Last but of course not least, I would like to thank our families 

for the continued support they provide to us. It’s truly their 

sacrifices that allow us to do this work on behalf of the people 

of this great province. Our spouses, children, and other family 

members often have to endure extended absences as we put in 

often long hours that this work requires. And for that I offer my 

sincere gratitude. Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to wish everyone a 

safe and happy summer as we continue with our duties outside 

the Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I move: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the 

sitting day today, it shall stand adjourned to the date and 

time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 

government and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 

seven clear days notice if possible of such date and time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to add a bit to the words of the Government House Leader 

— words of thanks, words of appreciation. Certainly this will 

be a bit redundant in terms of the list, but we want to make sure 

that these folks are referenced. Certainly we want to thank the 

Table officers, the Clerk and all in the Clerk’s office. As a new 

House Leader, Mr. Speaker, I’ve benefited greatly from their 

instruction and guidance and assistance, and probably not as 

much as the wisdom on offer, but we’ll keep working at it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We want to thank those in members services, the Hansard and 

Journals folks, the audio-visual folks, security and 

commissionaires, those in the library, those in the cafeteria. 

You’ll probably note, Mr. Speaker, that I benefit greatly from 

the work of those in the cafeteria as well. I want to thank all of 



May 17, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

the staff of the Legislative Assembly, those in the press gallery 

for bringing the proceedings of the legislature to the broader 

public. I want to thank the caucus members. I want to thank 

members on both sides of the House. And I want to thank the 

caucus staffs and those that work to help us do the work that we 

do. 

 

I want to . . . [inaudible] . . . those in the constituency office 

who are keeping the home fires burning for us in terms of 

serving the people in our respective constituencies and that 

we’ll be there working alongside them very shortly, Mr. 

Speaker, as we get a chance to shift focus with the conclusion 

of the session. 

 

I want to thank the House biz folks, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

thank Cole Goertz on the opposite side working with the 

Government House Leader. And I want to thank the 

Government House Leader as well for working in a 

straightforward, co-operative manner to ensure that — we may 

not always agree, Mr. Speaker — but to make sure that process 

doesn’t become the issue as often as possible but that we can 

focus on the issues in front of us in terms of policy and ideas. 

On our side, I want to thank Kyall Glennie and the particular 

work that he has done in aid of that. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank our families and friends 

and those who support us, as referenced by the Government 

House Leader, and helping us to do the work that we do in 

service of the people. 

 

I guess in thinking about what I wanted to say today, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m reminded of the remarks of a Scottish writer, Ian 

Maclaren, who said, let us be kind, one to another, for most of 

us are fighting a hard battle. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that in 

some ways this Assembly is like a big family, kind of a 

brawling family sometimes, kind of a dysfunctional family 

sometimes, but we know that a lot of different people are going 

through a lot of different things. But still they come to work 

every day. They help us out in the work that we’re doing. And I 

guess in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to say, if I 

haven’t been as kind as I should have been, I’ll work harder on 

that. But it’s certainly inspiring the work that people do while 

struggling with difficulties with loved ones, struggling with 

difficulties themselves oftentimes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the last person I thank is you, Mr. Speaker, for putting up 

with me and not throwing me out of the House yet. But I’m 

sure there’s time for that on the docket. But I guess I’ll end off 

by saying, obviously our work does not conclude. We’re not off 

on summer holidays, but the work shifts venues. But this 

Assembly, where we strive to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan, is a very important . . . It’s a great privilege to 

serve in this Assembly, and I thank all of those who help us to 

do this work of service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity as well to join 

with the House leaders with a few comments. I’d like to thank 

the caucuses on both sides and the House leaders on both sides 

for their co-operation and good work, and the Whips. I can’t 

forget the Whips because they are certainly a very important 

part of this operation on the floor of the House as well. I would 

like to note from the Opposition House Leader’s comments that 

the boys from Cannington are serving both sides in the House 

Leader business. 

 

Also I’d like to thank all the legislative staff, especially the 

Clerks at the Table, the Hansard people, the Sergeant-at-Arms 

office, the libraries, and certainly the cafeteria which is 

extremely important for most of us members, and also all of the 

other staff members that make it possible for us to carry on the 

duties as MLAs and to display this building in the best possible 

light — the cleaning staff, the tour guides that we saw earlier 

today, and all of those that participate here with us. Also I think 

we need to thank our families. 

 

It has been moved by the Government House Leader: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this 

sitting day, in accordance with the parliamentary 

calendar, it shall stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 

25th, 2012, unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon 

the request of the government, and if recalled, Mr. 

Speaker shall give each member seven days clear notice 

if possible of such date. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to the call of the 

Speaker. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:03.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1545 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1545 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1545 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1545 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1545 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1545 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1546 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1546 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1546 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1546 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1546 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1547 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1547 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1547 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1547 

 Canadian Progress Club  

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1548 

 Norwegian Constitution Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1548 

 Art Work on Louis Riel Trail 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1548 

 National Early Learning Conference 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1548 

 Natural Resources and the Canadian Economy 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1549 

 Appreciation for Caucus Staff  

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1549 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Performance of Government and Opposition 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1549 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1549 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1550 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1550 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1550 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1551 

 Review of Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1551 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1551 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1552 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1552 

 Surgical Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1553 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1553 

 The Government’s Record 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1553 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1554 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1554 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1554 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1554 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1555 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


