




















































Hansard: November 20, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 15B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2077 

 November 20, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, the House is 

reconvened. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 54 — The Seizure 

of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s great 

to be back. It’s great to have this audience. It’s great to be on 

TV at 7 o’clock talking about something very, very important. 

What a crowd. What an audience. It’s great to look out and see 

people’s smiling, happy faces to be back at work, talking about 

their legislation. 

 

So I am happy to be talking tonight about Bill No. 54, An Act to 

amend The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009. And this 

one is a significant one because, you know, Mr. Speaker, as I 

said earlier, we have to have confidence in our judicial system, 

and clearly when they introduced and passed the bill, The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009, they found that there 

were challenges that they had to address. And so that’s what we 

are here doing tonight and over the next few weeks and into the 

spring, looking at the amendments so that the Act can carry out 

the intentions of what it is. And really that is to enable the 

forfeiture of criminal property that will either be used in a 

criminal activity or property that was acquired through criminal 

activity. 

 

And this is not a small thing. This is quite a significant thing, 

Mr. Speaker, because clearly as we see more and more activity, 

particularly around organized crime, we can’t let that go. We 

can’t turn a blind eye to that omission that had existed before 

that allowed a significant amount of economic activity to be 

carried on through various means of criminal activity. You 

know, as the face of that kind of activity has changed over the 

years, but as I will talk about later in my speech, it really hasn’t 

either. In fact, it goes back hundreds of years. It goes back 

hundreds of years and clearly we need to make sure that the 

justice system seems to be pursuing those who have profited 

from criminal activity. And this is one way of doing that. 

 

Of course it’s not just a clear-cut case. We have to ensure and 

there are critics of this type of process by Justice because you 

have to make sure that you protect the rights of those until they 

are proven guilty and that they’ve exhausted all their appeals. 

And sometimes in the case of some of the properties that are 

seized or about to be seized, there is a time factor. And clearly 

this is what we’ve talked about. One of the amendments talks 

about extending the period of time that the director can apply 

before the courts from 30 days to 60 days. 

 

But as I said that sometimes there are those, and rightfully so, 

to make sure that justice is a balanced process, that we do 

protect the rights of those who are innocent, and we also protect 

the rights of those who unknowingly and unwillingly got 

caught up in something that they were unaware of and then 

found out that they were part of some process that they were 

able to acquire property. And so you have to protect that, and 

we have to make sure that all those bases are covered. So 

clearly this, as I said, is an important one, and you clearly don’t 

want to have any unintended consequences. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to go through some of the processes 

here because I think it’s important that we spend some time 

talking about this Act tonight. I know it’s one that . . . I was 

here in 2009 when the major piece of legislation was passed, 

but it’s time that’s well spent if we can review what got us to 

this place. And we can all benefit from that because what we 

want to do is make sure we have a good, solid, rigorous debate 

about this and then when we go to committee we can ask those 

specific questions and determine whether or not there needs to 

be more work done on the Bill. But tonight what we do is the 

debate, and I hope I can contribute in some way to the 

understanding of this. 

 

And as I said, it’s just really important that we think about this 

as part of the justice system. We think of what we try to do 

when it comes to criminal activity. We think about deterrents. 

What is a deterrent that will make criminals think twice before 

they continue with their ways? That if it leads to the seizure of 

their house, their cars, their property that before was shielded or 

was unreachable or untouchable but now isn’t, will be a 

deterrent, and I think that’s a good thing. And of course as well, 

a sense of punishment that the law will reach you no matter 

where you are, and if you’ve benefited from criminal activity 

that the law will make sure that rights are carried out and that 

you will not be able to keep those that you’ve benefited from. 

 

But as I said, the seizure of property is not a straightforward 

thing. There’s whole issues around ownership. Who owns the 

property? Is it clear, direct so only one person owning it? Are 

there multiple people owning it? And sometimes there’s even 

mortgages involved, so credit unions, financial institutions are 

involved unknowingly, and their interests have to be protected 

as well. And the original bill that was passed in 2009 does 

address those things and will continue to do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to review some of the pieces of 

information that I’ve been able to gather because I do think it’s 

an important topic and we need to spend the time. And the folks 

at home, you know, they’re wondering, what are the issues 

before the House this fall? What are the important concerns that 

are brought forward? And clearly this is one, and they want to 

make sure that we’re being . . . keeping up to date, keeping 

legislation current, and that no rock will be left unturned so that 

we make sure we get our work done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as the government website talks about: 

 

The Seizure Of Criminal Property Act, 2009 provides that 

property that is acquired, directly or indirectly, as a result 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

of unlawful activity or that is, or has been, used to commit 

a crime may be seized and, when appropriate, sold by an 

order of court. 

 

Because it’s not in the interests and it’s not in the business of 

the courts to maintain property. It’s to liquidate the property, 

get a financial settlement, and then proceed with that. And I 

will talk about that in a few minutes. I’ve been able to print off 

the financial statements for the year ending March 31st, 2012, 

and I’ll talk a bit about that later on because it is interesting 

how the fund, the forfeiture fund has been growing and what is 

it used for. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the seizure of the property by the province is 

intended to prevent crime by taking away the proceeds of crime 

so they can’t be subsequently used for further crime. Property 

under the Act includes both real and personal property and any 

interest is real or personal property. So it covers the whole 

gamut of what might be confiscated and what the purposes are. 

It’s to stop crime and to stop any further uses in crime. 

 

Now the Act provides that a director appointed by the Minister 

of Justice and Attorney General may apply to the Court of 

Queen’s Bench for a forfeiture order respecting property 

located anywhere in Saskatchewan. The director then applies to 

the registrar of titles and to the personal property registry to 

register an interest in that property. This ensures that an 

innocent third party is not affected by the forfeiture processes. 

The people with an interest in that property have an opportunity 

to be heard prior to the property being liquidated. So there is a 

process and it’s a clear process and it protects those third parties 

that find themselves caught up in this kind of process. And 

whether it’s a bank or a credit union, a family member, there is 

a process for them to protect their interests. So this is important 

that we have this kind of thing in place. 

 

The director may apply to the court for an interim order to 

ensure that the property that is or may become the subject of 

application for a forfeiture order is not wasted or disposed in 

anticipation of that order. So they don’t go and sell the house or 

sell the car, thinking that it’s better to get the cash and move the 

cash somewhere else so that there is a way to act quickly and in 

response to this. 

 

And so, for example, this page talks about the court may make 

an interim order authorizing the director to investigate or list 

the property in an inventory, an order for search, seizure, an 

order for delivery, safekeeping of the property. 

 

So it goes through all of this type of thing and it talks about the 

processes that happens that the court will make . . . shall order a 

forfeiture of the property and make a protection order to protect 

third parties who have an interest in the forfeited property, 

holders of the prior registered interest of the property. And they 

talk about banks, financial institutions. In fact the Canadian 

government’s co-owners or owners of property who were 

unaware of the criminal activity are entitled to the protection 

order. 

 

And so it talks about what happens here. And then the Act 

establishes a Criminal Property Forfeiture Fund to hold all 

money received through the property forfeited to the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And that property is subject to 

an interim order. 

 

And then what this happens with this is that under the direction 

of the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing, it may be distributed to the police 

operations and to the Victims Fund under section 6 of The 

Victims of Crime Act, 1995. And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting. I pulled down off the Internet the financial 

statements for the criminal property fine forfeiture fund because 

it’s interesting to know, how much money are we talking about 

here? What is the extent of the fund, and how much money 

have we got in that account? And so tonight might be a good 

night to be talking about that. 

 

And of course, there’s the audited statements. The Provincial 

Auditor has signed off, and in her opinion the financial 

statements present fairly the financial position of the Criminal 

Property Forfeiture Fund as at March 31st, 2012. And it seems 

to be relatively straightforward when I looked through it. I 

don’t see any glaring things that jump out at me. 

 

But these are the numbers that I think that members may be 

interested in for the year ending March 31st, 2012. The 

revenues for the . . . in 2012, the forfeitures were $750,000. 

Three-quarters of a million dollars. That’s a significant amount 

of money, $750,821. Out of that we also were able . . . The fund 

got about $4,800 awarded costs and the interest about 2,500. So 

we’re talking about total revenue for the fund was, for that year, 

758,000. 

 

The previous year it was 44,620. So there must have been some 

significant activity, because they gathered more than $700,000 

in forfeitures. So clearly as the expertise is built up, that they’re 

being more effective in their forfeitures processes. 

 

It would be interesting to know how many they felt that they 

didn’t get or how many people got away, and that’s why we 

have the amendments today. Because if I were to read this only 

I would say, boy they’re pretty effective. But clearly the police 

feel they could be doing better. The director feels he could be 

doing better, that some are clearly not happening. 

 

But I assume, you know, we’re talking about houses. We’re 

talking about cars. We’re talking about other properties that 

may be of significant value. And so it’s not, I don’t think it’s 

totally unusual to hear a number about 750,000. But it would be 

interesting to know more about that, and maybe that’s 

something that we could ask the minister in terms of some 

written questions. What exactly have been the lists of 

forfeitures that have been established? 

 

The expenses: the commissions, about $10,800; legal fees, 

2,400; some registration fees. The biggest thing is property 

management, and of course this is something that every 

government wrestles with. You’ve got to rent an office space. 

And the office space rental, it looks like the property 

management is $225,000. So clearly a bit of an expense. So 

that’s the expenses for the year. 

 

I am curious to know, what about the staff, if there’s any 

staffing costs involved. Or is the director part of the Ministry of 

Justice and there’s not really any extra cost? 

 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

So the surplus for the year is 512,000. At the end of the day, it 

looks like they have over a half a million dollars. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Now what I am interested in hearing is what did they pay out in 

terms of . . . And I don’t actually see any claims yet being paid 

out, and I don’t know why that is and whether it’s because it’s a 

relatively new fund and they haven’t been able to establish that. 

They do need to establish the fund, and so they can’t be going 

into debt. And of course what they do talk about is how this 

will be split evenly between police operations and to the 

Victims Fund. Now it doesn’t say that the total amount will be 

split evenly, but that whatever the Victims Fund gets, it sounds 

like the police operations will get. 

 

So that’s an interesting way, and I think that clearly they have 

done a good job of accounting for this and it raises . . . I think 

when we get into committee it will be a good discussion about, 

what have they claimed? What have been the major claims 

under the forfeitures? What major forfeitures have occurred to 

date? And that will be of a lot of interest. 

 

I know, for example, the government did do a news release and 

this was back in April, April 23rd, 2010 when they actually did 

their first . . . And the headline says, “First success under The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009.” And I’ll read this: 

“The Saskatchewan Ministry of Justice successfully completed 

the first application for forfeiture of property used in the 

commission of a crime.” 

 

Now this one was a relatively small one, Mr. Speaker: “The 

property forfeited was $2,290 in cash and 3 cell phones.” So 

that was a first success and now they’re up to $750,000, so 

there must’ve been some big catches in between. But to get 

$2,200 they feel was a success. It was “used in the operation of 

a drug trafficking scheme known as a ‘dial-a-dope’ operation,” 

and the fact that “this application is a separate case from the 

prosecution of the actual crime.” And this was actually 

prosecuted under the federal Department of Justice. 

 

And actually the minister of Justice at the time, the member 

from Saskatoon Southeast, was quoted as saying that, “Even 

though it is a relatively small amount of money and the value of 

the cell phones is not high, it is the first test of the new 

legislation brought in last year. This legislation gives us the 

right to seize larger ticket items, like houses and expensive 

cars.” 

 

So you can see that that’s how we can get up to $750,000 if 

that’s what they were able to raise through The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act. But the question really becomes, here 

we are tonight and we’re talking about this but . . . And this is 

actually, it seems like the Justice department is actually 

focusing in a big way on this. 

 

This is a news release from last year, May 13th, 2011: 

“Saskatchewan to share information on criminal property 

forfeiture cases with other provinces.” And this is an agreement 

with six other provinces to share information related to seizing 

the proceeds of crime. And of course the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast, the Justice minister at the time, felt that 

this was an important thing to make it a level playing field right 

across the province. 

 

The other jurisdictions participating under this agreement are 

British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario — essentially 

everybody west of Quebec — New Brunswick and Nova 

Scotia. The provinces that weren’t included, looks like, were 

Quebec, Newfoundland, and Prince Edward Island. I’m not sure 

what’s happening there. We know that Quebec has a different 

kind of judicial system, and I’m not sure if we were able to 

dovetail with theirs or what the issues were. 

 

But it goes on to talk about “In Saskatchewan, civil property 

forfeiture is covered by The Seizure of Criminal Property Act 

. . . [and it’s] intended to seize the proceeds of crime so they 

cannot be used to further criminal activity.” And so the minister 

at the time goes on talking about how it’s important to “. . . 

strengthen the joint efforts of provinces to enhance the safety 

and security of our communities.” But what is interesting in that 

is talking about how it’s important to make sure the legislation 

is correct, is strong, is rigorous, can withstand the challenges of 

lawyers, and if it’s not, then we have to go back to the drawing 

board. And of course that’s why we’re here tonight and then the 

next few months to talk about how we can strengthen that. 

 

It’s important that we do coordinate with other provinces, 

particularly when we talk of all the provinces west of Quebec, 

with Ontario, Manitoba, BC [British Columbia], Alberta, and 

Manitoba. That way there’s some consistency and that we can 

make use of that. And as I said, it’s really important that we 

make sure that our laws are seen to be effective and that people 

have confidence in our laws, and they’re not seen to be weak 

and easily challenged. And people, especially when we talk 

about organized crime and the kind of abilities they are to make 

the money that they do, and whether it’s through, as we talk 

about this dial-a-dope, drugs, illegal drugs, or other activities, 

it’s really important that we can be able to make it a strong 

deterrent, that they will lose their houses, their cars, other 

valuable pieces of property and that the police will go after that, 

will go after that and be quick about it and liquidate it. And the 

assets will go to both further policing and to those victims who 

have suffered under the criminal activities. 

 

I think this is an important aspect of our laws in Saskatchewan. 

And I think that it’s critical that we understand this as fully as 

we can and that we don’t take it lightly, you know. And I know 

that this is something that, as we’ve seen, it seems to be a 

relatively new phenomenon in the last decade or so or maybe 

even longer, but it seems when I look across the country that, 

whether it’s Ontario and the work that they had done in the 

early 2000s, Manitoba in the mid-2000s, and then us in 2009, 

that it’s important that we get it right. 

 

I just want to review. This is another review talking about asset 

forfeiture, a form of confiscation of assets by the state pursuant 

to the law. And it typically applies to the alleged proceeds or 

instrumentalities of crime. Now some places call it confiscation 

instead of forfeiture, and although it’s mostly used in the USA 

[United States of America], other jurisdictions have introduced 

this civil forfeiture legislation, including Italy, South Africa, 

Ireland, UK [United Kingdom], Fiji, most of the Canadian 

provinces, Australia, the individual states, Antigua and 

Barbuda. In addition, the Commonwealth has introduced model 

provisions to serve as templates, and that’s important because 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

it’s good for us to have those templates so the law can be 

consistent right across the country. 

 

So it’s important to do that, but as I said earlier that some civil 

libertarians feel that there’s issues when there are greatly 

reduced standards for conviction and financial conflict of 

interest that arise out of this. But I think that we have to strike 

that balance and it’s important to do so. I think that we cannot 

shy away from this. We absolutely cannot shy away from this. 

We cannot turn a blind eye to this and if we do, in many ways 

people would argue that we are only encouraging organized 

crime and crime that creates a lot of financial reward for those 

who should not be rewarded, who should not be rewarded. In 

fact they should be punished and know that we are after that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important . . . We came across 

this review from Ontario, but it’s very informative, and I think 

it would serve the people at home and members across the way 

to talk about civil forfeiture. Clearly we are on the same page 

here in Saskatchewan as they are in Ontario, so I think that it’s 

important to review what is civil forfeiture, what does it mean 

in the history of civil forfeiture around the world, so we can 

clearly understand why it’s important to do these amendments 

and why Bill 54 is important, why it’s important to get it right 

and that we do send a clear message that we’re going to be 

vigilant on this. We’re going to make sure that there are no 

loopholes that organized crime or others can take advantage of 

and retain their significant financial rewards. And I think that 

would be wrong. That would be wrong. 

 

So he talks about civil forfeiture. What is it? Well it’s the 

judicial transfer of title to proceeds and instruments of unlawful 

activity through civil proceedings. 

 

Now they talk about Ontario, and I imagine much is the same 

here in Saskatchewan, that civil forfeiture legislation focuses on 

the connection of property and unlawful activity. And the 

standard of proof required for this forfeiture is the same as all 

civil suits, a balance of probabilities. And we have to determine 

that and I believe, as I’ve gone through my reading, that that’s 

what we look at for that. 

 

Now in contrast, criminal law deals with people and their 

criminal liability for specific acts. The Criminal Code of 

Canada, the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, and 

numerous other statutes contain provisions that allow for the 

seizure or restraint of tainted assets in the course of criminal 

investigation and provide for forfeiture on conviction. Other 

federal statutes also provide for seizure, restraint, and forfeiture 

through adoption of the Criminal Code regime. Criminal 

seizure, restraint and forfeiture apply to assets derived or 

obtained directly or indirectly from the commission of almost 

all criminal offences. So this is just one part of the tool kit, but 

a significant tool kit. 

 

Criminal asset forfeiture is primarily conviction-based, meaning 

the Crown usually must first obtain a criminal conviction 

against an offender in order to seek a forfeiture order, and the 

Crown must establish on a balance of probabilities that the 

target asset arose from or was used in the commission of the 

offence. And so that’s what we’re talking about tonight. 

 

Now interestingly, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, that while this 

may be seen to be relatively recent — it may be only a decade 

old or so — but as this writer describes, forfeiture law is based 

on, or built on one of the oldest concepts in law that dates back 

to the ancient Saxon law prior to the Norman Conquest of 1066. 

So it does go back quite a ways that criminals were not getting 

away with keeping the goods or the bounty of their criminal 

activity. People were making sure for over 1,000 years that that 

was not going to be the case. 

 

But modern civil forfeiture law is now covered by statute in the 

same way as remedial property laws. Civil forfeitures are 

brought in rem, a legal action directed solely against the 

property, seeking a judicial finding that the origin of property 

lies in illegal activity or is being used as an instrument of 

unlawful activity. It’s not an action against the person but 

against the property involved. So I think that’s interesting, and 

we’d like to clarify that, if that’s the case here in Saskatchewan 

because you’re really after the property. The person has already 

been dealt with in the court of law and has been convicted and 

therefore that’s not the case, that it’s after the person but after 

the property.  

 

Now this is an interesting paper because it talks about what 

happens in the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, 

United Kingdom, and reviews what happens in Canada. And I 

think it’d be worthwhile to just take a minute or two to talk 

about what happens in other parts of the world. 

 

So in the States, these kind of forfeitures will have been part of 

the legal tradition for a long, long time. Initially forfeiture law 

was used to protect revenues coming largely from tariffs and to 

protect shipping from the threat of piracy. So we often, we do 

think about piracy. Of course in recent years we think of piracy 

around Africa, but of course, you know, we think of those days 

when piracy down in the Caribbean and that type of thing. And 

this forfeiture really stems back to, in the American tradition, to 

protection from pirates seizing property and being able to seize 

their property because of what is really derived from criminal 

activities. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So that’s an interesting aspect that we’re really talking about: 

old crimes that we think about in olden days when we’re 

thinking now about new crimes and new times. But really we 

have to change with the times to make sure, at the end of the 

day, criminals are trying to acquire property, trying to distance 

themselves — particularly in organized crime — distance 

themselves from the direct activities of criminal activity and so 

that they’re not seen to be . . . actually their hands are not 

touching the criminal activity, but we know it is. And this is 

how they’re getting the property and sometimes fairly extensive 

properties. And so it’s important that we go after it as hard as 

we can. 

 

It talks about, in the later half of the 20th century, the US 

[United States] pioneered the use of legislation specifically to 

go after unlawful assets. Congress passed the racketeer 

influenced and corrupt organizations, or the RICO Act, in 1970 

to deal with the rising organized criminal activity, and these 

laws at both the federal and state levels include civil remedies. 

That same year the US Congress also passed the 

Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act, which 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

authorized the government to seize and ask the courts for a 

forfeiture of property used in connection with illegal drug 

activities. 

 

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Congress expanded forfeiture 

law and created the Department of Justice Asset Forfeiture 

Fund. So there you go, and that could be perhaps where we 

really were able to see what was happening and we needed to 

do the same. Proceeds from the sale of forfeited assets are 

deposited and subsequently used for victim restitution, as well 

as for law enforcement initiatives. So you see a parallel, a 

parallel to what we are doing here in Saskatchewan — the 

Victims Fund and police initiatives. 

 

In 2000 the federal forfeiture laws were amended by the Civil 

Asset Forfeiture Reform Act to address specific issues, 

including the onus of proof with the government bearing the 

onus to prove, on a balance of probabilities, the property was 

used for illegal activity. In the US there are state and even local 

forfeiture laws creating hundreds of provisions. 

 

Now what happens in Australia and New Zealand? Well 

criminal forfeiture has been in place in Australia since 1987. 

The state of New South Wales amended its forfeitures laws in 

1990 to create a civil forfeiture regime for a range of unlawful 

activity. And more states followed with the federal government 

with the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. This Act strengthened the 

existing conviction-based forfeiture scheme that was in the 

Proceeds of Crime Act 1987, and incorporated both the 

imposition of monetary penalty orders and the civil forfeiture of 

property used in, intended to be used in, or derived from crime. 

It goes on to talk about the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 further 

created a national confiscated assets account from which, 

among other things, various law enforcement and crime 

preventions programs could be funded. So they’ve expanded a 

little further, not just having a dual purpose, but a third purpose, 

that crime prevention initiatives could be funded as well. 

 

Now that Criminal Proceeds (Recovery) Bill 2007 is currently 

before the New Zealand parliament and is expected to provide 

for a civil forfeiture regime for property and profits derived 

from significant criminal activity. So clearly, probably, most 

likely in the five years since then we would assume that they’ve 

passed that bill and it’s now actually in place. 

 

Ireland passed the Proceeds of Crime Act, 1996 and created the 

Criminal Assets Bureau to implement civil asset forfeiture in 

response to the public calls for action to follow the murders of a 

police officer and a journalist investigating organized crime in 

Ireland. And Ireland now has one of the most successful asset 

forfeiture programs in Europe. 

 

So an interesting trigger for how Ireland decided that it had to 

move on this and that they were going to do something about 

organized crime. And it was the murder of a police officer and a 

journalist that really moved that further, moved that ahead. And 

I think that, while it’s tragic, that they really clearly got down to 

work and made sure that their civil asset forfeiture program was 

successful and met the target. 

 

And again, it’s about deterrents and it’s about punishment. 

Clearly in Ireland they saw a situation where they needed to do 

something. They needed to do something and they did and it 

was successful. It would be interesting to know more about 

that. I mean it would be interesting to know, did it act as a 

deterrent to organized crime or are they just acquiring a 

significant amount of funds in their programs, and what are 

they using their program for? 

 

Now United Kingdom, they have a Proceeds of Crime Act 

2002, with amendments under the Serious Organised Crime 

and Police Act 2005, addresses the detection, recovery of 

criminal property under the overall supervision and control of 

the Assets Recovery Agency. The agency has the power to 

enforce its own civil forfeiture or tax cases and works to 

recover assets which are or represent property attained through 

unlawful conduct in England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern 

Ireland. 

 

And again in 2007 they introduced it, and if it was passed and 

we wanted to create an agency called the serious organized 

crime agency, again it would be good to have an update to that 

to find out if that was the case. 

 

So it talks about what’s happening in Canada. Ontario set the 

precedent in Canada for doing this but British Columbia, 

Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and I understand then 

Quebec, Quebec has since introduced or passed similar 

legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, then here’s an interesting 

conundrum we have. If Quebec has this kind of legislation, why 

is it that they’re not part of the six provinces that signed on? 

That would be a very, very important reason but maybe it’s 

because of their court system. It’s really important. 

 

Ontario’s Civil Remedies Act, formerly known as the Remedies 

for Organized Crime and Other Unlawful Activities 2001, came 

into force 2002, but it concerned itself only with civil matters at 

that time. And then it moved on to December 2005 with 

amendments to the Civil Remedies Act under the Law 

Enforcement and Forfeited Property Management Statute Law 

Amendment Act came into force. 

 

And so they had a constitutional challenge June 2005, but it 

was dismissed, and the Ontario Superior Court of Justice agreed 

with Ontario’s position that the Act regulated property and civil 

rights, the administration of justice in local matters which all 

fall within the provincial jurisdiction. So we have some strength 

that this actually is something that the provinces can be doing, 

and I think that’s important. 

 

As I said, that it’s important that the legislation be as strong as 

it can be because, as you know and as we know, that the 

criminals with a large resource, financial resources can work 

hard to challenge laws that are set up to be a deterrent and 

punishments, and it’s in their interest that if they can strike 

these down, they will. And so when we see that the courts agree 

that civil forfeiture of property does not infringe the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms, it’s an important ruling. And it’s one that 

in Canada, I think that we think it should be a good thing. And 

as well then in May 2007, the Ontario Court of Appeal upheld 

the lower court’s decision, and then the court also upheld the 

lower court’s findings that the monies in that case were 

unlawful proceeds. 

 

Now interesting, this is one that I found very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, because it may be something that we want to think 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

about here in Saskatchewan. I don’t know if the minister has 

thought about this or looked at what’s been happening in 

Ontario. Maybe they have; we would have this question for 

him. But they have what they call the Safer Roads for a Safer 

Ontario Act, 2007. What happens here is it allows civil courts 

to impound and order the forfeiture of instruments of an 

unlawful activity, vehicles used or likely to be used by people 

who have two or more previous licence suspensions related to 

drinking and driving offences or who have continued to drive 

while their licence is suspended for drinking and driving. 

 

So that’s an interesting twist on this. It speaks specifically to 

driving issues and vehicles used in that circumstance. So while 

it could be maybe one that they would think is already covered 

under this legislation that we have, The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Act, in Ontario they wanted to go further, and they 

wanted to focus on vehicles that were used by drivers who 

should not be driving. And whether they’ve been suspended a 

couple of times or whether they’ve been caught drinking and 

driving more than they should be, I think that’s an interesting 

idea, and maybe that’s one that we can raise when we get to 

committee. Is this something that we want to go down that 

road, the Safer Roads for a Safer Ontario Act? 

 

And you know, it is interesting because we’ve talked about this. 

And I talked about this in our Throne Speech response about 

the number of deaths in Saskatchewan on our roads and how we 

do have to send a clear signal that drinking and driving is not, 

it’s just not acceptable and that those who will, will pay for that 

and as both a deterrent and a punishment. 

 

And I think it’s always interesting when we look across the 

world and across the country. What are other provinces doing? 

What are they doing to make sure people who engage in 

criminal activity get the message that it will not be tolerated? 

The police will come after you, and society will just not turn a 

blind eye but in fact think it’s important to go after these 

people. 

 

So what they did, they talked about how they renamed some of 

their legislation, and go on from there. So now Ontario, I mean 

clearly this is an Ontario paper. They talked about how they 

feel that they’re a leader in this area now. And it’s always 

interesting when you read a paper that’s five years old. And 

now is it still the case today? 

 

But what they did is they created the civil remedies for illicit 

activities office in 2000 to implement and enforce the Civil 

Remedies Act. And it’s a way of dealing with its civil forfeiture 

and has a specialized team of civil lawyers who bring civil 

forfeiture proceedings to court on behalf of the Attorney 

General. So again I’m not sure what our office is called and 

how it’s run, and this will be questions that we have during 

committee. 

 

But it would be interesting to know if Ontario is still 

maintaining this. They claim that they’re considered to be an 

international authority on civil forfeiture, and it regularly shares 

its expertise and best practices around the world including to 

the Philippines, Ireland, the UK [United Kingdom], Australia, 

Hong Kong, the United States, and South Africa, and it’s 

offered assistance to other provinces in Canada. And it would 

be very interesting to know whether this is the case that . . . 

whether it is still the situation. And it goes on about working 

with the European Union and New York and the Caribbean and 

so forth. 

 

So it’s an important, it’s a very important . . . It’s very 

important that we understand what happens here. I mean I will 

talk about this. It’s very interesting. This part, this could be like 

our, you know, the evening criminal news, what happens. We 

talk about in Saskatchewan where we have our dial-a-dope bust 

in that ring and we got $2,300. But Ontario case profiles and 

results . . . I’ll just take a few minutes. We’ve got some time 

tonight. I wouldn’t mind highlighting some of these. 

 

But since November 2003, forfeiture proceedings have been 

launched in over 170 cases. 170 cases. So I think I’m going to 

go home tonight and write some written questions. I’d be 

interested to know how many cases we’ve launched here in 

Saskatchewan, what the nature of the crime has been, the 

criminal activity, how much the assets were involved. As of 

July 31st, 2007, $3.6 million in property has been forfeited 

under the Act and the province has an additional 11.5 million in 

property frozen under this Act pending completion of civil 

forfeiture proceedings. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So it’s interesting — about 4 million in the fund and they have 

about 11 million, 11.5 million that’s frozen because they’re 

working it through the courts. Now I don’t know how long it 

takes to go work its way through the courts, but up to 2007, 170 

cases, 3.6 million in property forfeited, 11.5 million in property 

frozen, but almost $1 million distributed to victims. That’s 

significant. About a third of the money and more than $900,000 

awarded in grants to help prevent victimization. That’s very 

important. 

 

So I assume then that another . . . It’d be interesting to know 

how much the police initiatives got. But this is what happens in 

Ontario. It’d be interesting to know what happens here in 

Saskatchewan, and maybe we’ll get those details. But 73 per 

cent of their cases have been related to drugs — approximately 

$500,000 in property including real estate, cash, guns, cars, 

grow operation equipment, has been forfeited to the Crown as 

proceeds or instruments of unlawful activity linked to 

marijuana grow operations. So that’s interesting. I would like to 

know what happens here in Saskatchewan. 

 

They have some case studies and I think these would be 

interesting for us, just to take a minute to go through because I 

think that it’s interesting. 

 

Forfeiture of King Street East crack house in Hamilton. So on 

March 28, 2006, a crack house at 193 King Street East in 

Hamilton, along with an associated bank account containing 

$10,000, was forfeited by the court order to the Crown. Police 

say the property, the former Sandbar Tavern, was the source of 

the crime, drug dealing and almost daily police calls for over 10 

years. The building was the location of two crack-related 

murders, numerous stabbings and drug offences, including 

crack cocaine possession, use, and trafficking. According to 

police, neighbouring businesses and residents were plagued 

with crimes associated with the drug trade, including robberies, 

burglaries, and violence. And following the forfeiture of the 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

property, ownership was transferred to the city of Hamilton as 

compensation for victimization of the community. 

 

So that’s interesting that what they did in Hamilton is the city 

of Hamilton got the crack house. And I’m not sure what . . . It 

would be interesting to know what’s happening with it today. 

But that’s an interesting example of what can be done. 

 

They talk about cash seizures. Almost $1 million in illicit cash 

has been seized under this Act. In 2006, $99,000 in cash was 

found in a rented car during a motor vehicle search by the 

Ontario police near Kirkland Lake, and it was forfeited to the 

Crown as proceeds. Another case, 120,000 was found. The 

bundled cash was found during a traffic stop and seized by the 

Ontario police. It was forfeited —$120,000. 

 

So now what they talk about is that Thunder Bay is often seen 

as a mid-point for money to be exchanged for drugs from 

British Columbia. Very interesting. 

 

And they talk about marijuana grow operation forfeited in 

Oshawa. This time it was . . . Police seized the grow op 

equipment, plants, and dried marijuana with a street value of 

more than 540,000. Now I don’t think the police would then 

liquidate the seized marijuana. Would they go out and try to get 

the cash value of the marijuana? Probably burn it. And I think 

it’s . . . Well it’s worth a lot of money. I don’t think they would 

actually get the value of the money. But it’s really an issue. 

 

And this is one, I mean it’s interesting because they did seize 

the grow op, but they note that a grow op, current or past, can 

drastically lower the value of the property because of resulting 

electrical, plumbing, mould, and drywall damage. And this is 

something that we’ve heard. We’ve heard this from real estate 

agents. In fact I think probably the other side has heard this as 

well from the real estate agents, that when you have a house 

that’s been used as a grow op, that is severely damaged for a 

whole host of reasons, not the least is mould in the walls. And 

this can be, as they say in this paper, totally unusable and 

maybe impossible to finance and insure. 

 

So here in 2002 alone, grow ops were estimated to have cost 

Ontario nearly $100 million mostly due to electricity theft. It’d 

be interesting to know if SaskPower has done the same study 

here in Saskatchewan. How much have we lost because of 

electricity theft because of grow ops? 

 

And so they talk about violence and around grow ops is a very 

real issue, and weapons, and all sorts of things. So 52 properties 

have been seized that are associated with marijuana grow 

operations and they’re currently frozen under the Act. 

 

Fraud is another big issue. Credit card fraud alone resulted in 

over 201 million to credit card companies, 70 million debit card 

fraud, and so on and so forth. So that’s a big, big issue. 

 

Now the other one — we haven’t really got too much into this, 

but I know in BC it’s a big issue, Ontario it’s a big issue — that 

two cars have been seized and forfeited by court order under the 

Act as a result of street racing incidents. And naturally the cars 

were destroyed. And, Mr. Speaker, if you don’t believe it, I 

have a picture here of the car being destroyed by the police. So 

they clearly weren’t going to sell this street car to somebody 

else and get the . . . you know, to get the money. They did not 

want the car to exist. And it was the first time street racing cars 

were destroyed under civil forfeiture legislation. The York 

Regional Police had impounded cars after they had been 

stopped for speeding and dangerous driving in separate 

incidents involving street racing in 2003 and ’04. But this time 

they had it with the cars and they were just going to take them 

out of commission and they had done that. 

 

Gang house, clubhouse, gang clubhouses frozen. This was one 

in Oshawa. Hells Angels clubhouse. That was among other 

things allegedly used to sell alcohol illegally. I think that that’s 

an interesting one. 

 

It talks about the different grants and what they’ve used to use 

the money for: sometimes for fingerprint identification; Peel 

police Internet child exploitation unit; canine unit; vehicle to 

help locate missing kids and elderly people quickly. 

 

So they are doing this and I’m sure . . . And it would be 

interesting for us to see, as we’re starting out on this process, 

what we’d be using the funds. And as I said, now that we’ve got 

over $500,000 in our account and it’s growing quickly, that we 

want to make sure that we’re doing the right thing with it. 

 

So as they look forward to . . . You know, they conclude by 

looking forward to where they would go with this and that the 

caseload has been steadily increasing. It’s expected to continue 

as enforcement personnel from government bring forward more 

and more cases for civil forfeiture proceedings, especially in the 

areas of mortgage and telemarketing fraud. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s an interesting thing to review 

what happens around the world, what’s happening in Ontario. 

They seem to be leading the way in those concerns. And it’s not 

just getting the money, but if it’s getting property and how to 

dispose of that property, whether it’s destroying street racing 

cars because you really can’t sell them; you’ve just got to run 

them over with a big front-end loader. That’s what you’ve got 

to do to take them out of commission, but that’s what you’ve 

got to do. 

 

And so I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if they allowed the people who 

had those cars to watch as they were being destroyed. That 

would be an interesting thing. That would hurt, watching your 

car being run over by a front-end loader and having nothing 

being done about that. That would be an . . . They’ve got 

pictures but did they actually, you know, who was allowed to 

watch this? 

 

But it’s an interesting solution and I think like what they did 

with the crack house in Hamilton — they turned it over to the 

city of Hamilton. I’m not sure what they’re doing with it. But 

clearly it’s a way of being creative to compensate society for 

the kind of things that criminals are doing. And we will not 

tolerate this. We will not turn a blind eye to this and I’m hoping 

that the minister has covered all the bases with this. And clearly 

in committee we’ll be asking the questions to make sure that 

there are no more loopholes in this. 

 

And we’d be interested to know some of the lessons we’ve 

learned from other provinces. Are they doing something around 

specializing in confiscating cars that have been used by people 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

who are habitually drunk drivers or driving without a licence? 

And will that be part of this process too? I think that’s an 

important thing when we talk about safer roads in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s something that we really do need to 

address in Saskatchewan. We’ve talked about the challenges 

that we have here that for some strange reason . . . And it’s just 

something that we have to do as much as we can to stop the 

deaths and accidents that we have on our provincial highways, 

in our streets, in our cities. And whether you’re driving or 

walking, this cannot be tolerated. 

 

So I hope in some small way I’ve been able to add something to 

the discussion tonight. I think it’s an important discussion that 

we have. I think that we want to make sure, as I’ve said, that it 

can be both a punishment for those people who have committed 

the crime but also to a deterrent for those who are thinking 

about committing a crime or to engage in a process, that 

Saskatchewan Justice will not stand idly by, will not turn a 

blind eye but in fact go after proceeds from a crime, whether 

they be real or property or whether they be used in the crime or 

as a result of crime. 

 

People should feel rest assured though that if there are proceeds 

from a crime — and let’s say it’s a mortgage or an expensive 

car — that there is protections in place for those who are 

innocent third parties. And whether that be a financial 

institution, whether that be a bank, credit union, a family 

member, if there is proof that they did not knowingly 

participate in the crime or had anything to do with it, that there 

are processes in place. 

 

But we will be asking questions about this. Clearly when you 

have an account of 500,000, and it’s grown quickly from really 

essentially over just a few years, what is the plan? The auditor 

has given it a clean audit, and so they must be doing things 

well. We’d be curious to know about the staffing because 

clearly they talk about costs involved in terms of property 

management. I’m not sure what that is, and we’d ask more 

questions about that. 

 

And I think that it’s a good time to reflect. Over a couple of 

years this is what the minister has done. Well what are the 

problems? What can we do to make sure that all the bases are 

covered? And in fact in many ways if this is one more tool in 

the tool kit to fight crime as it changes over periods of time, as 

we said earlier from previous before 1066 to seizing the 

property of pirates in the Caribbean to the drug trade in our 

province here, dial-a-dope, I think that we need to do all that we 

can. But it’s our job as the opposition to make sure we ask the 

questions for this and that there is confidence in the system that 

when you see these major crimes, or small crimes, that in fact 

that justice will prevail and that we will see that justice is 

carried out, and that’s so critical. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, clearly this is an initiative that the government 

wants to see move forward and they see that they want to 

continue on. And I see the good things that have happened in 

Ontario and other provinces. We see the coordination between 

the six provinces across the western part of Canada. So this is 

important that we make sure we’re able to cross provincial lines 

so that if there is criminal activity and if they think they can get 

away just by hiding in another province, that won’t happen. 

That won’t happen. We will ensure that the innocent are 

protected, but those that are not, we will go after them. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that members here have 

many items they want to talk about tonight, and I know that 

they will have a lot to say about this bill and other bills. It’s our 

job to do that. And so, Mr. Speaker, that the bill before us, Bill 

No. 54, An Act to amend The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 

2009, while it’s a relatively straightforward one, there’s some 

three pages, that I think it’s important that we take some time to 

review all that it means and that we get it done right. And we 

won’t be back here too many more times, but if we have to be, 

we will be with that. So, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

adjournment of Bill No. 54, An Act to amend The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act, 2009. Thank you. 

 

[20:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 55 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 55 — The 

Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to rise tonight to speak to Bill No. 55 which is An Act 

respecting Consumer Protection and Business Practices, to 

repeal certain Acts and to make consequential amendments to 

other Acts. So it’s a long name. It’s a long bill, and we’ll just 

start at the beginning. 

 

The minister indicated in his opening remarks to the bill on 

November 6th that this bill is attempting to accomplish quite a 

few things actually, and it’s a fairly ambitious project. What I 

did first of all, Mr. Speaker, is I had to go back and look at the 

existing Act. And what I’ve discovered is that probably about 

two-thirds of the bill is actually not new; although it repeals the 

old Act and replaces it, about two-thirds of it has already been 

in place for some time. 

 

What I’ve also discovered is that there were amendments made 

to other bills in the spring that are now being amended again, so 

it seems like this is an ongoing cleanup of a cleanup in some 

cases. On the financial . . . What’s the name of the bill? The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

Act. It’s a new authority that was established by this 

government in the spring, and they’re already making 

amendments to that bill. So you can see there’s a lot of details 

here that appear the government is dealing with and getting 

caught up with and trying to look after all the issues related to 

consumer protection. The minister indicated he’s looking to 

update and rationalize the framework for consumer protection 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

in Saskatchewan, and he’s indicated this is a consolidation and 

simplification of the existing Act. 

 

But before we get into that, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to talk a 

little bit about consumer protection and where it comes from. 

And what I was immediately reminded of when I started 

thinking about this was going way back to my first year of law 

school, and in there we took a class called torts. It was a long, 

long time ago, in 1991 actually, Mr. Speaker, and it’s certainly 

something I remember with great fondness. It was a good time, 

and we learned a whole heck of a lot about consumer 

protection. What happened with consumer protection back in 

the old days is that it was the courts who finally intervened 

because things were not fair for consumers. 

 

I have an article here that I found from an Australian journal, 

and they talk a lot about the role of consumer law and why it 

developed as it did. Consumer protection has always become 

more necessary as we have more goods and services. As we 

consume more obviously, there are more reasons for protection, 

and the common law offered a lot of protection recently. But 

that’s something that started really back in the 19th century.  

 

So the explanation they have here is that consumer law came 

out of English law. If we look at before the industrial age when 

people were basically living in subsistence societies, in that 

case imagine most people, provided it was a close community 

where goods and services were provided within a very rural 

kind of community, people consumed far fewer goods than they 

do today, and obviously there weren’t a lot of products to 

choose from. So if you could imagine, there was really . . . The 

only place to get milk was from the farm down the road, and 

maybe they made cheese there too. There could be some 

chickens and eggs from the farmer on the other side. The rule in 

those days was caveat emptor, which is buyer beware. And 

that’s something that we’ve heard about a lot: let the buyer 

beware. So it’s up to the consumer to make sure that they check 

that the eggs aren’t broken before they buy them or barter them 

with some other goods. 

 

There were very few laws in those days that had things like 

weights and measures. If you’re going to buy a pound of 

cheese, was it really a pound of cheese? And we hear about 

expressions like a baker’s dozen, and often in those days 

consumer protection was afforded through self-help and 

self-regulation by shop owners and guild’s craftsmen. So 

people produced and sold their own goods, and they knew their 

customers personally. So they would go out of business if they 

offered poor services. 

 

Now comes along the Industrial Revolution. And what happens 

now is that we have large-scale manufacturing of cheap goods, 

and certainly that hasn’t stopped since the 18th century. What 

happens now though is instead of people buying from their 

neighbours, they’re manufacturing products, receiving wages, 

and then they go and buy goods and services that people had 

always looked after themselves, like vegetables, meat, and 

clothing. If you’re working in a factory, you’re going to have to 

buy your food from somewhere else. And also at that time more 

products came available. 

 

So what’s happening then, we are now switching from 

subsistence to a mass consumption society. And still the 

concept of caveat emptor operated. So that means at that point 

if there was something that the consumer was treated unfairly 

by a seller, there was very little that the consumer could do 

about it, and that led to very unjust results. 

 

Now at that point in time there was no government interference 

in the deals made between buyers and sellers. And the 

philosophy that they referred to here, and this is one that 

members will have heard of before, and it’s the concept of 

laissez-faire. So in those days the concept was the government 

should not interfere in private negotiations between people. 

And it was a laissez-faire kind of arrangement — let things be 

as they will. Laissez-faire is a French expression that just means 

leave it alone, leave things be. 

 

So at this point the courts had to start intervening, and there was 

various changes in the courts that brought more fairness to the 

relationship between the buyers and the sellers. And in fact in 

1893 was a seminal year when the first Sale of Goods Act was 

passed in Britain. 

 

The article goes on to talk about then the mass consumption 

society of the 20th century. And in the ’50s and ’60s, you will 

recognize the name of Ralph Nader. He was one of the leaders 

for safety of consumer goods and consumer safety and giving 

consumers greater bargaining power. 

 

But one of the first things we can talk about here is the law 

itself and how it developed. And one of my favourite cases 

from first year law school in 1991 was in our torts class and it’s 

the famous . . . It was the first case where consumer protection 

came into being and it’s called . . . The case is referred to as 

Carlill v. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co.. And that was in 1893. And 

I’ll just tell you the story of this particular case. It’s the 

beginning of consumer protection in the courts. This is before 

the governments intervened in consumer protection. 

 

So the Carbolic Smoke Ball Co. was an English company, and 

they made an influenza remedy. So they were saying, if you 

take our smoke ball, you won’t get the flu. And in an 

advertisement it offered £100 to anyone who contracted 

influenza after using the product as directed. So Mrs. Carlill 

faithfully used the product in accordance with the directions, 

but she still contracted influenza. So she sought payment of her 

£100. And the company argued that there was no contract 

between Mrs. Carlill and itself because she had not 

communicated her acceptance of its offer to the company. In 

that case, the court found in favour of Mrs. Carlill. And that 

was the first time where the courts impugned that if you bought 

the services, in this case the carbolic smoke ball, that that was a 

contract and there was a legal relationship between the vendor 

and the purchaser. This was, as I recall from my early law 

school days, this was a revolution in the equity law and in the 

law of tort, and it really began a big change in consumer law 

over the years. 

 

So at that point the governments at this point were still dealing 

with the laissez-faire: let the markets be as they will, let the 

buyers protect themselves, caveat emptor. But there was great 

pressure on the governments to start enacting legislation to 

protect consumers because as you can imagine with the larger 

mass production and more distance between the vendor and the 

purchaser, the law really had to evolve and intervene. But still 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

in 1893, the thought that parliament taking a broader public 

policy role and begin legislating was not established. It was 

only in the 20th century when we start seeing that the courts 

and parliament started looking at the idea of consumer 

protection law. 

 

So the article goes on to describe that when you get into the 

20th century with lots of cars on the road, there’s ways people 

can contract with others that can hurt each other and humans 

are having a bigger impact on each other than ever before and 

technology has taken a greater role, there still was a huge 

reluctance to change because the law of tort was based on moral 

duties. And the courts were really reluctant to open . . . There 

was a real floodgate argument. They didn’t want to allow 

greater and greater claims to arise from these new laws that are 

applying to manufacturers, especially, if you think about it, 

duties that, you know, with the floodgate argument, these 

would spread across to consumers generally. 

 

So there was another pioneering decision by the English courts 

to set the stage for consumer protection law for the rest of 

actually the 20th century. This is another famous law court 

decision that we learned in first-year law, and it’s the court case 

called Donoghue v. Stevenson from 1932. 

 

Now this is an interesting fact scenario as well, Mr. Speaker. In 

this particular case, it was a bottle of ginger beer, and Mrs. May 

Donoghue purchased this bottle of ginger beer. And what the 

problem was is that the bottle contained the decomposed 

remains of a snail which could not be detected because the 

contents of the bottle had not been consumed and the bottle was 

opaque. So she took a good swig of this ginger beer, Mr. 

Speaker, and what happened is she didn’t see the decomposed 

snail, and she suffered nervous shock and gastroenteritis. So she 

had a serious stomach complaint, and it went on for quite a 

substantial period of time. And this was a classic case of a small 

consumer versus a large manufacturer. So this went back and 

forth in the courts, and it finally went to the appeal courts in 

England and it was . . . Finally at that time, the court said there 

was a duty from the manufacturers to protect these kinds of 

things with the consumers. 

 

Then I think kind of . . . Everything kind of broke loose at that 

point, and we started seeing in the United States consumers 

becoming very litigious. And I think you’ll hear stories of, you 

know, someone finding a worm in their hamburger at 

McDonalds and winning these huge court cases with huge 

awards. So again the courts kind of . . . You know, the 

pendulum swings back and forth. We see the courts going way 

far the other side. And now the parliamentarians come along, 

and they’re going to create the laws that bring the balance to 

that. 

 

There was another interesting case in Australia that I’ll share 

with you, Mr. Speaker. This is 1936, and the case was Grant v. 

The Australian Knitting Mills. And what happened here in 

1936, a Dr. Grant from Australia got damages for dermatitis 

that he got from wearing woollen long johns which he didn’t 

wash when he bought them. And what happened is the 

manufacturer forgot and left some chemicals in his underpants, 

and he actually got damages for wearing his long johns without 

washing them. And we’ve all been told by our mother, Mr. 

Speaker, that when you buy new clothes, you should always 

wash them first. And that’s probably the damages that we 

would all get if we didn’t listen to what our mothers told us. 

 

The member across is asking what kind of damages. In this 

case, we know there is actually financial damages that he 

received. We’re not sure the extent of the physical damages that 

he may have suffered as a result of the woollen long johns and 

the chemicals that impacted him. 

 

At any rate, consumer law has really changed more since the 

Second World War. As I said, society became much more 

litigious and people started going to courts to enforce their 

rights, and of course the word would spread as well, as people 

knew if you went to court you might have a good chance. And I 

think that’s when you started hearing people say, I’ll sue. I’ll 

sue. And indeed I think that still continues to this day. 

 

So there we have the background of a little bit of where 

consumer law has developed from those early cases where you 

have the carbolic smoke ball and the bottle of ginger beer with 

the decomposed snail in it — all very interesting fact scenarios 

and certainly leading to the changes that we see today. 

Governments now are much, much, much more involved in 

consumer protection. 

 

The previous Act was 80 pages long, and this new Act that is a 

consolidation in many ways of the previous Act, is almost as 

long. It’s 50 pages. This minister has, what he’s done is 

removed a lot of the legislation and moved it into the regulatory 

authorities in the Act. So that’s some of the changes that we see 

in this bill. 

 

The minister indicated that one of the things they’ve got in the 

Act is a new part called designated activities and licensing. And 

by putting this new section in the Act, and I believe it’s part 

VII. . . Yes, part VII in the Act, designated activities and 

licensing. And what this does is allow to consolidate a number 

of other pieces of consumer legislation, if I understand it 

correctly. So there’s 12 other statutes in Saskatchewan that deal 

with consumer protection with different standards, enforcement 

mechanisms. And some of them are licensing Acts and contain 

licensing provisions. So what this bill attempts to do, if I 

understand it correctly, is to actually consolidate all the 

licensing authorities within this one bill, now The Consumer 

Protection and Business Practices Act. 

 

So in that section, in part VII we see a definition of section 55, 

designated businesses. And that’s where we have the authority 

now for the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make 

regulations to identify that this part, designated activities, “. . . 

applies to the whole or part of a trade, business, industry, 

employment or occupation designated in the regulations.” So 

it’s a very wide scope. I think that the Minister of Justice is 

attempting to incorporate all these other bills into this bill so 

that we don’t have to deal with all the other pieces of legislation 

as a consolidation. 

 

[20:15] 

 

The licensing again, there’s a whole division on licensing here 

and how these applicants will apply for licences, the type of 

financial security, how the licences will be issued, and how the 

licences are suspended when they expire, and a few 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

opportunities for individuals to be heard if they’re refused by 

the director to get their licence or have it renewed or what have 

you. 

 

Section 74 of this new Act has a long, long list again of the 

types of things the Lieutenant Governor in Council can make 

regulations for. And once again the concern that we have as 

legislators is when the government chooses to delegate 

decision-making authority to the regulatory sphere, we lose the 

opportunity as legislators to comment. And often it just shows 

up on our desks as a passed, done deal, and it’s an order in 

council and it’s already done. So there’s not as much scrutiny. 

There’s no ability to comment on those decisions when we take 

things out of legislation and put them into the regulations. 

 

In this case the list is long. They go all the way up to probably 

over 20 different types of things that can now be in the 

regulations, including things like defining consumer — which 

is a big definition, Mr. Speaker, and that might be something 

that we would prefer to see in the legislation itself. That’s the 

whole purpose of this protection. And so it’s not clear to me 

why the Lieutenant Governor in Council would want to be able 

to do that in the regulatory sphere when this is of the actual 

definition of the Act itself. So that’s a question we have. 

 

It goes on to the types of things that they can make regulations 

now or that the Lieutenant Governor in Council can make 

regulations: deal with types of financial security that the 

business must have, the duties and obligations of those people 

in that business or the class of business, prescribing the rules 

governing the carrying on the business, or the experience or 

educational requirements required, the type and condition of 

premises, the type and condition of equipment, the conduct of 

people, the conduct of persons engaged in carrying on a 

designated business. 

 

Now I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, what kind of conduct we are 

talking about here, and certainly we’ll have to watch for the 

regulations to see what kind of conduct is acceptable and what 

is not, given the new announcements we’ve heard today 

regarding activities related to liquor and gaming and that kind 

of conduct. We’re not sure if those will . . . The designated 

businesses that were identified there will have to wait for 

regulations to determine what kind of conduct they can actually 

carry on. Different classes of licences, how the licences are, the 

circumstances in when they are going to require to file for 

financial security. There’s a whole list of fees for licences, the 

length of terms of licence and so on. 

 

So you can see that the opportunity for Lieutenant Governor in 

Council here is immense and the discretion that’s being given 

in section 74 is wide. And I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 

the same for section 75. This is the section where the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council can make regulations about 

registration — so who has to register, what kind of classes of 

persons have to register before they get a licence, what kind of 

registration scheme there will be, and all kinds . . . And then of 

course there’s the usual dealing with any matter on which the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations under 

the previous section for the purposes of the registration scheme. 

 

So you can see this part VII actually is a fairly comprehensive 

part, and if I understand this bill correctly, what it does is it 

allows the part X to take effect. And in part X we see a number 

of consumer protection laws being repealed. We see The 

Auctioneers Act being repealed, The Charitable Fund-raising 

Businesses Act being repealed; The Collection Agents Act, The 

Consumer Protection Act, The Credit Reporting Act, The Direct 

Sellers Act, and The Motor Dealers Act are all repealed. So 

presumably all the requirements that were in those pieces of 

legislation are now being delegated down to the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council’s regulatory authority, and that the 

minister responsible for this bill will then be responsible for 

ensuring that the consumers are protected in a standard fashion. 

And I think that’s the attempt of the minister in this legislation. 

 

So in his opening comments he indicated that this new part of 

the Act I just referred to is attempting to consolidate other 

consumer protection legislation. So the goal is for consistency 

of treatment and coordination of administration. Now you can 

see what these different activities, where things are being 

repealed, there was a big difference between The Motor 

Dealers Act and The Auctioneers Act, for example. So those all 

had their own personal characteristics and flavour and their own 

history. So we’ll be needing to watch carefully if this bill 

passes, to ensure that when you try to put everything and treat 

everything the same, often cracks start forming in the 

standardization. So that’s something we’ll be looking to, the 

consumers and the protection of consumers, and the types of 

concerns and complaints that come out of this type of 

consolidation. 

 

The minister went on to also indicate that: “The Act will allow 

for individuality of rules governing the businesses depending 

on the particular needs of the industry being licensed.” So I 

wasn’t able to identify exactly where that is in the Act, but I 

guess it will show through the regulatory schemes that are 

passed once those regulations come forward. Again, we haven’t 

had a chance to look at those. 

 

He also talks about consumer contracts. And typically, 

apparently, in The Consumer Protection Act there’s five types 

of consumer contracts that . . . There was a long section in the 

previous Act dealing with the regulation of those contracts. The 

five types of contracts he refers to are Internet sales, future 

performance, personal development services, travel club, and 

remotely formed contracts. 

 

And those are interesting. I just couldn’t help but wonder why 

those five types of consumer contracts were singled out. But 

when I looked at the previous Act, I could see that there was 

long, long sections on those types of activities in the previous 

Act. So starting at section 75 in the previous Act . . . And these 

weren’t passed all that long ago, Mr. Speaker. In fact, these 

changes appear to be . . . came to the Act in 2006 where there 

was a whole new section added on these five types of consumer 

contracts. 

 

And so we’re not sure exactly why the minister felt that they 

needed to remove them from the Act and delegate them down 

to regulation, but I guess the goal of the minister is to ensure 

that this new Act would provide a simple mechanism to allow 

the government to regulate other types of contracts. He 

indicated at this point that consultations haven’t been 

undertaken yet, and how this is going to affect industry groups 

and consumers and business groups, legal profession and the 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

public. So again it’s difficult to debate a bill in the absence of 

that type of consultation, but I guess we will have to wait until 

the bill is passed and see what happens when the regulations are 

brought in. 

 

There is one other area in the bill that the minister indicated is a 

very small change but important change to the bill, and it’s in 

relation to some cases that have come from the Supreme Court 

of Canada recently. And he said what they’re attempting to do 

is “add clarification to the section of the Act that prevents 

contracting out of the protections of the Act.” I wasn’t able to 

locate that particular section. I’ve been through the bill and I’m 

missing it somehow, so I’m going to ask the minister to maybe 

provide some direction on exactly what section that is intended 

to be in, and once he’s done so perhaps some of my other 

colleagues will be able to comment on that, because we’re not 

sure where that change is. 

 

Now he says that the “provision has been enhanced to ensure 

that standard form contracts cannot tie consumers into 

arbitration clauses or prohibit them from participating in class 

actions.” So we’re hoping that that’s indeed the case and we 

certainly do not want to prevent people from participating in 

class actions because that’s an important mechanism these days, 

again a new and developing area of law. The class actions in 

this day and age when there’s mass production and mass 

purchasing, they seem to be an effective tool to help ensure that 

the sellers are behaving appropriately, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we will look more closely at that section and I look forward 

to some further clarification from the minister in terms of where 

that section is in the Act and what it’s intending to do. So we 

want to make sure that the consumers are being protected here, 

and it’s not entirely clear at this point whether that’s been 

achieved by the proposed changes in this bill. 

 

There’s another small change allowing courts to have 

jurisdiction, which is entirely appropriate, and then the 

administration provisions. There’s some . . . The enforcement 

administration provisions have been moved now to a part that 

applies to the whole Act and if I think I’ve . . . Not sure exactly 

where those are in the new bill because . . . I think it’s the 

general matters and then offences and penalties. So it’s near the 

end in Part IX of the Act. And what his indication there is that 

this will make it easier for consumer protection division of the 

new financial and consumer affairs authority to do its job. So 

presumably those are the types of provisions that will make the 

new authority be more successful. 

 

And these are the types of things I think, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to want to have more questions for in committee in 

particular, because these are fairly detailed questions and they 

are ones that are very technical in nature. So the minister’s staff 

will be available at that time to help us sort through this and 

ensure that it is achieving indeed what the minister is hoping 

that this bill will achieve. 

 

So I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, that will be probably the 

extent of my comments on this bill and at this point I would 

like to adjourn debate on Bill 55, An Act respecting Consumer 

Protection and Business Practices, to repeal certain Acts and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 55, The Consumer Protection and Business 

Practices Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 56 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 56 — The Court 

of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi 

de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

thanks to the fans over yonder, such as they are. It wasn’t quite 

the table banging that ended the last speech, Mr. Speaker, but 

we’ll see what we can do on Bill No. 56, An Act to amend The 

Court of Appeal Act, 2000. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of as befits a piece of legislation 

dealing with the very fundamental legal institutions of this 

province, happy to see that this particular piece of legislation is 

brought forward, both in an English and a French rendition, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s again, as you would hope with the 

amendments being brought forward around Court of Appeal 

legislation, so it should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But just going through the notes for the piece of legislation and 

the particular items in the legislation itself, the bill sets out to 

do a number of things. Of course, Mr. Speaker, first of which, 

well there’s the new section 5.1 being brought in, added after 

section 5. And under judgment by a former judge, you’ve got: 

 

5.l(1) A judge who resigns his or her office or is appointed 

to another court or otherwise ceases to hold office may, 

within six months after the resignation, appointment or 

date that he or she otherwise ceases to hold office, give a 

decision in an appeal or matter he or she heard while 

holding office, and the decision is effective as though he 

or she still held office. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what would seem to be a 

fairly reasonable approach to the fact that on the bench, as with 

many other sectors of this economy and in society, we’ve got 

people approaching the age of retirement where they want to 

move on to a different stage of their lives, but again, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of how to best sequence that with the 

retirement and the matters outstanding before the court. So that 

one would seem to make fair sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:30] 

 

5.1(2) A judge who is appointed to another court may 

continue with the hearing of an appeal or matter of which 

he or she was seized, and the jurisdiction to hear the 

appeal or matter and give a decision is effective as though 

he or she still held office”. 

 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

Again dealing with the fact that you’ve got different judges 

being seconded off to other courts and again not interrupting 

the due process under proceedings as relates to proceedings 

currently under way. 

 

Moving on to section 15 being amended to the following, 

wherein: 

 

Subsection 15(3) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

The new (3), Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

“(3) Subsection (4) applies in the following 

circumstances: 

 

(a) an appeal or matter has been heard and is standing 

for judgment; and 

 

(b) one or more of the judges who heard the appeal or 

matter: 

 

(i) dies before the decision is given. 

 

(ii) is, because of illness or for any other reason, 

unable to participate in giving the decision; or 

 

(iii) resigns his or her office and is appointed to 

another court, or otherwise ceases to hold office and 

does not participate in giving the decision as allowed 

by section 5.1. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of ensuring the wheels of justice 

continue to roll despite these sort of circumstances that may 

arise due to death or illness or resignation or appointment to 

another court. This as well seemed to be a fairly common sense 

proposal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s also a new sub (4) under subsection 15(3). So the new 

subsection 15(4) is: 

 

“(4) In the circumstances mentioned in subsection (3), 

notwithstanding subsection (1) but subject to subsection 

16(1), the remaining judges may give the decision, and the 

decision is deemed to be the decision of the court”. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that the flow of these things is 

properly identified and rooted in the law and governing the 

Court of Appeal. 

 

Moving on through the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, section 

(16) is amended to the following: 

 

Subsection 16(1) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(1) The court shall rehear an appeal or matter that has been 

heard and is standing for judgment if a majority of the judges 

who heard the appeal or matter: 

 

(a) die before the decision is given; 

 

(b) are, because of illness or for any other reason, 

unable to participate in giving the decision; or 

 

(c) resign their office or are appointed to another court 

or otherwise cease to hold office and do not participate 

in giving the decision as allowed by section 5.1”. 

 

So in that case, Mr. Speaker, again it goes to decisions being 

heard by the whole Court of Appeal and those judges on the 

bench, and again extending that principle that is enshrined 

earlier in the legislation, in the amended legislation, so that 

again you’ve got an orderly proceeding of the matters before 

the court, and proceedings and punitive decisions not being put 

at risk for matters such as death, illness, or appointment to other 

benches, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I guess one of the things that was interesting following the 

minister’s second reading speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

minister had made reference to the allowances in most other 

provinces, referencing that the time period varies from 90 days 

to six months. To quote, “The six-month period contained in 

these amendments is consistent with British Columbia, Alberta, 

New Brunswick, and Newfoundland and Labrador.” Again 

good to see these things brought in line with the best practice 

with other jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again if 

we’re going to have that justice not just being done but being 

seen to be done, it’s pretty important to pay attention to what is 

best practice in other jurisdictions. 

 

I guess some things I’d like to add alongside by way of 

observation on the importance of a bill like this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in terms of ensuring that . . . I think we’ve discussed a 

number of times in this Assembly and in other forums, Mr. 

Speaker, the overcrowding that is taking place in our 

corrections system and the way that that negatively impacts the 

way that a correctional system is supposed to work in terms of 

not just being punishment on the one side for misdoings and 

crimes, Mr. Speaker, and being found guilty in a court of law, 

but also the possibility of rehabilitation. Or you know, we have 

a correctional system, Mr. Speaker. It takes its name from the 

idea of corrections — correction of a wrong path, correction of 

wrong choices, and the idea that you can get people on a better 

footing in their lives and equipped to make better decisions in 

their lives. 

 

And if your criminal justice system is going to be operating 

appropriately, Mr. Speaker, you need not just a 

well-functioning corrections system in terms of the 

incarceration of individuals and, you know, the importance of 

that. You need a good police force, Mr. Speaker. You need 

good law. But you also need a good legal system. You need a 

good system in the courts, and you need a system that ensures 

that due process is being fostered and enabled by the resources 

available by ensuring that you’ve not got undue holdup in terms 

of the proceedings and that’s, you’ve not got people spending 

undue amounts of time on remand because of disorganization 

on the part of the courts. And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

seeing a piece of legislation like this coming forward, in terms 

of trying to make their allowances to ensure that orderly and 

consistent progress that needs to be there, you’re going to have 

a justice system worth its name, Mr. Speaker. Something like 

this is very important. 

 

And certainly we’ve seen in other jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

Speaker, where the prosecution side of things or the court side 

of the equation is so screwed up that you have people spending 

undue amounts of time on remand and meeting with early 

release dates. And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just a 

miscarriage of justice, but it’s almost an anathema to justice, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, where, you know, we can’t get the court 

system organized. So you’ve got someone who’s been charged 

and is awaiting trial, can’t get to that trial, and then, you know, 

the people that are the, possibility the victims in this 

circumstance, the wrong that has been done, the individuals 

themselves not being held to account for justice denied, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

All of those things are a consequence of a court system that is 

not functioning properly. And we don’t need to look too far in 

the West, Mr. Speaker, to see other jurisdictions where that 

kind of tragic circumstance is being carried out. And again I 

don’t think tragic is too heavy a word to use, Mr. Speaker, 

because, you know, imagine for yourself if that was your 

circumstance, there’d been a crime done to you or your family 

and because the court proceedings couldn’t get it straightened 

out, couldn’t be organized efficiently and effectively, that 

eventually the case falls apart and the person, the person goes 

free without facing a day in court. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not alarmist. It’s something that 

has happened through other jurisdictions in Canada right now. 

And again if you’re not taking the kind of precautions that I 

believe this piece of legislation is partly, at least partially 

informed by, you’re not going to have an effective, efficient 

functioning court. And if you don’t have an effective, efficient 

functioning court system in your justice system, then other 

things suffer as a consequence. 

 

So there are other questions on different aspects of that that I’ve 

touched upon tonight, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of the items in 

the legislation itself and again, in terms of that broader 

observation that I’d make around comparison to the experience 

in other jurisdictions and something that we definitely do not 

want to see in the province of Saskatchewan in terms of justice 

being denied as a function of an inefficient, ineffective, poorly 

organized court system, under-resourced court system. Those 

are things we do not want to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I know that there’s a greater job of consultation to be 

undertaken on this piece of legislation. I know that other of my 

colleagues are interested in participating in the debate on this 

bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with that in mind I would move 

to adjourn debate on Bill No. 56, The Court of Appeal 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 56, The 

Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 57 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 57 — The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s awfully 

special to receive that sort of greeting when I take the floor of 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. The side opposite’s in good 

humour tonight. That’s good. Hopefully they’ll be open to 

some reasonable amendments as well, Mr. Speaker, as we 

speak constructively about the legislation before us here this 

evening. 

 

Tonight it’s my pleasure to weigh in to discussion as it relates 

to Bill No. 57, The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 

2012. I understand this is a fairly broad bill with significant 

implications. I’ve read through the minister’s comments. I’ve 

read the suggested aims of this legislation and the intended 

consequences that the minister’s put forward. Some of the 

changes certainly seem to be reasonable in nature. It’s been 

reflected by the minister that this has been accomplished 

through very broad consultation. 

 

Part of our work, at this point in time as the official opposition, 

is in fact to make sure that that broad consultation has occurred 

and to listen to the stakeholders to ensure in fact that this Act, 

these changes in fact are making the improvements that are 

required and that there’s not a whole host of unintended 

consequences being brought forward by a government that has 

in many cases pushed aside consultation and has pushed ahead 

with bringing forward legislation that has consequences that 

aren’t in the best interests of Saskatchewan people and that 

have impacts for many stakeholders for whom should have 

been consulted. But in this Act here, as it relates to The 

Condominium Property Act, there’s like I say a fair body of 

work on this front by way of consultation that we’ve done to 

date as well. And certainly it is reasonable to make sure that 

we’re providing improvements for those living in 

condominiums, for those that are purchasing condominiums, 

and for those selling condominiums. 

 

Recognizing that there’s some — about four — different areas 

of specific change in this piece of legislation, I’ll speak to each 

of those here tonight and of course bringing to the attention that 

we’ll be working with stakeholders all across this province in 

inviting participation as it relates to this piece of legislation. 

And quite frankly some of the pieces that are touched do impact 

many people here in Regina, in Saskatoon, and in small 

communities, small communities and large communities all 

across this province 

 

The first piece of legislation or the first aspect of this legislation 

revolves around consumer protection. And this adds several 

new protections for purchasers of new condominium units 

converted from apartments. It’s an interesting piece because 

certainly there are many apartments that are converted to 

condominiums over the past so many years in this province, and 

it has created a hardship to the supply of housing in this 

province. And it seems in some ways that government’s acting, 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

and I see some recognition that they now need to put some 

provisions in place to better regulate when conversions can 

occur and if they can occur. 

 

[20:45] 

 

My thought would be that this comes awfully late, after we’ve 

been in a very tight supply of housing, and many of those rental 

units that were on the market have in fact been converted, sold 

as units, and no longer available to provide the buffer within the 

rental market that we require. But because of the massive 

conversion of condos, we do have many individuals who have 

purchased those condos, and certainly they do have rights as 

well. And certainly we should make sure that we’re fair in our 

laws that govern their property and that govern their 

co-existence with their fellow condo owners, and so I’m 

looking here specifically. I think there’s some new protections 

that I would welcome around providing some protections for 

those that are moving into buildings that have shortfalls or 

inadequacies that weren’t addressed upfront by the developer. 

 

And I understand and I have heard personally from individuals 

who have moved into these sorts of units and then recognize 

that there’s significant deficits that the building has from a 

common perspective, from a structural perspective. And these 

can be very significant costs that are then being incurred by, in 

many cases, new homeowners, new young families, those on 

fixed incomes, and typically being resolved by way of very 

large levies placed upon the owner of that property. 

 

When many of these individuals that I’ve spoken with that have 

come across this challenge, many of them aren’t in a position 

simply to access further financing by way of a credit line or 

expand their debt level. In many cases, a lot of the new young 

families that are purchasing these dwellings have in many ways 

maxed out their borrowing capacity, and so when they’ve 

purchased a unit, they certainly deserve the certainty and peace 

of mind that what they’re moving into will serve them well into 

the future and that what they’re buying is what’s been sold. 

And I know on many, many fronts that just simply hasn’t been 

the case and that there’s many properties that have significant 

deficits, structural repairs that are required that have been 

masked in some cases by a developer and leaves a hardship on 

the owner. 

 

And if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, and picture, you know, a 

young family coming into a home that’s worked hard to save 

that money for that down payment in a rental market that’s 

really, really difficult, worked hard to save those dollars, finally 

moved into that new condominium that they might be speaking 

about here, and then all of a sudden realizes that they were sold 

a bill of goods by way of the structural integrity of that unit. 

And the next thing they know, they’re dealing with a roof or 

boilers or other aspects of a building for which can be 

exorbitant costs. And spread across the units that are within the 

building, that can be a significant levy. And for many of these 

families quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that have been stretched 

just to enter into that sort of housing and aren’t in a position to 

start putting costs into something that they should have had 

provided to them as a certainty. 

 

So I recognize that there’s, by way of the minister’s comment 

here, that “This Act is being amended to require a declaration 

from the developer describing the improvements to the 

common property that are promised as part of the conversion.” 

As well, “The completion of these improvements is secured by 

a bond or a letter of credit.” 

 

So this is an example of where you come in, and you look at the 

brochure and it tells you, this is what you’re going to be 

moving into. This is what we’ve committed to. And then you 

have all these young families or maybe seniors on fixed 

incomes moving in, Mr. Speaker, and then those improvements 

simply never coming along and the developer reneging on their 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker. And it might be as simple as some 

of the aesthetics to the building, but it might also be some 

structural aspects. And quite frankly if that’s been a 

commitment of the developer, it’s one that needs to be fulfilled, 

and certainly I support legislation that provides that to be 

achieved. 

 

The idea of having a bond — so that’s securing this by a bond 

and a letter of credit — seems to be a reasonable approach to 

making sure that those provisions are in place and that we 

provide some protection to individuals who, as I say, are 

reading the brochure and maybe read the MLS [Multiple 

Listing Service] listing and then move into a place, and simply 

the developer doesn’t fulfill what’s been promised to the 

individual, by way of a contract as well, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s where we need to recognize that these are contracts. 

These are contractual commitments, and they’re now 

requirements I would hope by way of strengthening the Act and 

strengthening legislation. And this is a requirement that’s going 

to need to be in place now, is my understanding, before units 

are going to be sold. That’s important. 

 

And further to that, a reserve study needs to be in place to a 

building. And this is actually something very important which 

provides a real sense of transparency to a potential purchaser or 

to a new homeowner, to a new condo owner, to understand the 

liabilities or lifespan of all the different structures and aspects 

of that building, whether it be the windows or the roof or the 

furnace or the electrical system, the flooring — all the aspects 

that are shared within a condominium which in some cases can 

be overlooked by a purchaser or dismissed by a developer. It is 

important to understand, by way of a reserve study, when these 

different aspects of the building are going to need to be 

replaced or maintained or improved and as well some allocation 

of what sort of dollars are going to be required to do that, and 

then of course a statement by way of the estoppel that would 

then state back to the owner by way of the board what sort of 

dollars have already been in place or what sort of regime is in 

place by way of setting aside dollars for a reserve fund. 

 

So the idea of making sure a reserve fund or a reserve study is 

in place is very important. It provides a more fulsome picture of 

what a new homeowner, a new condo owner is getting into, 

understanding that the integrity of the windows or the structural 

integrity of the building or the boiler itself . . . and also 

understanding then its projected lifespan and the costs which 

then allows that owner to, or potential purchaser, to then look at 

the reserve fund plan and study to see if the dollars in fact are 

being collected to take care of that infrastructure to make those 

improvements that are going to be required. And if not, Mr. 

Speaker, it allows them the understanding that they are either 

going to be facing a building that’s in a deficit position from an 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

infrastructure perspective and is going to require at some point 

significant levy upon its owners . . . And this can be a challenge 

because if owners don’t have the dollars when you come to a 

levy, all of a sudden you’re dealing with very, very difficult 

matters to resolve with these sorts of common properties. 

 

I recognize that by way of the Act that these improvements 

have received support, have been built out of consultation with 

the condominium sector, with stakeholders. And this is 

something we’ll continue to review and make sure that that’s 

the case and making sure that these are as strong as they can be 

to make sure the protections of young families and seniors, 

condo owners, are being protected. 

 

I recognize as well that there can be a challenge between 

owners within a common environment that a condominium 

presents, a whole host of different types of challenges that can 

present themselves. And I understand that this legislation aims 

to improve dispute resolution mechanisms available to condo 

owners and to condo boards. And I understand the minister has 

suggested that his office regularly hears from condo owners 

who feel that they’ve been treated unfairly by their neighbours 

or by the condo board, and certainly I’m sure that he does. 

 

I can say that I’ve come across a couple circumstances of this 

nature and, you know, I would hope . . . And this is through our 

consultation that we’ll gain a broader understanding of this. But 

whether or not, it would be my hope that this in fact does 

achieve a fair dispute mechanism process, a dispute resolution 

process for condo owners and a board because it is an important 

valve. And those can be stressed and strained environments. 

And they have complications that can be financial in nature, but 

they can also be social in nature. And in many ways, when 

you’re blending relationships, stress, strain, financial, social 

harmony, these certainly impact one’s piece of mind. And 

putting forward reasonable provisions to provide an opportunity 

for condo owners and neighbours and condo boards to resolve 

these matters is something that I see as important. It’s going to 

be important for us to make sure that the tools this 

government’s brought to bear are the most effective tools and 

reflective of what’s been shared with them through 

consultation. 

 

Another aspect that strengthens some of the dispute resolution 

mechanisms would be access to courts, and this is certainly an 

important tool to condo owners. And this is available to an 

individual, board, corporation, developer, or an owner, if 

someone is acting in an oppressive or an unfair manner and if it 

can’t be resolved within a fair way within the condo board itself 

or from a local perspective. And this I understand would take 

Saskatchewan in line with the rest of Canada for the most part 

and would place us in the same place as other Canadian 

jurisdictions, which certainly seems a reasonable place to 

pursue, and it would certainly seem reasonable that individuals, 

developers, owners, condo boards should have access to the 

courts to resolve matters that can’t be resolved otherwise. 

 

There’s other strengthening of some of the supports for those in 

condominiums by way of making sure that when dispute arises 

between the owners and a board as it relates to the performance 

of duties of the corporation and the board . . . And this is 

important for owners because in many cases they have a 

relationship with their condo board that establishes what 

common services will be provided, what level of maintenance, 

what level of care. And if the board is reneging on its 

responsibility, not providing its contractual responsibility as 

directed by the condo board and budget, then this provides 

some measures in dispute resolution for the type of conflict that 

can arise out of these circumstances. And this might be 

maintenance of common, shared hall space, or in some places 

in condominiums there might be a shared rec room of some 

sort, or there might be entries that are of shared interest and of 

common interest. 

 

So all these different services and products that are of a shared 

nature would fall into this category. And again, certainly 

supportive of making sure that we’re allowing these sorts of 

conflicts to be resolved in a fair way and as well making sure 

that there’s mechanisms to do so that are effective. 

 

Moving along and looking at just some of the other changes 

that have been put forward, there’s also changes here that 

would allow for compensation to an owner in the circumstance 

that the condo corporation didn’t fulfill its duties in a way that 

then caused damage to a unit. And I’m trying to think a little bit 

of the types of scenarios that that might be. Maybe that would 

be maintenance that might have to occur for maybe a fire 

protection system, Mr. Speaker. And I suspect that if there was 

a schedule of maintenance that was required to be delivered by 

the condo corporation to the fire maintenance system in a 

building, and that was failed to be fulfilled by the corporation 

and damage then was caused to an individual unit, then I 

believe it’s certainly fair to make sure there’s a mechanism that 

allows the owner to be compensated for the damage that’s been 

caused by someone else’s or the condo corporation’s 

negligence. 

 

And again this highlights the very nature of condominium 

living and the common space, the common interest. And of 

course I’m sure there can be great harmony in many 

circumstances, but I’m sure there can also be conflict in these 

sorts of circumstances. And there’s a shared interest as well by 

way of a financial interest in these buildings and a level of 

maintenance, and so certainly it’s understandable where 

conflict could sometimes occur. 

 

[21:00] 

 

A third area that’s addressed in this bill and this legislation is 

around condominium conversions, and it’s putting forward a 

regulation-making authority as it relates to condo conversions. 

And I would argue that this is a little late — more than a little 

late, Mr. Speaker — in bringing around some sorts of controls 

and protections of the rental supply that we have in the province 

in that in these very cases here, we’ve seen a lot of our rental 

stock over the past decade in fact be converted, be sold as 

condominiums. And it’s placed a lot of pressure on the 

affordability of our rental market, on the supply directly. And 

we had an opportunity to be more strident as a government here 

in this province, and that simply hasn’t been the case by the 

current government. At a time where we’ve seen this significant 

transformation of what were rental units turned into condo 

units, flipped, Mr. Speaker, it’s created a very tight supply on 

housing. 

 

And in a growing population, when you have a growing 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

population within the province, something we should be proud 

of, we should be equally proud of our ability to respond to it 

and to meet the needs of families and seniors and people all 

across the province. And housing is such a critical aspect, and 

without a doubt this is an area where this government truly has 

failed the people of this province, has failed to make the 

investments that are required to make sure that they’re 

balancing off the housing supply and has failed to make those 

sorts of protections even where it doesn’t cost government any 

direct dollars, which would be an example of providing more 

robust, stronger laws and regulations around condo conversions 

and protecting the rental stock that exists. 

 

So I find this, you know, I don’t quite have all the information 

as it relates to this new regulation-making authority to prescribe 

a rental vacancy rate. I understand that there’s some reference 

that it will be linked to the surveys conducted by Canada 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation on a quarterly basis. But 

beyond that, we don’t have a whole lot of information or how 

this will work. 

 

What it does have is some broader statements around that it’s 

aimed to provide additional criteria that could be added to the 

Act. And the flexibility that the new regulation-making 

authority will provide when concerns arise in the future have 

been welcomed, I understand, by some of the city 

administrators, as suggested by this piece of legislation. But I 

would certainly defer any statements that would summarize a 

position on this specific aspect until I’m able to engage some of 

those stakeholders and ascertain a broader understanding of 

what exactly is being projected or proposed by the minister. 

 

But certainly providing protection of, better protection of 

ensuring that we protect our rental supply and don’t have it 

easily converted and flipped to condominiums that are sold is 

something that’s important, particularly . . . Well it should have 

happened a long time ago, but now this government is going at 

addressing some of the affordability pressures by building 

incentives to build out new rental units. But we want to make 

sure that those rental units that are being built out with some 

public dollar incentive by way of this government in fact will 

remain part of the rental supply and not simply built for 10 

years for example, Mr. Speaker, and then sold and flipped as a 

condo, and at that point a loss for the rental supply. Because 

these are public dollars, public dollars that have been required 

in the building of these new projects that this government 

speaks of. 

 

When I look at a few other areas here, we look at . . . There’s 

some provisions around insurance. They seem to be reasonable 

in nature. They speak to ensuring that bare land is also insured. 

It speaks as well to make sure that corporations are required to 

carry directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, something that 

I understand has been important because in many condo boards, 

it’s been shared with the minister that individuals have been 

reluctant to let their name stand for board positions because of a 

concern around subsequent liability that’s then placed onto 

them by way of responsibilities of being on the condo board 

itself, assuming liabilities for the decisions of the board. And I 

understand that the provisions put forth by way of insurance in 

fact should alleviate these concerns and if they do, I think that 

sounds reasonable, but again I think this is something that we 

need to go out and do some broader consultation on. 

I recognize as well there’s some changes that will require 

standard unit descriptions to be built out for what is a standard 

unit and then what is separate from that, which would then be 

covered by the owner by way of improvements to that unit. And 

certainly that seems that that should be a clearer way of, a better 

understanding of what’s insurable by the owner, what’s 

insurable by the condo, condominium board. 

 

And just pointing out, I guess, maybe just a couple of other 

aspects that have been highlighted in this bill that there needs to 

be, there needs to be the authority of granted or the approval of 

all owners before any common property or any service units are 

sold or divested or titles are changed. And that makes a lot of 

sense, Mr. Speaker, because if you’re thinking about that, these 

are common spaces that when an owner has entered into 

contract by purchase of a property, they’ve had the full 

understanding that that’s their common space, their common 

share of the building. And anything that would subsequently 

change that should require approval of all owners, and certainly 

seems to be something that would provide some protection and 

some peace of mind for condo owners. 

 

And then there’s some strengthening, it suggests, of making 

sure that bylaws can be enforced. And that’s an area that I want 

to review in a broader context with stakeholders to make sure 

that the mechanisms that are suggested to enforce bylaws are 

reasonable and don’t infringe on the rights of owners and that 

do reflect the consultation that we’ll be having with a broad 

sector of those that are impacted throughout the condominium 

sector and residents and developers and owners, lawyers, right 

across the piece, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think at this point in time what I would say is that we’re 

going to require further information, both from the minister and 

of government, by way of what these changes mean, what the 

specifics are to some of the plans. We’re going to be doing 

thoughtful consultation with Saskatchewan people in all 

communities with respect to this piece of legislation. I would 

argue that it’s late in its arrival if its intent was to address condo 

conversions because that’s been, in many ways that’s been a 

very active market over the past few years. And we’ve had the 

loss of many, many rental units in this province that are now 

owned as condominiums. That being said, we certainly do 

support strengthening and improving the rights and protections 

for those owning condominiums in this province. 

 

But you know, as well as we’re looking at this, I wonder just 

how this connects as far as the sale of a rental unit as a 

condominium, how this connects to some of the incentives that 

the government’s put forward to build out rental units right 

now. Because what I would hate to see is for those rental units 

to come online and serve as rental units for a short number of 

years, only to be flipped by the developer and sold and profited 

once again, and done so on the backs of the public dime, Mr. 

Speaker. I really do believe that if government and the public is 

placing dollars into incenting and ensuring the development of 

rental units, that we need some level of certainty and protection 

to ensure that those rental units will service well beyond a short 

few years, but for the lifespan of the building, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that gets us into the whole broader discussion around 

housing and with a government that really has failed 

Saskatchewan people to ensure proper housing balance in this 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

province, has really failed to make sure that affordability and 

accessibility is something that many can access. And we’ve 

seen significant declines. And it’s too bad that we didn’t see 

some of the provisions brought in place some time ago by way 

of some of the protections that renters deserve, or protections to 

make sure that rent supply is protected. And then certainly 

something that was required which was a subsequent 

investment back into making sure that we have true affordable 

and social housing in this province, when we have a 

government that truly does little more than tinker around with 

market affordability, is incenting the development of buildings 

that are often unaffordable by far too many in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And if this government truly does want to do something 

meaningful on the housing front, they have to be more 

innovative. They have to be more bold. They have to look for 

other solutions that will allow them to address true affordable 

and social housing, Mr. Speaker. And certainly roles of 

co-operatives and all sorts of mechanisms can be very 

important to this. But there’s an active role that’s required on 

behalf of government to do just that. 

 

The bill also clarifies how tax assessments and enforcement 

proceedings apply to parking units. All condominium units and 

residential purposes for parking is something that’s important to 

Saskatchewan people and condo owners, and certainly that’s 

something that we’ll be looking to make sure is appropriate. So 

at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate for Bill 

No. 57, The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012. It’s 

been my pleasure to weigh in on discussion here this evening. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 57, The Condominium 

Property Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 58 — The 

Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’m glad to rise in debate tonight on Bill No. 58, The Workers’ 

Compensation Act. Now I know that others having participated 

in this debate have made the same observation that I’m about to 

make, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of the work you do as a 

Member of the Legislative Assembly, to be quite honest, some 

of the toughest work, some of the toughest casework that will 

walk through the doors in your constituency office, come in 

over the phone or by letter, quite honestly, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

often related to workers’ compensation and the functioning of 

the board and the challenge that some folks have had working 

their way through the process with the board in terms of making 

sure that injuries sustained on the job site, that they in turn are 

able to access the insurance that they have been paying 

premiums for under workers’ compensation. 

 

And you know, right from, even before I became a Member of 

the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I can remember in, 

certainly in the by-election, in the nomination that led up to 

that, way back in the summer and fall of 2000, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, talking to individuals that had some pretty, pretty 

horrendous circumstances that they’re dealing with. And you 

know, there’s not more than a few months would go by to this 

day, Mr. Speaker, where some of the most complex, 

demanding, often heart-rending casework that we deal with in 

the constituency office that is often very much related to 

workers’ compensation and whether or not people feel they are 

getting a fair shake, and in some cases whether or not they are 

getting a fair shake from the Compensation Board, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  

 

And I know you yourself, as a past Labour critic for the then 

official opposition and somebody that does a fair amount of 

work in the constituency, I don’t want to make any 

suppositions, but I’m sure yourself and other members in this 

Assembly can relate in terms of again oftentimes the most 

difficult casework we face as MLAs, and some of it that is 

protracted and has gone over years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

often related to workers’ compensation. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Now I know that certainly there have been changes made over 

the years, sometimes piecemeal, sometimes more sort of 

thorough-going in nature. And certainly not long after I’d 

become a Member of the Legislative Assembly in February of 

2001, there was a fairly significant set of reforms brought out 

and again trying to make sure that not only was the system 

seeking to act fairly on behalf of people but being seen to act 

fairly. But I know that in terms of even the evolution that has 

taken place in the earlier part of the last decade up to this day, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there would still be those that would say 

that in terms of the kind of oversight available to perform an 

ombudsman-type function, to advocate, you know, there have 

been some good advances made. Don’t get me wrong, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But in terms of, you know, where do people go for appeal if 

they disagree with the decision of Workers’ Comp? How do 

you ensure that you’ve got somebody helping to navigate the 

system? And how do you really ensure that the medical 

professional advice that is being preferred is not just being 

recognized but is recognized as independent and directly related 

to the best medical health advice possible? Again, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of being a compensation system or insurance system, 

there is oftentimes a fair amount of contention in terms of 

people don’t always line up in terms of agreeing, in terms of the 

adjuster said this, and I’ll have extra insurance. Oftentimes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that in any kind of insurance system, that can 

be a difficult line to mediate. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not to say that time has 

stood still, that there haven’t been reforms made, but to this 

day, there are different problems that kick up. And the different 

sort of checks and balances in the system are much appreciated, 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly. But I would venture to guess or 

venture an observation that in terms of incidence of cases 

related to WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] and the 

complexity of them, I think is still very much as complex as it 

ever was. But in terms of the frequency of them, Mr. Speaker, I 

think they diminished over the years, at least in my 

constituency office. 

 

And again, I think that is hopefully a comment to a more 

responsive system, a more . . . again, not just a system that is 

practising in a fair and impartial way, but is seen and accepted 

to be practising in that way. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again 

what comes forward today is the latest raft of changes to be 

made to Workers’ Compensation Board’s legislation. And I 

know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that we in the 

official opposition are very interested in gaining a very precise 

understanding of is the way that this piece of legislation is 

informed by the committee of review process. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, there have been some positive changes 

made, certainly to the system over the years. And I think one of 

the very encouraging changes that have been made to the 

system over the year is the introduction of the committee of 

review process. And again, that’s to take employee 

representatives, employer representatives working together to 

give that a very thorough going and clear-eyed look at the 

system — the legislation, how it’s functioning, how it is 

working, and how it is not working, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly the committee of review came forward last fall in 

2011. And one of the things that is remarkable about the report 

— again the committee of review coming forward over the 

years, Mr. Deputy Speaker — there was in the final report, 

there were 57 recommendations in the Act, or in the committee 

of review report, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And one of the things 

that we want to gain a very clear picture of, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is whether or not these recommendations — all but 

two of them on which they couldn’t reach consensus on, one 

concerning maximum wage and recommendation 51 

concerning incentives — all but two of the 57 recommendations 

achieved consensus and support on the part of the members of 

the committee of review. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, individuals convened from the employee 

side, from the employer side, right back to the initial sort of 

iteration of this legislation, the initial committee of review 

dating back to July 1st, 1945, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So again, a 

pretty important institution in terms of how Workers’ Comp is 

reviewed over the years, but again something that we want to 

see just how the legislation lines up alongside those 

recommendations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and something that we 

will be doing greater consultation on and analysis thereof. 

 

One of the things that is of particular note, in terms of the 

different cases that I’ve had the experience of working on over 

the years, is the way that information is either withheld or has 

an opportunity to go to the individuals when they are making 

their claims. And I can think of two individuals in particular, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, who having finally gotten their files from 

Workers’ Comp after significant efforts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

you know, is the kind of pride involved in the thing and the 

kind of relief at finally having wrested this information from 

the government. You know, it’s pretty significant in terms of 

the joy that they had. 

 

But one thing that is interesting, Mr. Speaker, is in terms of 

getting that information on your file from Workers’ Comp and 

getting all the things that you should be entitled to from the 

government and from the board, it’d be interesting to know 

what the Information and Privacy Commissioner would have to 

say about this latest effort of the government and what is the 

immediate sort of history on this file, and whether or not people 

are having a problem in terms of accessing their files, going to 

the Privacy Commissioner saying, can you help me out in this 

regard, and then how that has been responded to immediately 

by Workers’ Compensation and then the government more 

broadly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well we have the privilege of having received a letter from the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner. It’s dated November 

19th, 2012, Mr. Speaker, so relatively recent in authorship. And 

it’s addressed to the Minister of Workers’ Compensation Board 

and was copied to our opposition labour critic and to our 

Deputy Leader. And I’d like to quote at length from that letter, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I think the record would benefit 

from its airing. And again, it for me has resonance with the 

experience of people who come to the constituency office and 

the kind of troubles they’ve had getting information out of 

WCB. The letter states as follows: 

 

I note that Bill 58, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

is currently before the Legislative Assembly. I further note 

your observation that, “This bill represents a positive step 

forward for workers’ compensation in Saskatchewan.” I 

respectfully suggest that in achieving this laudable 

objective, there is an issue that warrants the focussed 

attention of the Legislative Assembly and yet which is not 

apparently addressed in Bill No. 58. 

 

Carrying on, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

I wish to remind you of long standing concerns that my 

office has raised over for a number of years over the 

interpretation of the Workers’ Compensation Board of The 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act and 

the current workers’ compensation Act. Most recently I 

recounted the issue and our concerns over the prejudice to 

the Saskatchewan injured workers in my annual report of 

2011/12, pages 24 to 28, in my review report F-2012-005, 

F-2012-002, and investigation reports F-2012-004, 

F-2012-003, F-2012-002, F-2009-001, and F-2007-001. 

 

I note that the 2006 committee of review made specific 

recommendations consistent with the changes 

recommended by this office. The latest committee of 

review acknowledged the issue and the concern, but 

declined to make recommendations pending further study 

of the issue. I have no idea when the legislature will 

address the concern noted above and in the attachments, 

but I would encourage it to do so as part of its 

deliberations of Bill 58. 

 

The relevant excerpt from my latest annual report is as 

follows [carrying on with the quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker]: 

 

Jurisdictional Issue with the Saskatchewan Workers’ 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

Compensation Board 

 

I have now issued four different reports with 

recommendations for WCB with respect to improved 

compliance with The Freedom of Information and 

Privacy Act and The Health Information Protection Act, 

(Investigation Reports F-2007-001, F-2009-001, 

F-2010-001, and review report F-2010-002). 

 

A fundamental problem is that WCB takes the position 

that section 171 to 171.2 of The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, 1979 are somehow paramount to the 

requirements of FOIP and that section 4(4) of HIPA 

operates as an exclusion of the records and the custody 

or control of WCB from HIPA. 

 

Our office receives a significant number of requests for 

review and complaints involving WCB; 44 WCB 

related files have been opened since July 2003. We also 

receive numerous inquiries about WCB which do not 

result in a file being opened. 

 

In recent years, we have issued two investigation reports 

involving a breach of privacy on the part of WCB: 

 

Investigation Report F-2009-001 — the 

Commissioner determined that WCB disclosed the 

complainant’s personal information to an independent 

claims advisor without authority and that WCB failed 

to satisfy its obligations under section 27 of . . . [The 

Freedom of Information and Privacy Act] to ensure 

that the complainant’s personal information in its 

possession was accurate and complete. 

 

Investigation Report F-2007-001 — the Commissioner 

found that WCB disclosed to the complainant’s 

employer more personal information and personal 

health information than was necessary. We further 

found that WCB failed to adequately safeguard the 

complainant’s information when it sent copies of the 

individual’s personal information and personal health 

information to the complainant by ordinary mail, which 

was not received by the complainant and could not be 

accounted for. 

 

Overall, the complaints and concerns we hear regarding 

WCB include the following: 

 

WCB demands personal health information that is not 

relevant to the compensable injury; 

WCB shares more information about an injury with the 

employer than is necessary or relevant; and 

WCB does not let complainants see their own case 

management files unless and until an appealable issue 

has been identified, and even then may not allow the 

complainant to view their entire file. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, we have independent 

officers of this legislature for a reason. And certainly I’ve 

heard, you know, different sides of people’s take on advice 

provided by independent officers over the years, Mr. Speaker. 

But one thing I’ve learned is this, that that advice is given for a 

reason, and when it’s given you should pay attention. 

And the Privacy Commissioner has come forward in this 

juncture because there’s a fair amount of work that is coming 

onto the desks of the Privacy Commissioner’s investigators 

related to the Workers’ Compensation Board. And that there 

have been, you know, again the great number of reports that 

have been issued in terms of requests for action. And these 

represent some significant oversights in terms of work that 

again the government should be aware of on the part of the 

Privacy Commissioner, work that that Privacy Commissioner 

has called for it to be addressed, and work that apparently has 

gone undone when it comes to this legislation. 

 

[21:30] 

 

And again that’s not us saying that, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 

Privacy Commissioner saying that. And again for myself, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that certainly tracks in terms of the complaints 

I’ve had registered at our office over the years that’s part of 

WCB casework, where people are very concerned about how 

their individual information is being handled by the board. And 

that is borne out by the Privacy Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have an opportunity here to remedy that situation in the 

situation with Bill No. 58. Again there’s some good work that 

is done and has been done systematically over the years through 

the committee of review process, that bringing of the two sides 

together to see the problem in the round and to try and come up 

with some solutions to problems, Mr. Speaker, and to make it 

more responsive to the injured workers that are at the base of 

what this whole regime seeks to serve. And again, one of the 

key components to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the role that 

information plays and the role that that information plays in 

terms of the people knowing what’s been done on their case 

with the board, and being able to, if the situation arises, be able 

to marshal that information, often in times of appeal, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So this would seem to be a fairly reasonable request being made 

by the Privacy Commissioner. And it’s something that we want 

to see a definite response on the part of the Minister for the 

Workers’ Compensation Board to see what that minister’s 

going to do to address these concerns. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t have independent 

officers just because all the other legislatures have them. We 

have them for a reason. We have them to provide that 

independent oversight. We have them to provide that outside 

observer that understands the legislature but can also help to 

advocate and to recommend positive change to make this 

Legislative Assembly and the different agencies of government 

work more responsibly for the people that they proclaim to 

have the interests at heart of. 

 

And we’re going to be looking very closely to see how this 

minister, how this government responds to what is a pretty 

significant set of concerns that have been raised by the Privacy 

Commissioner, and again which has been very conveniently 

brought together in this compendium in terms of the concerns 

not just being raised over the years — and again I might add the 

years of this government’s tenure, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but 

how again Bill No. 58 seems to be silent in terms of the 

response. 

 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

So that was something that I definitely wanted to get into the 

records, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that other of my 

colleagues are very, very interested in this issue of the Workers’ 

Compensation Board legislation and, you know, both the way 

that it presents in their work as legislators and as advocates on 

behalf of their constituents on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly we’ve got a greater piece of analysis and consultation 

to do on this legislation again, as I say, to make sure that it lines 

up favourably with the important work of the committee of 

review, but also to gain a better understanding, Mr. Speaker, of 

how that Minister for Workers’ Compensation and how that 

government is going to respond to the very legitimate and 

long-standing concerns being raised by the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner. So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, I 

would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 58, The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 59 — The 

Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise tonight to enter into Bill No. 59, An Act to 

amend The Animal Identification Act and it’s one that . . . You 

know, it’s always interesting to prepare for these bills because 

it’s not one that I have thought much about, you know. I do 

come from a farm background, but we were wheat growers and 

basically that was it; did not have animals. And so you learn a 

little bit every time you rise to enter into debate, but it’s one 

that’s clearly important. 

 

You know, we saw that this summer with the crisis at XL in 

Brooks, Alberta when consumer confidence in the agricultural 

system was really shaken. And it has huge impacts and 

sometimes, rightly or wrongly, confidence is eroded and 

challenged. And it’s important that we do all that we can to 

ensure that people have the confidence in the system, and that 

when we need to improve things, we clearly will do that. And 

so this is what this bill here really speaks to — how we can do 

and innovate and make sure we are doing the right thing. 

 

Now there has been other speakers and I know my colleague 

from Regina Lakeview talked about, is this simply a method to 

allow contracting out? We don’t know. It’ll be interesting to see 

what impact it has on the Ministry of Agriculture that really did 

look after the brand services. But we’ll go through this. And I 

do want to first . . . What I’ll do is, you know, I’ll take a look at 

The Animal Identification Act. And it was revised in 1978 — 

this is the bill — and then again revised ’96, ’98, and 2000. 

And it talks about . . . I mean the full title is An Act respecting 

the Registration, Application, and Implantation of Animal 

Identification Marks. And of course the marks really are the 

way to identify . . . In fact I should be clear about that because 

I’ll go through these definitions here because it’s important to 

understand what we’re talking about, that we’re not just talking 

about cattle, but we’re talking about “. . . any head of cattle or 

[any] other animal of the bovine species, any horse or other 

animal of the equine species, any sheep, goat or swine or any 

inter-species hybrid of the same.” 

 

So it’s much more than just cattle. And this gets back to one of 

the questions I have in the bill. The amendments seem to focus 

on cattle, and maybe that’s what the direction they want to go, 

but we’ll have a question about, is the same happening? And of 

course clearly the others are not nearly the . . . Well swine is a 

significant number there too, but cattle is really the focus of the 

amendment bill before us as well. But I want to talk about what 

the mark means. The mark means any brand or “. . . permanent 

mark applied to the exterior of an animal or any device 

implanted beneath the skin or within the body of the animal, but 

does not include any mark registered under the authority of the 

Livestock Pedigree Act.” 

 

And I’m not sure what that Act is. I don’t have a copy of that. 

But it does talk about what we traditionally think about brands 

that are applied or burnt to the skin, marks like that, or ear 

brands. So I think that it’s important that we know that. And we 

know with science now today too that it’s important that there 

are different ways, more humane ways of doing this, and 

whether, I don’t know whether . . . I assume ear tags would be 

part of this, devices implanted beneath the skin or within the 

body of the animal. So that’s very important. 

 

And then this whole new section is put in between section 2 and 

section 3 and that’s where it goes, but I do think that it’s 

important. This is a pretty thorough piece of legislation. At the 

beginning it does provide the frame, the framework for our 

discussion here. So this is an important piece of legislation. It 

talks about inspectors. Interestingly, “Every member of the 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police is, by virtue of his position, an 

inspector under this Act and has the same powers and duties 

that are conferred or imposed on an inspector by this Act and 

the regulations.” 

 

I did not know that. It’s interesting that an RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] officer is a brand, a mark inspector. 

So that’s very interesting. And routine inspections talks about 

all of that kind of stuff. So very important that we understand 

the framework for which this legislation is part of. 

 

I think that I do want to say that I’ve read the minister’s 

remarks, and I have to say that the minister’s remarks are more 

full and more in plain English than many of the other ministers, 

and so I do appreciate that. And you know, it was interesting, 

Mr. Speaker, that it did come up . . . It’s interesting where 

things come up but, Mr. Speaker, as you may know, I did this 

series of labour consultations throughout September and lo and 

behold, somebody made a comment about the consultations that 

the Minister of Agriculture is doing and how his were so much 

different, so much different than the Minister of Labour. The 

Minister of Agriculture was taking much more time, 

approximately six months, and doing this kind of work and 

having the buy-in, the support of the affected stakeholders and 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

clearly had a stronger understanding of appropriate 

consultations. And clearly we’re seeing the results of that. 

 

Now he’s not saying the consultations are over, but he’s 

preparing for the end and he’s saying that he doesn’t want to be 

caught in a box where it seems that this is where this committee 

is going. This is where they’re landing, that they want to have 

more flexibility in terms of brand inspection services, and that 

that would be done by parties outside the government. And 

that’s where they’re landing. And it seems that that’s, if you do 

the consultations in an appropriate way that you do get support 

and people do rally behind, and I think this is important. 

 

So he goes on and I just want to quote some of the things that 

he says, and this is very important because for all of us in the 

House, some of us may be up to speed on what brand inspection 

services are; some of us may not be. But he clarifies that by 

saying, “Brand inspection ensures that animals offered for sale 

are rightfully owned and verified through a brand registry. The 

messages come in loud and clear from livestock producers that 

they want and need a brand inspection service.” And then he 

says that the changes will allow for that service. 

 

Now I’m not sure he meant a new, improved service because it 

seems that we already do have a service, but that these folks 

want something improved. Interestingly he talks about what’s 

happening across Western Canada, that the role of government 

is unique here in Saskatchewan. No other agricultural 

commodity is purchased or sold in the province with a 

government service to verify ownership. In fact Alberta, BC, 

both have industry-led and -delivered brand inspection services. 

And Manitoba interestingly has no brand inspection services at 

all. That’s very interesting. I’m not sure why that is. Clearly 

their programs work. I’m not sure. But it’s interesting that the 

member made those comments. 

 

Now as he said, he announced on July 30th that he announced 

the formation of an industry advisory committee to review the 

delivery of brand inspections in Saskatchewan, and he’s met 

several times. And clearly that is something that people have 

noted and said, why can’t we be doing that with other kinds of 

consultations. People in the labour movement have noted that 

they’re taking more time to talk about brands and animal 

identification than they are talking about the 15 pieces of labour 

legislation that took 100 years to put together. So this is really 

interesting. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Now I just want to touch on one other point that he talks about. 

Towards the end he talks, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this proposed legislation is enabling in nature. 

It is necessary to allow for the new delivery model when it is 

finalized in 2013. The exact details of the new model remain 

to be determined as the committee works towards its final 

recommendations. We want to ensure that we are not limited 

by the current inability of this Act to allow for third party 

delivery in 2013. 

 

Now I think those are important words because he talks about 

how it is enabling. But if you look at the legislation, he talks 

about the new section 2.1(2), for the purposes of carrying out 

the minister’s responsibilities, the minister may do. And he 

talks about may create, develop, adopt, co-ordinate, implement 

policy strategies, and so on and so forth; undertake and 

coordinate planning, research, investigations, and so forth; 

provide information and do any other thing that the minister 

may consider appropriate to carrying out the minister’s 

responsibilities. 

 

But this is the part that I think is important. The minister talks 

about in section 2.2(3) . . . And when we talk about agreements 

and clearly whether this is contracting out or just a new model 

of how to do business in agriculture, he does say that the “. . . 

animal identification inspection administration agreement must 

include provisions that specify all of the following . . .” So I 

think this is a good thing. That while it’s empowering, there are 

requirements that the minister is setting out. That if they are 

entering into agreements, all of the following . . . And there’s 

several agreed parts to it. I won’t go through all of it.  

 

But that it’s important that we recognize that there are 

requirements and that they must be there, for example the 

expected outcomes to be achieved by the person; the powers 

and duties being delegated to the person with whom the 

agreement is being entered into. And it’s not . . . A person 

means more than just . . . A person can be a corporation, a 

group, a co-op, that type of thing. The acceptance by the person 

of their responsibilities; the requirement that the person must 

report to the minister and when these requirements must be 

done; requirements for records management, and so on and so 

forth; that the person must carry out adequate insurance, all of 

that type of thing; the obligation of the parties if the agreement 

is terminated; settlement of disputes. So these things are all laid 

out. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that there are requirements within 

the agreement. That it’s not a may or leaving it up in the air. 

That it clearly . . . The duties are laid out because this is a 

significant change for a significant industry, agricultural sector, 

that a lot of people are hoping and looking forward to the 

results of this, the advisory committee and the minister’s work. 

But if this is the kind of work that’s coming out, it looks like 

that they’re taking it very seriously. And of course we’ll have 

questions in committee. 

 

But I think that that’s good that we see some of the extensions 

that they may be doing. And, may, is the key word in terms of 

the kind of, as I say, extensions or the things that people would 

like to see done. But there are obligations that the minister will 

ensure will be done, and that’s very, very important. So when 

we see these kind . . . And we’re not sure whether it’s one 

agreement or many agreements, but this is important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that while there’s more things that we 

would like to say about this Bill No. 59, it is an important one 

because as you know that we, as consumers . . . And I think 

more and more I know . . . And we see the billboards up in our 

cities about farms and ranches and how they take care of their 

animals. And they’re very sensitive about how consumers view 

the production of food in our society that when we see an Act 

like this that it’s done in a thoughtful way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s one that I know that many of 

us will have a lot of questions about and one that we’ll watch 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

the work of the committee very closely and one that will be 

taken very seriously because, as I said, consumer confidence is 

critical. And in Saskatchewan we have such a great reputation 

in terms of the provincial herd, the cattlemen, and I think that, 

you know, we’ve talked about this many times, many forums, 

about being great stewards of the land but also the great 

caretakers of the animals that they are looking after and 

bringing to market. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that many of us will have lots 

to say about this. But at this time I would like to move 

adjournment of Bill No. 59, An Act to amend the Animal 

Identification Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 59, The Animal Identification Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I move that we now adjourn, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:51.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2077 

 Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2084 

 Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2088 

 Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2090 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2094 

 Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2097 

 

 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


