




















































Hansard: November 19, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 14A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1981 

 November 19, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure for me to introduce two groups today if I can. The first 

is . . . well one group of three and another duo that have joined 

us, Mr. Speaker. I’ll begin with the duo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is a constituent of mine, Mr. 

Danny Singh. There he is. He is joined by his father, Harpal 

Singh, who is visiting from India. Danny works at the 

agriculture research station in Swift Current where he is a 

durum breeder, and he comes by his interest in agriculture 

honestly. His father is a professor, now retired, of veterinary 

surgery who’s had a distinguished career at G.B. Pant 

University of Agriculture and Technology. That was the first 

university in India dedicated to agricultural research. Dr. Singh 

earned his Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] from the University of 

Illinois. 

 

These gentlemen had the chance to come to Regina today, and I 

had the chance to visit with them. We had a great discussion. 

And they also donated, Mr. Speaker, to Movember, overlooking 

perhaps the specific cause in question and seeing the broader 

picture in supporting prostate cancer fundraising and as well as 

awareness for that disease and men’s mental health. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask members of this Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming them to this Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I can tell you that in your 

gallery is nine-year-old Jeremy Olson from Swift Current. 

Jeremy is joined by his parents, Michael and Rri. Mr. Speaker, 

not long ago was Jeremy’s birthday. And he noted to his parents 

that he thought he had enough toys. So rather than ask for his 

friends to bring toys or presents to his birthday party — which 

was at the Frontier Bowling Lanes, I think, in Swift Current, a 

popular place for birthday parties — he asked rather that they 

would bring a donation to the food bank, which in Swift 

Current is operated by the Salvation Army. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he said, quote, he wanted to do something nice 

that made him feel nice inside. He said, “Why don’t we get 

everyone who comes to my party to bring some food for the 

food bank?” And 110 pounds of food later, Mr. Speaker, the 

party was a great success. He’s going to help us in a few hours 

with a Christmas greeting that we’re going to do, but I want to 

welcome Jeremy and his folks to the Legislative Assembly at 

this time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I have the honour of introducing 

some very important guests from the western zone of the 

Canadian Red Cross. Today joining us is Cindy Fuchs, the 

provincial director; Dave Kyba, the coordinator of disaster 

preparedness and response; Norm Jakubowski, RespectED 

manager; Victor Thomas, Chair of the Saskatchewan Council. 

And I’d also like to welcome Maury Harvey, Linda Korney, 

and Deanna Wysoskey from the Ministry of Social Services. 

 

I’m also pleased and would really like to welcome, from Red 

Cross, volunteers and staff in attendance today: Tito Roman, 

Jayesh Parmar, Diane Bochulak, Yvette Crane, Rose Cardiff, 

Dee Friday, Tony and Diane Walsh, Debra Peterson, and 

Michael Forgues, Lara Ludwig. We also have Shanda Fuchs 

and Kayla Myrah with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Social Services has a long and 

positive relationship with the Canadian Red Cross. Just this past 

spring, we entered into an historic three-year service agreement 

with them for the provision of emergency shelter operations and 

management in our province during disaster events. It was the 

first agreement of this kind in Western Canada. 

 

At lunch we had the chance to speak about Kim MacLean, 

who’s the manager of disaster management. She has spent the 

last two weeks in Staten Island after Hurricane Sandy. She’s 

managing a shelter with 1,200 individuals and feeding 3,500 

individuals a day. We also talked about some of the work that 

the Red Cross is doing with bullying and cyber bullying. 

 

Our partnership is working very well, and I want to thank the 

Canadian Red Cross and all their volunteers for their excellent 

work in serving the people of Saskatchewan through disaster 

assistance and all the other wonderful programs they do. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming these outstanding 

volunteers and citizens to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to join 

with the minister in welcoming the individuals from the Red 

Cross from across this province, as well from the Department of 

Social Services, welcome them and thank them for that great 

work that they do in terms of stepping up when people are in 

times of crisis, in times of emergency, in times of disaster. 

There’s no help quite like that which comes in these times of 

trouble, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to say, on behalf of the 

official opposition, thank you very much for the work that you 

do making sure that people have that help and that they come 

out stronger and better for your interaction with it. So with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d welcome these individuals as well to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

this Assembly, three very special guests in the west gallery. As 

we celebrate Multicultural Week in the province of 

Saskatchewan this week, Mr. Speaker, joining us today is 

Rhonda Rosenberg — if you can just give us a wave or stand 

up; okay, thank you Rhonda — the executive director of the 

Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. And with Rhonda are 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

Mr. Gagan Deep Singh, past president of Multi-Faith 

Saskatchewan; and Ms. May Buwembo, vice-president of the 

Ugandan Canadian Association of Saskatchewan; and Ms. 

Allen Ssemmanda, financial secretary of the Multicultural 

Council of Saskatchewan. These organizations, Mr. Speaker, 

are involved in innovative programs that the council has 

invested in with the aim to build connections for lasting and 

productive relationships. 

 

This week, November 18th to 25th, is Multicultural Week in 

our province. This is in recognition of the fact that 

Saskatchewan was the first province in Canada to enact 

multiculturalism legislation. The council has provided 

multiculturalism material to be distributed to schools and a lapel 

pin for each MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] to 

wear in recognition of this week. 

 

As more people than ever live in Saskatchewan, our province is 

changing, becoming more diverse and multicultural. Mr. 

Speaker, the motto of our province is, “from many peoples, 

strength.” Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 

welcoming these very special guests to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, it is my pleasure to welcome the guests here 

in the gallery today. I’m sorry, I don’t want to completely 

massacre your names here without the list in front of me, so my 

apologies for that. But deepest welcome and thank you for all 

the work that you do. We do have an incredibly wonderful 

multicultural province and it continues to grow, thanks to your 

support to make sure that people continue to feel welcome and 

supported in our wonderful province. So thank you for all that 

work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

rest of the Assembly, seated in your gallery, it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce Erin Fogarty. Erin currently works as the 

team leader at Street Culture’s emergency youth shelter; is 

months away from completing her master’s degree in social 

work; currently maintains two jobs in two cities; her internship; 

a five-class course load; involvement in countless community 

groups focused on suicide prevention, poverty reduction, 

bullying awareness, and youth advocacy. 

 

But also, Mr. Speaker, Street Culture team member Erin 

Fogarty is a finalist in the Scotiabank ‘s Game Changer contest. 

Should Erin win, Street Culture will be provided with prize 

money of $100,000. The funds will be used to restart the 

community project pre-employment training for street-involved 

youth with a goal of ultimately becoming taxpayers. 

 

Currently Erin is in fourth place, so every vote counts. Erin is 

flying to the Grey Cup as part of the contest, and the winner is 

going to be announced at the game. And just so we know, the 

voting ends tomorrow at 10 p.m., 10 p.m. tomorrow, and it’s 

scotiabankgamechangers.com. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you to the members of this Assembly, I would like to 

introduce a special guest. Mr. Speaker, you know, I think if 

anybody could present a case for having a better half it would 

probably be me, and I would like to introduce her to this 

Assembly today. My wife, Linda, is here. She’s been my 

partner and strength for a lot of years and a lot of endeavours, 

and the mother of our three kids. And I would like to have you 

all invite her to her Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on cellphone coverage. And the 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation and the community of Turnor Lake, including 

all the neighbouring communities in each of those areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 

all the communities I’ve listed, and in this particular petition the 

people that have signed it are from St. George’s Hill and Dillon. 

And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise . . . petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across our province as it relates to our provincial finances. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the Provincial 

Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin to provide 

responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy financial 

management as deserved by Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Melville, Osler, and Warman. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Diwali Celebration  

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday 

in Regina the Diwali Celebration hosted by the India Canada 

Association of Saskatchewan was held at the Royal 

Saskatchewan Museum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Diwali is one of the biggest festivals of the 

Hindu community, celebrated with great enthusiasm and 

happiness in India, throughout the world. Diwali celebrates the 

victory of good over evil, light over darkness. The festival is a 

celebration for five continuous days, where the third day is 

celebrated as the main Diwali festival or, better known, the 

festival of lights. 

 

Diwali is known as the festival of lights because houses, shops, 

public places are decorated with small earthenware oil lamps 

called diyas. These lamps are traditionally fuelled by mustard 

oil and are placed in rows in windows, doors, and outside 

buildings to decorate them. The lamps are lit to help the 

goddess Lakshmi find her way into people’s homes. Mr. 

Speaker, in India oil lamps are often floated across the Ganges 

River. It is regarded as a very good omen if the lamps manage 

to get all the way across. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s Diwali festival was a wonderful night 

filled with singing and dancing and food and sparklers for 

everyone. I would like all members of this Assembly to join me 

in recognizing the India Canada Association of Saskatchewan 

for putting together such an amazing event. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 

provincial motto is, of course, “from many peoples, strength.” 

And certainly the strength of our province lies in diversity. 

Saskatchewan is a province full of diversity that continues to 

grow as our population does. This week, November 19th to the 

23rd, we officially celebrate diversity through Saskatchewan 

Multicultural Week. 

 

In 1974 Saskatchewan led other Canadian provinces in 

becoming the first to enact multicultural legislation. In 1997 the 

Act was revised to preserve, strengthen, and promote 

Aboriginal culture and to acknowledge the historic and current 

contributions of First Nations and Métis people. 

 

I am proud to be living in a province that recognizes the right of 

every individual to have their identity, religion, language, and 

culture not only protected, Mr. Speaker, but celebrated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in thanking president of the 

Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan’s board of directors, 

Bruno Kossman, and their executive director, Rhonda 

Rosenberg, for all their hard work. And it was a pleasure to join 

in the special welcome to Ms. Rosenberg as well as Mr. Singh 

and Ms. Buwembo today, and to join with all Saskatchewan 

people in recognizing the hard work and the great celebration 

that is Multicultural Week in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Recruiting and Retaining Physicians 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recruiting 

physicians to Saskatchewan and keeping them once they’re here 

is a priority for this government. Over the past five years we’ve 

worked hard to address this issue, so I’m encouraged, Mr. 

Speaker, that our efforts are being recognized at the national 

level by the Canadian Institute of Health Information. 

According to the CIHI [Canadian Institute of Health 

Information ] report released last week, Saskatchewan continues 

to recruit physicians at a higher rate than the national average. 

Our province also has a higher than average number of family 

physicians located in rural areas than the Canadian average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are over 240 more doctors practising in 

Saskatchewan today than there were just five years ago, yet 

there’s no question that we can still use more family physicians 

in our province. We recognize that more work needs to be done, 

particularly in rural and remote areas. Our government has 

added more training seats and medical residency positions at 

our medical college because we know that when we train 

doctors here they are more likely to stay here. 

 

We have also created a made-in-Saskatchewan program to 

assess the skills of foreign-trained doctors. We continue to work 

with our provincial recruitment agency, Saskdocs, to not only 

bring more doctors to our province but also to work at retaining 

our Saskatchewan-trained physicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to stabilizing the 

physician workforce in Saskatchewan. The recent CIHI report 

proves our efforts are showing results and we will continue 

those efforts to bring even more physicians to Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Life of Pi World Premiere 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a big week 

for one of my constituents, author Yann Martel. He’s the author 

of Life of Pi, which has been made into a feature Hollywood 

film, and the world premiere is tonight in Saskatoon. Oscar 

award winner Ang Lee, director of other films such as 

Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, the Hulk, and Brokeback 

Mountain took on this complex novel, turning it into a visually 

stunning 3-D cinematic experience. 

 

Yann Martel was born in Spain and has spent much of his life 

living all over the world and in cities in Canada. In 2003 Yann 

was offered a writer-in-residence position at the Saskatoon 

Public Library, and he hasn’t left. He developed a deep 

affection for Saskatchewan and prairie land. He says: 

 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

The Canadian prairies are underappreciated. People race 

through them to get to the mountains the way people in the 

Louvre rush past the Tintorettos, Fra Angelicos, and the 

Rembrandts to get to the Mona Lisa. 

 

His novel Life of Pi was released in 2001, selling 780,000 

copies in Canada and 7 million copies worldwide. It has won 

several prizes, including the 2002 Booker Prize, and was chosen 

as one of five books for the 2003 CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] literature competition Canada Reads. 

 

The book is said to be an inspiration to many throughout the 

world, including leaders like Barack Obama who describes Life 

of Pi as “a lovely book — an elegant proof of God, and the 

power of storytelling.” Mr. Speaker, I look forward to seeing 

this beautiful novel’s interpretation on the big screen tonight in 

Saskatoon. I ask you to join me in congratulating Yann Martel’s 

success. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Agribition Incoming Buyers Program 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today is the first day of Canadian Western Agribition, and it’ll 

run all week until Saturday at Evraz Place here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Agribition is the largest cattle show in Western 

Canada and it marks its 42nd anniversary this year. The theme 

of this year’s show is Agribition is for everyone. The show 

features more than 4,000 head of livestock and includes 

commercial displays, seminars, heavy horse pull, tours for 

school children, youth education, a professional rodeo, grain 

expo, and an international business centre. 

 

Today the Minister of Agriculture announced nearly $56,000 in 

provincial funding to Canadian Western Agribition to increase 

international marketing opportunities through Agribition’s 

newly created incoming buyers program. Agribition’s incoming 

buyers program will increase international marketing 

opportunities, promote Saskatchewan’s agriculture products, 

and will help build relationships that support the agriculture 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Saskatchewan plan for growth, our 

government set a goal of increasing our international agri-food 

exports from this year’s record high, $10 billion, to 15 billion 

by 2020. Through partnering with organizations like Agribition 

and their incoming buyers program, our government is 

confident that we will be able to meet that goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking the 

organizers of Canadian Western Agribition and to wish them 

another successful week. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Government Partnership with the Red Cross 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise in the House today to recognize this government’s 

partnership with the Canadian Red Cross and commend this 

organization for all the wonderful work that they do at home 

and around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Social Services has a long and 

positive working relationship with the Canadian Red Cross. In 

this past spring, as the Minister of Social Services mentioned 

earlier, Social Services entered into a historic three-year service 

agreement with the Red Cross for the provision of emergency 

shelter operation and management in Saskatchewan during 

disaster events. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that this is the 

first of its kind of agreement in Western Canada. 

 

This past summer this new agreement was put to the test when 

the Day Star and James Smith First Nations were impacted by 

disaster. During these unfortunate events, the Red Cross 

stepped up and provided excellent support to 265 people from 

these First Nations, demonstrating that this agreement is 

working and working well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the good work of the Canadian Red Cross goes far 

beyond disaster assistance. I want to take this opportunity to 

recognize the Canadian Red Cross for the great work that they 

do to help prevent violence, abuse, and bullying. Through 

educational initiatives like the RespectED violence and abuse 

prevention program, they’re helping to make our schools and 

communities safer places for children to live. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The week of 

November 18th to the 25th has been proclaimed Saskatchewan 

Multicultural Week. Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 

recognizes the contributions of the diverse mix of cultures and 

nationalities that make up Saskatchewan’s growing population. 

It starts with First Nations and Métis heritage, which includes 

many people with Scottish and French ancestry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 2012 is the Year of the Fransaskois. We take time 

to honour our province’s proud francophone heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last 150 years our province has been 

transformed by the waves of immigrants, largely from Europe 

and Asia, who came to this land searching for a better life. And 

that continues today as we welcome new immigrants from 

around the world. It’s believed that Saskatchewan is now home 

to people from more than 170 countries. 

 

For those wondering how they can participate in this year’s 

Multicultural Week, Mr. Speaker, an informational handout 

created by the multicultural council is being distributed to 

Saskatchewan schools to mark this annual event. This handout 

will let people know how they play their part in celebrating 

multicultural week. Mr. Speaker, as the province becomes more 

diverse, so do our schools and our workplaces. I encourage 

everyone to join in promoting the spirit of multiculturalism, not 

only this week but throughout the year. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Information Services Corporation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is no mandate 

from the people nor any Sask Party campaign promise to 

privatize ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]. The former minister said he wouldn’t touch the 

Crown and said it would remain public in the annual ISC report. 

The Premier said the Crown corporations, not just a select few 

but all of them, would not be sold by the Sask Party 

government. The only reason they want to sell ISC is because 

the Sask Party can’t do the math to get the budget balanced. 

They’ve run three deficits in a row, and it’s obvious they are 

now selling whatever isn’t nailed down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people are flipping through the Premier’s little 

booklet, the Throne Speech, and the election platform, and they 

can’t find where it says the Sask Party will privatize ISC. To the 

Premier: on what page in those documents does the Sask Party 

say it will privatize ISC? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, on page 44 of the platform. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, let’s review the timeline and the 

words used by the Sask Party. The minister admitted on 

October 11th they had the legislation ready to go, tucked away 

in a drawer. Last Wednesday the minister said in this Assembly 

the Sask Party government had not decided on whether or not to 

privatize ISC he said, “We have not made the decision.” 

 

Later that day he told the press he had just received evaluations 

by RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] on November 9th and the 

decision was pending. Yet less than 24 hours later a Sask Party 

supporter announced province-wide on Twitter: “Looks like 

legislation to privatize ISC drops Monday.” Mr. Speaker, if the 

legislation to sell ISC is being tabled today, why is the Sask 

Party using its insiders to tell the province in advance? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, anybody that’s followed 

ISC and ISC’s history in this province over the last decade or so 

would realize that members of the opposition, when they were 

in government, often talked about selling ISC’s services around 

the world, Mr. Speaker. They talked about different 

jurisdictions that would be interested, whether it was Eric Cline 

talking about it, Chris Axworthy. They all talked about it, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the opposition also did an 

evaluation in 2003. They did an evaluation in 2006. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that ISC was in the legislation — taken out, 

Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we have done an evaluation. We received that 

over a week ago. We made a decision, Mr. Speaker, in cabinet. 

Introduction of the bill was given on Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, 

Wednesday in the House. I think the member opposite is talking 

about a tweet that happened on Thursday. If the members 

opposite were following the order paper as well as citizens out 

there, Mr. Speaker, they would have known it probably dropped 

on Monday as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that made it to 

Hansard, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday the minister said he had 

not made a decision on whether to privatize ISC. He didn’t 

introduce any bill. Less than 24 hours later, their insider friends 

said they not only knew of the decision, they knew it would be 

coming today. 

 

This is how the Sask Party works, Mr. Speaker. They tell their 

friends about their real plans instead of being straight with the 

public. They hide their potential sale of ISC until reporters dig 

it out, and then they admit that they already have the legislation 

drafted. One has to wonder if the Sask Party hasn’t come clean 

on their plans for all of the Crowns. 

 

To the Premier: if he is selling ISC, what is next? What other 

Crowns are on the table to be sold by the Sask Party 

government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in the 2011 election 

campaign we were very clear. On page 44 of the platform, it 

talks about, Mr. Speaker, honouring the Crown protection Act. 

That’s what we are doing. There was a deliberate action by the 

former government to take ISC out of the Act, Mr. Speaker — a 

deliberate decision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue about timing, I find it very, very 

interesting. I would ask the member opposite to just lean across 

and talk to the House Leader, and maybe he will explain that 

introduction of the bill, notice to the bill, was given on 

Wednesday, Mr. Speaker. All you had to do was go through the 

proceedings and you would see that notice of the bill was 

introduced on Wednesday. There may have been a tweet on 

Thursday but maybe they were following it closer than the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in fact even some of the 

leadership hopefuls on the other side were talking about ISC’s 

legislation being dropped today, Mr. Speaker. Maybe he’s a 

Sask Party insider himself. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting the 

minister speaks of honouring that legislation when they’re 

going back on promises that they made to the Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Selling a highly profitable Crown will have a huge impact on 

the province’s financial picture. There would have to be a really 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

good reason to sell a profitable, useful, and important Crown 

corporation. We know other jurisdictions are ready and willing 

to work with ISC as it currently stands. 

 

To the minister: if he’s accusing ISC of having limited market 

for its products, why hasn’t he helped this Crown work to 

improve its services rather than selling it to the first bidder who 

comes along? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, ISC as I said has had a 

varied history in the province over the last decade or so. I would 

say that over the last number of years — six, seven years — it 

has offered excellent service to the people of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the product that ISC has to market now is far 

different than the product that it had when it was first, Mr. 

Speaker, introduced. 

 

In fact opposition members, when they were in government, 

had plans of selling ISC. And what they found is when they 

went to other jurisdictions to talk about how well a service ISC 

was, they’d look in their own jurisdiction and find it wasn’t 

working very well, Mr. Speaker. There were no sales at that 

time. 

 

We feel ISC is positioned very well. It’s doing a great job here 

in Saskatchewan and we think that technology and that service 

and the systems that they have built up will service other 

jurisdictions very, very well. But we also believe that, Mr. 

Speaker, it cannot be making sales as a Crown corporation. It 

needs to be looked at as a public offering which is what we are 

doing with ISC, to allow the public to have a share in the 

company, Mr. Speaker. And we think the future is very bright 

for ISC around the world. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this Sask Party wants to talk 

about anything but their own record and their own words. They 

said they would not sell a Crown, but that has turned out to be 

false. They said last week they had not made up their mind to 

sell ISC, but that turned out to be false. They said they’d done a 

study and evaluated the potential for ISC, but they have yet to 

consult with the public, show the results of that study, and 

prove any new model would return the same dividends to the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why does the Sask Party government put ideology 

ahead of common sense and want to do . . . with public 

ownership of the Crowns, starting with ISC? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this is not about 

ideology whatsoever on this side. This is about a growth 

potential, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this is about. Now I know 

the members opposite don’t want to talk about growth, don’t 

understand growth. But when you talk about growth potential of 

companies that were government owned and then moved to the 

private sector, you could look at the very successful 

PotashCorp. You could look at the very successful Cameco, Mr. 

Speaker. There are great examples of government-owned 

entities that went public and then, Mr. Speaker, grew 

substantially. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the members don’t like talking about 

growth, whether it’s the 80,000 more people that moved to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, whether it was the 12,500 more 

new jobs in the past year, Mr. Speaker. Or, Mr. Speaker, as of 

just today, Mr. Speaker, the Conference Board of Canada is 

looking at Saskatchewan leading Alberta for growth in 2013 

and 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Potential Changes to Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. People in 

Saskatchewan were surprised once again by the Sask Party 

when the Minister of Labour started talking about policies they 

didn’t vote for on Friday. 

 

At a private, paid event with the North Saskatoon Business 

Association on Friday, the minister announced his ideas for the 

massive overhaul of the province’s labour legislation. Mr. 

Speaker, then the minister went to an unprecedented step of 

holding another news conference on Saturday where he tried to 

backpedal and said he was open to hearing new views. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: in light of the minister’s eleventh 

hour pledge to actually listen to the public, is the Sask Party 

government now scrapping their plans and launching a full 

public consultation on its massive labour bill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. We’ve had a number of points over 

the last year where I’ve said and the Premier has said that we’re 

open for discussion; we’re open for consultation. We had a 

consultation process through the summer with some 3,800 

submissions to it. We indicated during the earlier comments 

that were made that we were prepared to have submissions that 

would go right through the House and into the spring session if 

there was appropriate reason to make a House amendment. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re working and we’re well on in that process of 

getting the bill drafted and, Mr. Speaker, I’d urge the members 

to stay tuned and watch when that gets introduced. We’re 

hoping that we’re going to have a very good product, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’d urge the members to watch for it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister said on 

Saturday in his rushed scrum that the legislation is nearly 

complete. But by the sounds of what he told the NSBA [North 

Saskatoon Business Association], it’s already written and the 

ink is already dry. 

 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

The Sask Party has ignored what hundreds of Saskatchewan 

people have said to the government. The people want a fair and 

balanced labour environment in this province. And the changes 

the minister’s already revealed are out of step with what the 

people are talking about and are just not common sense. The 

minister won’t seem to listen to what working people have 

called for when they’ve called for public consultations, for 

better workplace standards, and for balanced labour law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the bill is drafted, why hasn’t the 

government tabled it in this House today? Will the government 

table their massive labour law overall today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I have two quotes I’d like 

to read. The first one is: 

 

In May when we saw this coming forward there didn’t 

seem to be a reason why this was coming forward. That 

was the big gap in this. There was no common sense 

reason for this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a quote from the member for Saskatoon 

Centre, the member opposite, October 31st, 2012. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d read the second quote: 

 

Governments should always be ready to improve labour 

legislation. That readiness is an important part of a 

common sense commitment to a better future for the 

province. 

 

That was from the first NDP submission on labour review, 

dated July 31st, 2012. Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure which 

common sense approach the member opposite is going to take 

or wants us to take, but, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that this 

government is going to take a common sense approach. We are 

going to move the legislation so that it is consistent with other 

provinces. And, Mr. Speaker, it will move the province 

forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the minister quoting me and quoting our 

consultation, our reply on July 31st. It’s too bad it’s not on the 

website along with the other consultations. He should put it up 

there with the rest of them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are worried about 

tipping the balance when it comes to labour legislation, yet that 

is exactly what the Sask Party wants to do. This labour 

legislation is an attack on collective rights. They know from 

Justice Ball they should consult with people instead of going 

through expensive, costly court decisions 

 

And on Friday, the minister finally shot down the Premier’s pet 

project of ending the Rand formula. Now the Premier has talked 

about this since May 2nd, about doing away with that 

court-tested means of participating in unions. But that’s just the 

thing, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party will only talk about these 

very important policies if the crowd is paying. Why would the 

Sask Party require people to pay to hear the new legislation that 

affects them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, over the last number of 

months I’ve spoken at a number of events including the 

building trades council, Sask. Federation of Labour convention, 

minister’s advisory committee, and in this House. Mr. Speaker, 

it was not until last week that I spoke to any kind of a business 

group whatsoever in any kind of a formal setting. The matter 

was publicized in the House. The member opposite raised it last 

week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s the intention of this government to speak to 

people on both sides of the issue, from the labour side and from 

the business side. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s surprising how many 

consistencies and how much common ground there is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d say to the members opposite, just point out a 

few things to them. When we brought in secret ballots and 

freedom of speech in the workplace, they said it was an attack 

on unionization. Well, Mr. Speaker, the sky did not fall in. 

When we brought in Bill 80, they said it would destabilize the 

construction industry. Mr. Speaker, construction industry has 

gone on and progressed as it never has before in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party are throwing out 

the good, balanced labour laws that people have spent 100 years 

in building in favour of a slanted, one-sided approach. And this 

isn’t good for working people and it isn’t good for our 

economy. If this minister is really sincere about hearing new 

views, he should stop the road show of what is in his already 

drafted legislation and start one where he’s listening to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the Sask Party track record in allowing amendments to 

legislation, labour legislation, is zero. Not one amendment was 

made to their unconstitutional bills in their first term. Now he’s 

already alluded to this earlier in one of the answers, but will the 

minister today firmly commit to allowing common sense 

amendments to be made when he eventually brings his 

legislation to this Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, our goal is to try and draft 

the bill as carefully as possible to try and avoid any significant 

number of changes to the legislation. Mr. Speaker, we want to 

make sure that that bill is as ready to go as possible and that’s 

why the good folks over at Labour Relations, Workplace Safety 

have been doing a lot of late-night and evening work, Mr. 

Speaker. We give them credit for the work that they do and we 

thank them for the work that they do. Mr. Speaker, if there are 

things that are necessary or essential to deal with the bill when 

it comes forward . . . We have certainly done House 

amendments before and, Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly prepared 

to do House amendments in the future. 

 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that values very much the 

contribution of the women and men that work in our province. 

Those are the people that are responsible for the prosperity and 

growth of this province. We thank them for their work and we 

want them to know and to be reassured that we will continue to 

look out for their rights and ensure that they have a place in our 

province and that they are well provided for and that they work 

in a labour environment that is fair, reasonable, and appropriate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Financial Support for University 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because of the Sask 

Party government’s actions, the financial picture at the 

University of Saskatchewan is quite concerning. In addition to 

the shortfalls in the operating grant, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

government’s decision to push $100 million of debt onto the 

university’s books is causing problems for the campus, and, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s now affecting programming. 

 

Last week we learned that the university is closing the Emma 

Lake Kenderdine Campus immediately and perhaps forever. 

This campus has played a vital role, Mr. Speaker, in courses 

related to biology, soil sciences, drama, art, and art history. It 

was first established in 1936. My question to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker: this program has been serving students for decades 

here in the province, does he have concerns with its closure? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I grew up in 

Saskatoon. I’m well aware of what goes on at the Kenderdine 

Campus at Emma Lake. I’ve never been there, but I’ve certainly 

heard discussions about it and read magazine articles about it. 

It’s something that’s part of the history of our province. Mr. 

Speaker, we recognize the valuable education that students have 

received at Kenderdine Campus. However, Mr. Speaker, the 

university is responsible for making program decisions that they 

see fit. We expect that our post-secondary institutions will 

continually look for opportunities to improve effectiveness and 

efficiency in managing costs to make sure that financial 

stability continues in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we provide $304.5 million this budget year, which 

is a 46 per cent increase from 2007 when it was only $208.4 

million. Mr. Speaker, the university made this decision without 

consultation with the province, and they advise it is for a 

three-year trial period while they explore other options and 

determine the viability of the campus. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Kenderdine Campus is 

important to the arts disciplines as well as many other 

disciplines. Its loss will be felt by many. The university is 

facing this decision because of the financial situation it has been 

placed in by the Sask Party government. The minister can try; 

he can try all he wants to hide behind the autonomy of the 

University of Saskatchewan, but everyone knows it’s the 

minister’s responsibility to properly fund the University of 

Saskatchewan, to provide adequate funding. 

 

My question to the minister: will he admit it’s his government’s 

actions, through a lack of proper funding, which is causing the 

closure of the Kenderdine Campus through the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan]? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, during the last five years 

we have provided $3.5 billion for post-secondary education and 

skill training. Mr. Speaker, I’ll give you some more particulars. 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], $143.4 million, a 21 per cent increase from 2007. 

University of Regina, $100.9 million, a 38 per cent increase 

from 2007. University of Saskatchewan, $304.5 million, a 46 

per cent increase from 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 2007 campaign, we promised to increase 

operating funding by $125 million over four years; instead we 

increased it by $274 million. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can try to duck his 

responsibility in this matter, but it’s not going to work. Mr. 

Speaker, it was this Sask Party government that forced nearly 

$100 million onto the university’s books with respect to debt, 

and it is having a negative effect. 

 

You don’t have to simply take my word for it, Mr. Speaker. On 

the 2011-12 annual report, on page 3, it says this: 

 

Further, a change in the way the provincial government 

funds our capital costs, from a cash grant to requesting the 

university to debt finance, will increase our debt load and 

reduce our financial flexibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s that financial flexibility that would allow the 

university to keep the Kenderdine Campus open. It’s that 

financial flexibility, Mr. Speaker, that has been removed by that 

government because of their decision to force nearly $100 

million of debt onto the university’s books. My question to the 

minister: will he admit this fact? Will he admit that the $100 

million forced onto the university’s books has removed its 

financial flexibility in order to keep programs like this 

operating? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I gave the member 

opposite some figures before, and I’ve got some more for him. 

Mr. Speaker, in the past five years we’ve also provided $378 

million in post-secondary infrastructure. $112 million for the 

health sciences project; I don’t think that took away any 

flexibility. $24 million for student housing; I don’t think that 

took away any flexibility. $118 million in combined 

provincial-federal through the knowledge infrastructure 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

program; I don’t think that took away any flexibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want to continue to talk 

about funding, let’s talk about their record. Mr. Speaker, let’s 

talk about the money that they didn’t spend and how it had to be 

made up for by the students. Between 1994 and 2007, tuition 

increased at the University of Regina 88.6 per cent. University 

of Saskatchewan, 99.2 per cent. SIAST, 263 per cent. Shameful. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, by the university’s own 

documents, they state that their borrowing capacity is maxed 

out. That is because, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

walked away from its commitment to fund the Health Sciences 

Building upfront and forced nearly $100 million of debt onto 

the university’s books. 

 

The minister can try to pretend that everything is rosy, Mr. 

Speaker, when we look at the financial picture on the university 

campus. But the reality shows a very different picture. We see, 

Mr. Speaker, the elimination of programs and the closure of a 

very important campus. 

 

Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, there is an important financial town 

hall meeting on campus, an opportunity for the university 

community to get together to discuss the financial situation that 

it has been placed in because of the Sask Party government’s 

actions. My question to the minister: what other bad news does 

he expect tomorrow as it relates to employment layoffs, as it 

relates to programs, Mr. Speaker, and as it relates to the Health 

Sciences Building? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

raised the funding for the health sciences project. Mr. Speaker, 

the members opposite raised the issue of the health sciences 

project in the fall of 2003. They made an announcement that 

they were going ahead with it at an estimated cost at that time 

of $120 million. Mr. Speaker, construction didn’t start in 2003. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, construction didn’t start until 2008. 

 

Do you know what happened between 2003 and 2008, Mr. 

Speaker? Costs went up. Costs went up by more than double. 

With the amount of money that they wasted because they didn’t 

do anything in 2003, we could have built two health sciences 

buildings with the money that’s been invested so far. And 

we’ve got to spend more on it yet to continue to make up for the 

deficit that was left by the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, prior to the election, the Sask 

Party government put out a news release. They cut a ribbon and 

said they were going to fully fund the Health Sciences Building. 

Budget comes around, Mr. Speaker — they walk away from 

that promise to pay upfront, Mr. Speaker, and force nearly $100 

million of debt onto the university’s books. 

 

The minister can try to pretend that this does not have an effect 

on the student experience, but the results would show 

something different, Mr. Speaker. We see, Mr. Speaker, that 

with the closure of the Kenderdine Campus that the student 

experience quality is being affected. My question to the 

minister: will he admit that the actions that he has taken, his 

government has taken, is negatively affecting students at the 

University of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we recognize that the 

university wants to be responsible and to make programming 

decisions, and we recognize their independence in making 

those. We support the fact that they are going through a process 

for that, Mr. Speaker, and we support the work that they do. We 

are not questioning their individual decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, personally I know about the Kenderdine Campus, 

as the members opposite do. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going 

to be taking any lessons from the members opposite about what 

should happen on the university campus, something that they sit 

and let languish for 16 long years where things were going 

there. 

 

We have more than doubled funding there. We have included 

capital projects. We funded the synchrotron, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ve done nothing but had a photo opportunity before they 

went out of government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ll take 

no lessons from the people on the other side of the House. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 69, The Information Services 

Corporation Act be now introduced and read for a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

has moved first reading of Bill No. 69, The Information 

Services Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table 

answers to questions 51 through 77. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 51 through 77. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 

Education Savings (SAGES) Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant 

for Education Savings Act. Mr. Speaker, this new legislation 

will allow the Government of Saskatchewan to provide a grant 

to a registered education savings plan, or RESP, at a rate of 10 

per cent of the subscriber’s annual contributions up to a 

maximum of $250 per year per beneficiary. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings, or 

SAGES, stems from a commitment our government made as 

part of our 2011 election platform. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the government announced in the 2012 

budget speech that SAGES would come into effect January 1st, 

2013. Mr. Speaker, SAGES is aligned with the government’s 

goal of making post-secondary education accessible and 

affordable for parents and students. SAGES will provide an 

incentive to save for Saskatchewan children’s post-secondary 

education and could benefit more than 83,000 of Saskatchewan 

children under the age of 18 through contributions made to their 

RESP accounts each year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SAGES is modelled after the Canada education 

savings grant, which is delivered on a national level by Human 

Resources and Skills Development Canada, or HRSDC. The 

federal government through HRSDC will be administering 

SAGES on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, this will leverage federal processes, reduce costs, and 

ensure a collaborative approach for administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, HRSDC is supportive of SAGES, and we will 

continue to work closely with them for the development, 

implementation, and administration of SAGES. We expect that 

SAGES will be implemented later in 2013 with it being 

retroactive to January 1st, 2013. 

 

In addition the ministry has consulted with the Government of 

Alberta; Canadian Scholarship Trust Foundation, CSTF; and 

registered education savings plan advisory group called 

RESPAG. I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that all groups 

are supportive of SAGES. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate that this 

legislation will provide an incentive to save for Saskatchewan 

children’s post-secondary education, and I am happy to speak to 

this legislation today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of The 

Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 66, The Saskatchewan 

Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Act. Is it the 

pleasure . . . I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased to be able to stand on behalf of the official 

opposition to give the Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan an initial perspective on our position as the 

official opposition on Bill 66. And I understood the minister to 

talk about the bill as it pertains to giving a support mechanism 

for the students and families and parents that might want to save 

money for a registered education savings plan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, of course from our perspective as an opposition 

caucus, we certainly are very supportive of trying to encourage 

people to save for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker, and of 

course education being a critical one. 

 

Now no question, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 

advantage grant for educational savings is something that needs 

a lot of study because obviously as the minister has spoken 

about the amount that they’re hoping to put into place in terms 

of matching what the parents or what the student might be able 

to save is up to $250 per year. And I’m assuming that there is 

going to be a multi-year facet to this particular agreement. And, 

Mr. Speaker, certainly I think from . . . as I said at the outset, 

from our perspective saving for education is very, very 

important, and as an official opposition caucus we would 

support that. 

 

But what’s very disturbing, Mr. Speaker, is that on one hand we 

see the Sask Party reaching out to some of the families that 

might want to save, and as we would as well if we were 

government. And what the problem was, and the problem is, 

Mr. Speaker, is that while they give with one hand they 

certainly are taking with the other. We see that in some 

instances as we watch question period today, where they’re 

forcing the U of S to assume $100 million in extra debt, Mr. 

Speaker. So some of the students that might want to go to the 

university for a number of reasons, they’ll see a savings plan in 

front of them for $250 a year, but they might see their tuition 

jacked up to 750 or 1,500 or 2,000 per year. 

 

 It’s so difficult to determine how this program would really 

serve the people well, not only from the taxpayer’s perspective 

but from the student’s as well. So it gives us certainly a lot of 

reason to be concerned about this particular bill, not in the sense 

that it’s trying to reach out to the students, but the net effect of 

the finances of the student is what we’re primarily concerned 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I indicated, if you’re going to help the families and the 

students save money for education, that’s something that we 

should all support, Mr. Speaker. And that’s not something that I 

say frivolous because obviously helping families and students 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

save for education is pretty important. But to turn around and 

then actually ding the students and the families and the parents, 

you know, with the tuition cost that some of the, in this instance 

the U of S has to charge them to go to school, to go to a 

post-secondary institution, Mr. Speaker, that is where we draw 

the line as an official opposition. 

 

To say to the government, and certainly on Bill 66, that we 

certainly are very, very confused as to what you intend to do 

with $250 that you’re matching families to save, and yet you 

turn around and adding a $2,000 tuition fee and bill to some of 

the families and some of the students that you say you’re going 

to help with this bill. So, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question in my 

mind there is going to be a lot of families and a lot of students 

that are going to watch this. 

 

And this is what’s really, really important, Mr. Speaker, is that 

as the official opposition we can have our position and we can 

state our position. And we can certainly talk to people, and we 

could meet with different groups. And we can also, from our 

perspective, research what the weaknesses of this bill is or 

might be. But the real value, Mr. Speaker, is going out to the 

students’ unions. 

 

I understand there are student groups that meet on a regular 

basis at both the U of R [University of Regina] and the U of S 

and some other campuses as well. And these student unions, 

they will certainly look at this Act, and they’ll certainly look at 

the actions of the Sask Party on other fronts. And they will be, I 

think — same thing as the opposition — they’ll be a bit 

confused as to why are they doing this for $250 to the 

maximum for one year and then turning around and dinging 

families 2,000 or $3,000 more for tuition costs because they 

didn’t follow through on their commitment with the U of S, in 

this example. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make any sense to us as the 

opposition of how you would put a program in place to save 

students $250 a year and turn around and cost them $2,500 in 

extra costs as the universities try and struggle and grapple with 

their debt load, Mr. Speaker, therefore trying to make sure that 

students pay more and more. So it’s absolutely confusing. 

 

And the advantage I think, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about 

the Sask advantage grant for educational savings, the only 

advantage I see here, Mr. Speaker, is for the Sask Party’s spin. 

There’s no question in my mind that as some of the students 

and the parents begin to see the increases in the tuition rates 

from the universities, they’ll realize that they have been fooled 

by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on one hand, they’re applauding their . . . They’re patting 

their own backs saying, we’re going to help the students for up 

to $250 per year under this program, under this Bill 66. But on 

the exact opposite, because of the mismanagement of the 

economy and the finances, as a result the universities are 

assuming greater debts . . . And $100 million of debt, Mr. 

Speaker, is a huge debt load for many institutions in our 

province. And the universities are in a very similar boat as 

many other places, Mr. Speaker. They simply cannot have debt 

of that magnitude. It’s a huge burden. 

 

So what do they do? They simply transfer that debt and those 

costs of servicing that debt onto the students, the same students, 

many of the students that may want to apply for the 

Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings under Bill 

66. So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of information that we are 

going to access on this front. We need to make sure, as an 

opposition, that we research the financial implications of this 

bill versus the cost of going to a post-secondary institution for 

the average student. 

 

[14:30] 

 

We’re going to try and see where the costs are, where the 

benefits are, Mr. Speaker. Because if all they’re going to do is 

give a student or a parent $250 a year and then turn around and 

they get a big bill of $2,000 extra costs on the university then, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the parents and the students that may take 

advantage of this will know very quickly that the Sask Party is 

playing with not only their dollars, but the future of their 

children and their family, Mr. Speaker. And that kind of anger, 

Mr. Speaker, doesn’t go away very easily. I think people will 

see through that facade very quickly. 

 

So questions that we have under this particular bill, the Sask 

advantage grant for education savings, Bill 66, we appreciate 

the fact that the message is that you want to help families and 

students save for their education, up to $250 a year, as I 

understood the minister to say. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he spoke about other scholarship funds and 

foundations throughout western Canada that he has spoken 

with. And really, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t any other foundation 

out there that’s going to say no to any government that may 

want to look at giving a grant to students. Of course in theory 

and their general philosophy, they would applaud any amount, 

Mr. Speaker. So the minister making reference to some of the 

foundations out there that deal with student financing through 

western Canada, it should be noted, it should be noted that he 

didn’t get no qualification from them and saying, this is an 

amazingly, amazingly fresh approach to how we can help our 

students, Mr. Speaker — none of that. 

 

He made reference to the groups and foundations he dealt with 

and that they are supportive of the bill. And as I said at the 

outset, yes, of course they would be supportive of any bill that 

gives any student money, but really I think they want to, they 

want to appear to have some of those foundations’ support and 

endorsement, Mr. Speaker. But in reality, if one were to take 

into consideration, as I mentioned at the outset, the debt that 

was placed on the U of S by this government, $100 million, and 

then you contrast that to the Bill 66, then you begin to wonder, 

where’s the benefit for the students? Where’s the benefit for the 

families? Where’s the benefit for the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

So as we look through the bill in its initial phase here, we 

obviously want to reach out to some of the students that may be 

impacted by this. And I think the university students’ 

association, the union of the students, I think they’re going to 

have a lot to say about this particular program, Mr. Speaker. 

They are going to say obviously that any amount to help save 

for educational purposes is valuable. I think I can hear them say 

that. And certainly from our perspective, as I said at the outset, 

we would support that notion too. 



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

But you’ve got to do the complete analysis of what this 

government’s action and activity is when it comes to the 

university setting, Mr. Speaker. Not only are they increasing 

debt to just an absolutely horrific level, Mr. Speaker, they are 

now trying to put a small band-aid over a huge wound when it 

comes to the affordability issue that many of our families and 

students struggle with under the effort that they’re undertaking 

to seek a post-secondary education. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s huge, huge problems. There are huge 

deficiencies in this bill, and they’re not recognizing what 

they’re doing on one hand, and yet they’re trying to applaud on 

this particular bill some of their measures when it comes to 

saving for educational purposes. 

 

So I tell the people of Saskatchewan, the people that may be 

looking at a post-secondary opportunity, families that might 

want to take advantage of this, the first thing I would say to 

them is that any family would want to take advantage of any 

program out there that helps them save for education. That is 

pretty common sense, I think it’s pretty apparent in every 

family’s and parent’s mind that this is something that they 

ought to do. And I think many families and many people are 

doing this, Mr. Speaker. And as an opposition we say, great, 

you know. So we would encourage you to take advantage of the 

Saskatchewan advantage grant for educational savings. 

 

But after you’ve taken advantage of this up to $250 per year — 

that’s the maximum they have put, Mr. Speaker — you have to 

then as a parent or as a student determine, okay, I’m saving 250 

here. How much more is it going to cost me to go to university 

a year from now or two years from now, knowing full well that 

the university has got a lot of debt to service? 

 

The University of Saskatchewan, the U of R, all these different 

institutions out there, they have a lot of debt to service. And 

guess what, Mr. Speaker? They’re not getting any money off 

the government. Both the federal and provincial governments 

have wiped their hands clean of any further funding to these 

proud institutions. And now the student and the parents at home 

have to sit down and they have to calculate what it could cost 

them, the increased cost for sending their child to the university, 

Mr. Speaker, or to any post-secondary institution. It’s going to 

be a considerable amount more. 

 

So on one hand, if everything lines up as the minister indicated 

under this bill, if all the stars line up and everybody takes 

advantage of the grant program for up to $250 per year, then 

there’ll be some people eligible and some people not. 

 

However, I would encourage those families and those students 

and those student unions out there to watch very carefully 

because while we’re encouraging you to take the grant that’s 

identified here — we’re encouraging you to work with people 

that want to save for their educational purposes; that’s a great 

idea — but to really contrast, to really contrast what this 

program will, how it will help you under the basic knowledge 

that the university that you may be attending are going to be 

increasing your tuition rates for them to start paying their 

interest and their debt that was created by the Sask Party. And 

you’re going to find out very quickly, Mr. Speaker, that $250 a 

year is not going to be enough to cover the increases that the 

university will want to tack on to their students because they 

simply have to find the ways and means to pay their bills, to 

make ends meet from the university perspective. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the crux of the issue and the concern that I have 

and we have in opposition, on Bill 66. 

 

So people out there ought to know that that’s the kind of 

information that we would like to know. We know that students 

have increased costs in accommodation. There’s increased costs 

in food. There’s increased costs in your power, your telephone. 

The list goes on, Mr. Speaker. So I think people out there are 

sharp enough and they’re very intelligent and they’re very 

motivated to find out exactly how this is going to be an 

advantage to students or to families wanting to save for 

education and to be able to afford that education. 

 

So the key message I would have on Bill 66 is that of course we 

encourage people to save for education, but what you’re saving 

under this particular bill will be a lot less, would be a lot less 

from what the tuition hikes will be when the universities send 

you your bill for your child or for your education because the 

Sask Party simply refused to follow through on their election 

commitment from the last election to fully fund the universities’ 

capital construction costs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what happens now they’ve broken the 

promise? Guess who’s paying that. The people of 

Saskatchewan, the students of Saskatchewan will be paying that 

bill. And, Mr. Speaker, make no two bones about this fact, that 

it’s not going to be the Sask Party is going to go back and pay 

that bill. They already said no, absolutely not; the door has been 

closed. So guess what? The students and the parents are going 

to be paying that particular bill. 

 

So what kind of costs are we looking at, Mr. Speaker? I would 

determine when I say that the $2,000 mark, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

totally not something that’s out to lunch. Because I’ve 

incorporated what I think is a very conservative estimate of 

what the fees or the tuition costs might be, but I’ve also looked 

at the costs of rents. Rents are skyrocketing in the city. I look at 

the costs of transportation. I’ve looked at the food costs. And 

these costs don’t stay stable and nor do they decrease. 

 

So for the student to go into Saskatoon and to be able to go to a 

post-secondary program, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to cost you a 

lot more money through tuition, but it’s going to cost you a 

heck of a lot more money if you come from outside the 

community and don’t have any living accommodation within 

the city. 

 

So we’re seeing this obviously as something that is a small, 

small step in the right direction of encouraging people to save 

for their education purposes — families and students. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the big hammer comes when that student gets accepted 

into university and all of a sudden the bill comes in for tuition. 

All of a sudden the bill comes in for rent. All of a sudden the 

bill comes in for finding furniture, for finding the 

accommodations, for finding the transportation, for being able 

to be able to eat and survive in the city. Those are when all the 

bills are coming in, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something that’s 

really, really important and that I would encourage people to 

certainly take into account when they’re assessing the merits of 

this bill. 

 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

So clearly we think the bill is short in many, many ways in 

terms of financial commitment, primarily because it’s a much, 

much smaller amount to what the students and families will pay 

as a result of the increased tuition costs that universities will be 

tacking on to their children because the Sask Party simply 

didn’t follow through with their election commitments, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So clearly there’s a lot more information we want on this bill. 

We are going to consult with the students’ union and we are 

going to consult with some of the teachers and some of the 

faculty and some of the students as well. And the parents, Mr. 

Speaker: I think those are the folks that generally do a lot of 

heavy lifting when their children are going to a post-secondary 

opportunity and they should know that on one hand you’ve got 

this, but clearly they’ll say, well that’s great to be able to access 

that part of the support plan, but look at the opposite side, the 

cost factor. This is absolutely ridiculous. 

 

So once again we’re seeing the Sask Party give out the crumbs 

on one hand, and take the wallet out of the working men and 

women with the other hand. Because quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, as the result of the non-commitment to the 

universities, universities are borrowing more money and the 

costs for interest and paying down the principal are greater. And 

the only place that they could tack on those costs are onto 

students through the tuition fees, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a 

crying shame. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have a lot more to 

say on this particular bill. I’m very pleased to give the official 

opposition’s first look at this bill and to assure you that there’s 

eight other folks and thousands of families that are going to be 

impacted as a result of some of the, the decision that the Sask 

Party make. And certainly from our opposition point of view, 

we’re going to defend those families, we’re going to speak up 

for those families, and we’re going to expose the Sask Party for 

some of the problems that they have created. And yet they try 

and hide it with small, small steps of this sort, Mr. Speaker, and 

it’s our job as opposition to make sure we expose that. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 66. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 66, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 

Education Savings (SAGES) Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Justices of the Peace Amendment 

Act, 2012. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this bill is to introduce a 

new process for determining salaries and benefits for 

Saskatchewan’s justices of the peace. 

 

Remuneration for Saskatchewan JPs [Justice of the Peace] is 

currently set through the regulations and is on a fee-for-service 

basis for most tasks and on an hourly wage basis for more 

complex matters. This bill will bring The Justices of the Peace 

Act, 1988 into compliance with these principles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan JPs perform a variety of duties and 

are an essential part of day-to-day functioning of our judicial 

system. Some of the more basic tasks performed by JPs include 

handling court process and paperwork, matters such as oaths, 

affirmations, and affidavits. Other JPs attend to more complex 

matters such as conducting remand and release hearings and the 

issuant of search warrants. 

 

The process, Mr. Speaker, is now inadequate, given that courts 

have ruled the principles of judicial independence applies not 

only to judges but also JPs. One element of judicial 

independence is the guarantee of financial security to judicial 

officers such as JPs. Financial security embodies three 

requirements. Firstly, salaries could be maintained or changed 

only by recourse to an independent process. Secondly, no direct 

negotiations are permitted between judicial officers and the 

government. And finally, salaries may not fall below a certain 

minimum level. 

 

Senior JPs, Mr. Speaker, are most responsible . . . have most of 

the responsibility. These individuals conduct trials for 

provincially regulated offences as well as bylaw and traffic 

safety matters. In recent years, the work of these JPs has taken 

pressure off our Provincial Court and improved timely access to 

the criminal justice system. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The framework introduced through this bill achieves judicial 

independence by granting an independent commission the 

authority to review and make recommendations regarding 

salaries and pension benefits for JPs. Following the initial 

recommendation of the independent commission, the annual 

salary for JPs will be established as a percentage of annual 

salary of Saskatchewan Provincial Court judge. Going forward, 

Mr. Speaker, the salary applicable to JPs will be adjusted 

annually in accordance with any adjustments to the salary for 

Provincial Court judges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will bring senior justices of the peace into 

the public employees pension plan. In addition, as a part of its 

function, the independent commission will review and make 

recommendations regarding contributions to that plan by senior 

JPs and the government. 

 

This bill also provides that the independent commission will 

conduct a subsequent review of JP salaries and pension benefits 

in 2018 and then every six years following 2018. Periodic 

review of these matters are required to meet the constitutional 

guarantee of independence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Steps have been taken in this bill, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 

the remuneration process does not impact on the independent 

process that is currently in place to determine salaries and 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

benefits for Provincial Court judges. Specifically, Mr. Speaker, 

this bill provides that the Minister of Justice, the Saskatchewan 

Justice of the Peace Association, and any JP shall not be 

granted standing to make submissions regarding salary and 

benefits for justices of the peace to a Provincial Court 

commission. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, a transitional bill or a transitional 

provision in this bill ensures that JPs will continue to be paid 

for services performed up to and until the first commission 

regulation comes into force. At that time, Mr. Speaker, JPs will 

be remunerated at the new salary level for services performed 

back to April 1, 2013 less any amounts earned in that transition 

period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Justice of the Peace Association 

has been consulted with on the remuneration framework 

contained in the bill and supports the approach. Mr. Speaker, I 

now move second reading of The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 67, The Community 

Planning Profession Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure . . . Oh sorry, I 

jumped one here . . . move second reading of Bill No. 68, The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of 

the . . . I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

again pleased to stand up on behalf of the opposition to give the 

initial comments on this particular bill where we’re talking 

about justices of the peace’s salaries, Mr. Speaker. And I was 

pleased that we got some information beforehand. 

 

And certainly as the minister spoke about some of the changes 

that he would like to see happen, Mr. Speaker, there’s no 

question that the JPs, as we call them, are very valuable to the 

court system or to the justice system, and that he had alluded a 

bit to the information as to what their purposes are, what their 

role is in terms of court powers, taking oaths and affidavits, the 

remand and release options, and of course issuing search 

warrants. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the JPs have a wide variety of roles as the 

minister spoke about. And he also spoke about the value of the 

JPs in the justice process and of course within the justice 

system. Now we obviously, from our perspective as the 

opposition, we want to make sure that we know exactly what 

we’re dealing with. So some of the educational issues that the 

minister alluded to when he introduced the bill, that information 

certainly helps. It helps a lot of lay people try as best they can to 

understand the role and where they fit in the scheme of the 

delivery of justice — I shouldn’t say or use the word scheme, 

Mr. Speaker, but for lack of a better word — where they fit in 

terms of their role and when do they enter into some of the 

processes when there are justice matters being discussed. 

 

What’s really important from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, is 

that we have a defined role and a defined responsibility and 

certainly a defined area in which the JPs are to be used. I 

understand that JPs are not judges, Mr. Speaker, that they do 

have some limits as to what they are able to do. But there’s no 

question in my mind that if you have a very skilled judge, you 

don’t want him to be tied up in some of the processes that the 

JPs do. And likely you don’t want the JPs infringing on the 

judges’ territories as well. 

 

So I think it’s very important that, as an opposition, that we take 

the time and the opportunity to try and educate the public from 

our perspective as to what we understand the bill’s intent to be, 

but we also want to make sure that they understand exactly 

what the implications are. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a graph nor do we 

have a comparison scale as to what the JPs are being paid now. 

Nor do we have information as to how much the JPs or how 

many JPs are operating in the province. Nor do we have a 

breakdown of the different levels of JPs. I understand the 

minister spoke of a JP three, level three, if I’m not wrong. But 

how does that, what does that salary compare to a JP two or an 

initial entrance of somebody that wants to be a JP? 

 

So this is some of the information that we in opposition will 

want. We will obviously have our opportunity to ask those 

questions during estimates and we certainly will. So overall I 

think the JPs’ salaries, I understand, are going to be tied to what 

a provincial court judge may make now. So what is the increase 

from what they’re being paid now to what they may be paid 

later? What is that cost going to be? And if it’s retroactive, what 

is that cost going to be? 

 

So there’s a lot of questions that we have, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s something that we want to take the time to understand 

very well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about the JPs’ salaries 

being paid on two fronts in the current state, one being a 

fee-for-service option, and of course the other being an hourly 

wage. Now, Mr. Speaker, we need to break that down as well so 

the people of Saskatchewan know that we have X amount of 

JPs in the province, we have X amount of classes of JPs in the 

province, this is what the different classes and different JPs are 

being paid, this is what it’s going to be — the new pay structure 

is going to result in these new costs. And we don’t have that 

information in front of us, Mr. Speaker. But as an official 

opposition we’ve got to find out that information, and we 

certainly will, Mr. Speaker, as time proceeds. 

 

So from my perspective, an initial look at the whole issue of 

JPs’ salaries. They play an important role. They are independent 

of the political process. I understand that and I certainly respect 

that as well. But clearly I think you’ve got to have a good solid 

line so we know that there are judges, that there are JPs, that 

there are police officers, that there are political people, and that 

all these lines cannot be blurred in any way, shape, or form. 

And I think once that integral part of the justice system is 

enforced and certainly part of anything that a government does, 

Mr. Speaker, then and only then will we feel a bit comfortable 

with going down the path of recognizing the different roles and 

making sure they’re paid accordingly. 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say. We 

have some very capable people in our caucus. We have several 

lawyers, and they know a lot about how this process works. So I 

think on this front that Bill 68 will certainly get good scrutiny, 

by not only our caucus, but the open invite to the public in 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

general, to the public in general, that they will come forward 

and give us their opinion and their take and ask questions as 

well of us that they may not know and they might want 

information on. And that option is always there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say on this particular 

bill. We look forward to the information that we would want 

from the minister. And as a result of that ongoing work that is 

necessary on this particular bill, I move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 68. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 68, The Justices of the Peace Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 52 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 52 — The Public 

Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to speak to Bill No. 52, which is a piece of legislation that 

is intended to deal with some consequential amendments that 

are required in order to bring into effect Bill No. 51, which I 

have spoken to previously. And so this is just a continuation of 

that, Mr. Speaker. These types of bills, as you know, are the 

ones that are required to ensure that all legislation reflects 

changes to legislation that’s subsequently affected by changes 

to an initial piece. 

 

And The Public Inquiries Act, 2012 is one that’s being brought 

forward by the Minister of Justice to modernize the format of 

public inquiries and to bring it in line with the work of the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And it 

makes sense for him to be doing that at this time. And it also 

makes sense and is actually required to do some consequential 

amendments to that to ensure that all legislation that refers to 

The Public Inquiries Act is properly amended. 

 

So in this case, as the minister indicated in his initial comments 

on November 6th, he indicated that there are 45 English Acts 

and one English regulation that refers to the current Act, The 

Public Inquiries Act, and that in each case these amendments 

that are being proposed just refer to the provisions of the new 

Act, which is of course The Public Inquiries Act 2012. So he 

went on to say that “. . . the majority of Acts will be amended to 

provide powers conferred on a commission by section 11, the 

power to compel evidence; section 15, contempt of 

commission; and section 25, the ability to hire staff.” 

So there’s a number of changes he’s proposing. For example 

The Agricultural Operations Act is being changed to refer to the 

modern-day Act. The Agri-Food Act, 2004 is being amended to 

strike out the reference to a commissioner under the old Act and 

substituting a commission now, which is the language of the 

new public inquiries Act, 2012, similar changes to Acts like The 

Amusement Ride Safety Act. 

 

And certainly all the Acts that have any reference to a public 

inquiry, if and when it’s required, as you know public inquiries 

are fairly public, hence their name, inquiries that involve all 

members of the public. And they’re often quite noteworthy in 

the media. Anything to do with correctional services is often the 

ones where we do see public inquiries, both federally and 

provincially. And I’m not sure that we will see a lot of public 

hearings in relation to The Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act, 

but I’m pleased to note that that is an option available to us. 

 

I could imagine public hearings when we get to something like 

The Heritage Property Act because that’s a sensitive topic for a 

lot of people in this province. And obviously The Labour 

Standards Act, Mr. Speaker, is also being amended because, as 

we can see, under The Labour Standards Act there’s a number 

of sections that refer to public inquiries. And I would expect 

that these sections of The Labour Standards Act are going to 

become quite used and maybe followed up on. We could be 

seeing inquiries, depending on the nature of the legislation that 

we’re anticipating to be tabled soon in this House, in relation to 

labour standards. 

 

We are also seeing changes to The Land Titles Act. Again, 

public inquiries are available under certain sections of The Land 

Titles Act. And with the legislation that was introduced today to 

privatize 60 per cent of our Crown, Information Services 

Corporation, which is responsible for the land titles system, 

obviously there may be issues that arise out of that for which a 

public inquiry might be needed. 

 

There’s a number of other bills. The Mental Health Services Act 

is being amended. The Municipal Board Act is being amended. 

There’s references in The Municipalities Act. 

 

And another one, Mr. Speaker, is The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act, 1993, and that’s also an area where there may be 

necessity for a public inquiry. And it makes sense that there’s 

references there in that statute to the availability of a public 

inquiry for occupational health and safety concerns. As we 

know, there’s lots of industries in Saskatchewan where this is 

an important factor in the workplace, and so it makes sense that 

there is a reference to The Public Inquiries Act in those 

legislations and that we are making the appropriate changes, 

given the introduction of the new bill by the Minister of Justice, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Other bills that are affected are things like The Police Act, The 

Provincial Auditor Act, The Provincial Lands Act, and the list 

goes on. 

 

Interestingly enough, The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 also 

has a reference to a public inquiry; The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act, obviously one of importance to the farming 

community and the producers in this province. 

 



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

[15:00] 

 

Even The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act is 

one that has reference to The Public Inquiries Act. And I’m not 

familiar with any actual public inquiries that have occurred 

under that Act, but that’s one area where there is often 

disagreement between the land owner and the producers and 

whether or not the board itself was able to deal with all the 

disputes accordingly. Apparently the previous legislators 

thought it was wise to include an opportunity for a public 

inquiry in that instance. 

 

We also have The Traffic Safety Act being amended and The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Act, water appeal 

board Act, workers’ compensation Act, The Youth Drug 

Detoxification and Stabilization Act. And finally there’s one set 

of regulations that also needs to be amended, and that’s The 

Public Health Appeals Regulations. 

 

So as you see, Mr. Speaker, the influence and the impact of the 

public inquiries is one that’s spread across a great number of 

types of legislation and areas of legislation in our province. And 

that’s why there are so many Acts that are amended under this 

consequential amendment Act. So at this point that’s probably 

the extent — that is the extent — of my comments to this Bill 

No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 

2012. And I would move to adjourn debate on this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 53 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As a new 

legislator, I am interested to see these types of bills being 

introduced in the Assembly. We saw one in the last session, and 

we’re seeing one again today where the government is basically 

going through the closet and seeing what outfits haven’t been 

worn for a while. In this case, there’s a number of statutes that 

this government has identified that are no longer necessary. 

And yet we’ve not . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I won’t touch 

that one, Mr. Speaker. We’re going through the list of statutes 

that are out of style and perhaps need a little modernization in 

how they look to the public. So there’s a number of bills in here 

that the government is intending to repeal, and I’ll make a few 

comments on some of those as I go through my comments on 

this bill. 

 

The first bill that’s being repealed is one that, I think, sadly 

shows how universities need to be funded, and that’s The 

Crown Foundations Act. As the minister indicated in his 

opening comments to the bill on November 6th, he indicated 

that the bill was introduced to allow universities to take 

advantage of income tax treatment for donations made to 

charities and to the Crown. And at that time there was a 

different formula for the treatment of donations to universities. I 

guess since then, in 1996 there were changes made and the 

distinction was eliminated, that tax credit distinction. It was a 

valuable tax credit apparently, and now there’s no more tax 

advantage gained from establishing that kind of foundation. So 

the minister has decided this Act does not need to continue. 

 

However as we see today, the impact of restraint on spending at 

the universities is causing them to make some very difficult 

decisions, including the closure of the Emma Lake Kenderdine 

Campus where I have spent many wonderful times through 

different arts organizations, including the Emma Lake fiddle 

camp, which ran there for 20 years, and also a blacksmithing 

camp for women where I was one of the . . . We called 

ourselves the sisters of fire. 

 

At Emma Lake there’s fiddling. There is blacksmithing, in 

addition to worldwide artists coming from New York for many, 

many years and making a name for Emma Lake in that area as 

well. Who knew, Mr. Speaker, that those kinds of things are 

actually available at the Emma Lake Kenderdine Campus. The 

range of artistic activity that takes place is really astounding, 

and it’s a huge loss to our cultural fabric in the province to lose 

the Emma Lake Kenderdine Campus. The cafeteria there and 

the big fireplace in the central gathering space is one where I 

think many, many wonderful conversations and artistic, inspired 

works of art have been inspired. 

 

And certainly the Emma Lake gathering of craft artisans for 

many years inspired all kinds of beautiful and original craft 

pieces that also worked on the notion of collaboration, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And that’s another piece that will be lost, is 

the ability for artists to gather and share ideas, and that’s truly 

the foundation I think of creativity and inspiration. And when 

universities are forced to close campuses like the Kenderdine 

Campus, it’s really a closure of artistic opportunity here in the 

province, not only artistic opportunity but the college of biology 

has also . . . The biology group in the College of Arts & Science 

used that space for all kinds of university credit-type courses 

where students were actually out in the field doing biological 

work and learning and studying and again sharing ideas. 

 

So when we lose that kind of institution in our universities, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a sign that there’s really tough times ahead for 

universities. Perhaps rather than repealing this bill, the 

government might consider reintroducing it and allowing a tax 

advantage for people who donate to universities, although we 

know they’re not really in favour of tax credits. But this is a 

case where it might be justifiable in order to ensure that things 

like the Kenderdine Campus continue to be available to the 

people of Saskatchewan and people from abroad. 

 

I don’t know if you’re familiar with the Emma Lake artist 

group, where there’s art coming from, particularly in the ’60s, 

for a number of years. And it continues to this day. Well not 

now because it closed. But it has continued where artists have 

come from around the world and some of the leading-edge 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

paintings have come right out of the Kenderdine Campus — 

names like Dorothy Knowles, Ernie Lindner, and other 

Saskatchewan painters. Bill Perehudoff is another painter 

whose works have come from the Emma Lake artists group, and 

those works are recognized around the world, Mr. Speaker. So 

it’s a real loss. And although our Minister of Advanced 

Education indicated earlier today that this is not the work of this 

government, I think it’s the failure of action on the part of this 

government and the off-loading of debt onto the universities 

that is the direct result in the loss of this valuable campus. 

 

Another bill that this miscellaneous statutes repeal is proposing 

to repeal, another Act, is The Cut Knife Reference Act. And 

that’s an interesting bill just in and of its nature because it talks 

about taking out a space. The word Cut Knife is treated as one, 

and what the bill did is that whenever there was a reference to 

the word Cut Knife as two words — Cut space Knife — then 

it’s essentially now the one word Cutknife. But apparently 

that’s been dealt with in all other pieces of legislation, and so 

there is a need to repeal the bill because it’s irrelevant.  

 

And so that’s just an interesting little bit of history, Mr. 

Speaker, as is the battle of Cut Knife, which I think is an 

interesting part of our history as well. So it’s always nice to 

refer to the rich history of our province. And this bill is just an 

indication of how names are important and certainly getting it 

right is what we want. It’s a valuable use of our Ministry of 

Justice staff to make sure that these spaces are dealt with in the 

appropriate way, so good work to them. 

 

The next one that’s being repealed is The Municipal Debentures 

Repayment Act. And the speaker spoke briefly to that as well, 

and he said there that this is 100 years ago when this bill came 

in. It’s a long time ago in our province’s history, right at the 

beginning, near the beginning. And there was Acts that required 

municipalities to issue debentures with prescribed terms and 

levy rates for repayment. And that was passed in 1915, Mr. 

Speaker, so almost 100 years ago, and it gave municipalities the 

ability to extend the terms of the government. 

 

So right now those are being dealt with through the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board, and there’s modern-day Acts 

that are dealing with financing and restructuring financing for 

municipalities. So now when they need extending of the terms, 

repayment terms, they can do that on the basis of current Acts. 

So here’s a little bit of history that is no longer relevant, I guess, 

in terms of the modern operation of financing for 

municipalities, and the Minister of Justice is repealing that one 

as well.  

 

He also, in section 5 of the miscellaneous statutes repeal bill, 

he’s repealing or proposing to repeal The Municipal 

Development and Loan (Saskatchewan) Act. And the municipal 

development and loan, in his comments he indicated it was 

passed in 1964 to implement a federal Act. And this is where 

the federal government passed an Act allowing provinces to 

borrow monies from the feds and loan them to the 

municipalities for capital works. And apparently in 1983 the 

federal Act was repealed, rendering this legislation obsolete. So 

we are looking at 29 years later. It’s been obsolete for 29 years, 

and this Ministry of Justice has seen fit to remove it from the 

books. Again I don’t have any further comment on that one, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

The next one that the Minister of Justice is proposing to repeal 

is the municipality improvements assistance Act. And the 

municipality improvement assistance Act was passed in 1939. 

Again we’re seeing some of our history here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I think that’s one of the most interesting parts of 

these types of bills is we get a chance to comment and review 

on a bit of our past. And in this case it was passed in ’39 to 

implement yet another federal bill which was the municipal 

improvements assistance Act. 

 

And you can imagine in 1939 . . . I just watched a show last 

night on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] about the dust bowl 

in the United States, and that was in those years from 1930 . . . 

Basically ’35 is when the dust bowl hit the American 

Southwest. And those things really changed a lot of people’s 

lives, and I know my own father speaks of seeing people 

moving past the farm. Our farm was on a municipal road, and 

he still remembers seeing people with all their personal 

belongings loaded up on a vehicle or a horse and carriage and 

moving away because of the dramatic conditions of the dirty 

thirties.  

 

So obviously in those days that’s when PFRA [Prairie Farm 

Rehabilitation Administration] was established. There’s all 

kinds of federal and governmental interventions, which is 

appropriate. That’s what governments do is look after people 

when they’re needy. And in that case it was the Municipal 

Improvements Assistance Act. And what that federal loan did 

was it gave loans to municipalities or power corporations, 

interestingly, across Canada for the construction of public 

works.  

 

So it’s again the sign of government supporting institutions and 

ensuring that they have the financial support they need and the 

ability to borrow, again the previous bill, for obtaining 

debentures in a way that they can operate successfully, even in 

times of extreme and critical need in the finances of the 

province and the federal government. And again that’s not what 

we’re seeing today when we see things like the Kenderdine 

campus being shut down and the University of Saskatchewan 

being financed beyond its ability. 

 

There’s a number of other bills in this Act that are also being 

repealed: The NewGrade Energy Inc Act and The Sales on 

Consignment Act. Again those are bills that don’t have any 

more relevance for the current day, and that’s why the minister 

is seeing fit, and his ministry, to repeal these Acts at this time. 

 

So I think at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would be the 

extent of my comments. I know my colleagues are going to 

want to comment on these bills as well and the little bit of 

history that they represent in our province. And perhaps we’ll 

hear from some of our constituents about any concerns that may 

be held out there in reference to the repeal of these various 

Acts. But at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I propose to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 53. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 53. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 54 — The Seizure 

of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to make a 

few remarks about Bill No. 54, An Act to amend The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act, 2009. Not a hugely long bill, Mr. 

Speaker, but an important one as it relates to law enforcement 

and relates to the situation that we often find ourselves in when 

there has been criminal activity; someone has been found 

guilty, and there is criminal activity, and it’s necessary for 

results to be taken with respect to The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in looking at this piece of legislation, the Minister 

of Justice highlighted a few important points in his second 

reading speech. And the points, Mr. Speaker, come out of 

information that I would assume is based on feedback or 

experiences that have been received from law enforcement 

officials and through the courts with respect to areas where the 

legislation had been working well and facilitated proper 

enforcement of The Seizure of Criminal Property Act and areas 

where there were some barriers and problems were identified. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So I think it’s good when we have the opportunity on an 

ongoing basis to examine legislation, see what parts are 

working with respect to The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 

and make necessary changes. But whenever changes are made, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to ensure that the right balance is 

being struck. It’s important to ensure that individual’s rights are 

being protected, personal rights as well as property rights, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s important to ensure that the changes do in fact 

enhance the bill and enhance the enforcement of the Act. I think 

that’s an important remark to make off the top before I get into 

some of the details. 

 

When we think, Mr. Speaker, of crime when it’s present in 

society, we need to ensure that we have the proper enforcement. 

We need to ensure that we have the proper consequences for 

individuals that are engaged in criminal activity. And most 

certainly that can’t be the sole focus. We need to have a strong 

focus on prevention when it comes to crime. That needs to be 

there in the early years of individuals’ lives and present so that 

we don’t find ourselves in situations where people turn to a life 

of crime. So it’s necessary to have a strong focus on prevention 

issues as it relates to people living productive lives and 

following the letter of the law. 

 

We need strong policing, Mr. Speaker. That’s crucial and key 

so that police officers have the ability to do their job, to carry 

out the laws, to do enforcement. And that’s something that we 

commonly hear when we’re speaking with constituents is that 

they want police officers to be able to do the work that they’re 

trained to do and have the resources available to them. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we also need the correct punishment. 

We need the correct consequences for actions, not in a 

vindictive sense, Mr. Speaker, but in a way that there’s a 

deterrent provided and that in certain situations when property 

can be seized, or there’s a legislative provision for that to occur, 

so that in certain circumstances the public system is able to 

recoup some costs when there is a legal property involved in 

criminal activity or with criminal activity or a legal property or 

earnings are realized through illegal activity. 

 

A number of items identified by the minister’s speech, Mr. 

Speaker, and the one area that the minister identifies is coming 

out of enforcement issues. And by the minister’s words here in 

his second reading speech, he said: 

 

The bill will amend the definition of instrument of 

unlawful activity. The change will make it clear that 

property used to engage in unlawful activity but that has 

not yet resulted in the acquisition or production of 

property may still be subject to forfeiture. Forfeiture 

could proceed if there is evidence of the likelihood that 

the activity will result in the acquisition or production of 

property or evidence of an intention on the part of the 

respondent to obtain such property. 

 

And that was page 1788 of Hansard on November 6th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I read that, I believe it’s suggesting that what 

this change would allow for is that if there is property 

connected with criminal activity but not directly resulting from 

that critical activity, that it could be in fact within the realm of 

forfeiture. So perhaps one example could be if there was 

earnings that were being accumulated in order to perform a 

crime or to facilitate crime, Mr. Speaker, or if there was a 

pattern of behaviour and people have been convicted of other 

crimes, as I read this, I think it would widen the net so that 

more items could be under the possibility of forfeiture, I think. 

 

So with that understanding, Mr. Speaker, it is important to 

ensure that we are striking the right balance between what law 

enforcement officers and the courts are able to achieve and also 

while at the same time respecting the rights of individuals. So 

that is an important balance to strike. So I would, Mr. Speaker, 

be interested in knowing — and perhaps committee will be an 

opportunity for us to pursue a line of questioning on this topic 

— but I would be interested, Mr. Speaker, to know what the 

range of consultation was with respect to this issue, if it was 

simply on the enforcement side or if there were other sources 

where opinion was received, to ensure that we are striking the 

right balance there. 

 

Another component, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the seizure of 

property. And as the minister said in his second reading speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will also specifically authorize the 

director to make an application to the courts by statement 

of claim in addition to the existing ability to proceed by 

notice of motion. It will deal with the challenges of proof 

of ownership by removing the requirement to name the 

owner of the property as a party to an application in all 

cases and extend the period from 30 to 60 days during 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

which time the director can request an order to prevent 

the sale, transfer of property prior to bringing a forfeiture 

application. This change will also provide authority for 

the court to extend a restraining order for any further 

period the court views appropriate. 

 

Again, from page 1788 of November 6th Hansard. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, what we see here is the loosening of 

the requirements with respect to proof of ownership where there 

could be a condition put on a piece of property. So in this 

situation, I would assume it might be a setting where there is 

property involved with a crime, but the property is not in the 

name of the individual performing the crime, but there’s a 

connection between the property and the accused. And so I 

would imagine, Mr. Speaker — and again some more details 

from the minister on this would be good to know what instances 

are motivating or providing the impetus for this piece of 

legislation — but I can imagine a situation where someone 

might be turning a blind eye knowing that property is being 

used for a crime. And this would increase the people 

responsible, in a way, if a blind eye is being turned when a 

crime is being performed with property. And so it allows the 

enforcement side to put a hold on a property so that it can’t be 

sold or transferred while the issue may be being addressed by 

the courts. 

 

So again, whenever you have any sort of issue like this where 

you’re widening the rules and making it easier to address pieces 

of property, it’s important that we are striking the right balance. 

I’m not saying that this isn’t striking the right balance, but I do 

think it warrants a bit more explanation so that we know that we 

are achieving desirable outcomes with the changes. 

 

And a final component that I’ll speak about, Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to the changes being brought forward in this amendment 

and amendments to The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, and 

this, Mr. Speaker, has to do with sealing orders. And the 

minister’s remarks on this piece say: 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, this bill will make procedural 

changes to provide for a sealing order regarding the 

respondents’ affidavits, provided that evidence of a 

person that was not charged with an offence is not 

relevant in making a finding of fact in an application 

under the Act. It will address how the rules of court will 

apply to an application under the Act, including one made 

by way of statement of claim. It will provide that the 

limitation period commences when the director is 

satisfied that property is proceeds of unlawful activity or 

an instrument of unlawful activity rather than two years 

from the point of discovery. And it will provide that 

evidence is admissible based on information and belief in 

order to lessen the burden on testifying police officers. 

 

So I apologize for the long quote, Mr. Speaker, but this would 

affect, as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, providing more 

information and allowing for more opportunities when sealing 

orders would be appropriate, when information would be 

guarded and not shared with the public in order to facilitate a 

process and to make things go more smoothly. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it is identified as lessening the burden on testifying 

police officers, so to allow police officers to do other work and 

not being tied necessarily to having to make court appearances 

and procedural matters as opposed to enforcing the law. 

 

So it would seem, Mr. Speaker, again another item that is 

brought to the attention of the ministry based on the experience 

of enforcement and of police officers. So again it may be a good 

change, but it is, whenever information is being sealed, that is a 

concern for the public because we ought to operate in a manner 

that allows for as much transparency and openness as possible. 

So those are some points that I make on this amendment Act, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said, it’s good and necessary that we examine legislation 

and ensure that it is responsive to the current needs because 

situations do change. And like any piece of legislation, there 

may be things that do need adjusting. It would be good, Mr. 

Speaker, to have a bit more information from the minister with 

respect to what safeguards were put in place to ensure that the 

necessary balance is being achieved in this proposed legislation. 

 

So perhaps we will have some questions in committee for him 

on that time. And we would also like the opportunity to speak 

with other individuals and other organizations to get their 

feedback on these proposed changes about how it may in their 

view make the legislation stronger or perhaps weaker. We 

obviously want legislation to always be stronger and more 

effective. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will wrap up and conclude my 

remarks on Bill No. 54, An Act to amend The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act, 2009. And I would move to adjourn 

debate on this piece of legislation. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 

 

Bill No. 55 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 55 — The 

Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Pleasure to rise to participate in the debate around Bill No. 55, 

The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act. 

 

Certainly there’s a wide range of activity touched upon by this 

piece of legislation. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, when I think of 

consumer protection, I automatically think of something that 

had happened in the riding of Regina Elphinstone not too very 

long ago but as related to a particular travel agency that had a 

lot of people relying on it in terms of sales. 

 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

There’s one very, very popular charity in town, Mr. Speaker, 

where there’d been a prize donated to that charity. And of 

course if you don’t have the prize, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty hard 

for that charity to explain to the folks. And of course, you 

know, the good name of the charity was such that folks were 

relatively understanding, but there’s a damage that comes to 

credibility through no fault of the folks that bought the travel 

package, Mr. Speaker. And of course they’re left to sort 

through. 

 

But in the case of this travel agency that went bankrupt, Mr. 

Speaker, before they did that of course, they took off in the 

middle of the night. The owner left various people on the hook 

for rent, for outstanding contracts with the agency, and of 

course people that had bought, had laid down fairly significant 

amounts of money to go on different trips, Mr. Speaker. And I 

don’t know about you — maybe you’re a bit more jet set than I 

— but certainly growing up in our family, the main mode of 

travel was usually in the McCall family station wagon, and 

plane trips to exotic locales, that was something that was very 

much out of our day-to-day or year-to-year experience, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I always think of the people that, you know, would be 

scrimping together the money — maybe they’ve got a dream to 

see a certain place on the globe — and again in terms of travel 

agencies and what kind of protections we have there for people 

that have put up that money to buy a ticket, to buy a travel 

package. I know that it caused a lot of hard feelings, caused a 

lot of hardship for people when this particular travel agency that 

again was headquartered in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, when it 

not just went into bankruptcy but when you had the owner 

unconscionably, Mr. Speaker, taking off in the middle of the 

night and, again as I say, leaving suppliers, the landlords, 

leaving different people high and dry in the process. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Well again, Mr. Speaker, there’s a certain kind of restitution or 

recompense that you can seek through the legal system, be it in 

this case, Mr. Speaker, there were fraud charges levelled against 

the individual. And as part of the sentencing provision in the 

summer of 2010, Mr. Speaker, that individual had to pay back 

some of the monies that were outstanding to different 

individuals. And again I would commend the judge for the 

appropriateness of that particular measure in the punishment for 

this individual in terms of not just not living up to their end of 

the contract, Mr. Speaker, but for the fraud involved, the way 

that people had had their money taken, expecting a service and 

that not coming through. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of consumer protection and 

where we’re at in terms of the legal oversight for business 

practices in this province, that is something that, you know, for 

me really brought home the need for good legislation in that 

regard and making sure that we’ve got the oversight and the 

penalties in place to not just put a stop to this kind of bad 

behaviour but to make sure that we’ve got the deterrents there 

as well. 

 

I think of as well is we have a fair number of seniors in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, Mr. Speaker, and certainly in my home 

neighbourhood of North Central there are still a fair number of 

seniors. And the kind of sharp practices that certain 

door-to-door salespeople can engage in, and again it’s . . . You 

know, I know for certain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know your 

way around a doorstep. I certainly know my way around a 

doorstep, and I’d venture to say that most folks in this 

Assembly are familiar with what it’s like to come walking up 

that front walk and knocking on the door. And it’s a very 

immediate form of contact with people. It’s a very intimate 

form of contact with people in terms of looking them in the eye 

and talking about what’s important to them and different issues 

that they’re facing. And certainly there’s a gift to it. 

 

It’s an interesting way for people to pursue sales, Mr. Speaker. 

And again, you’ve got that . . . If you’re a salesperson on that 

doorstep, you’ve got a pretty good indication as to what the 

competency is like of that person, what kind of situation they’re 

in. And you know, we get a lot of concern raised about what 

happens with the telemarketers, and I’ll get into that in a 

moment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in terms of consumer protection legislation and what 

happens with people that are selling goods and services or 

selling home repairs or selling different things, Mr. Speaker, 

door to door, and perhaps in some cases attaching onto people 

that are too trusting or maybe not as on guard as they need to 

be, consumer protection legislation and oversight should be sort 

of the front line there for people to look to those protections that 

we should be putting together as a society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think also about, you know, different sort of promotions that 

are made through the years around gym memberships. I’ve had 

the good fortune of dealing mostly with either the city of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, or with the Regina YMCA [Young Men’s 

Christian Association]. And I’ve never had the misfortune to 

encounter a gym membership that you pay for the service, and 

that service is expected, and you head to the gym the next day 

and lo and behold the doors are closed, Mr. Speaker. But again 

that’s another place where consumer protection legislation 

needs to be up to the mark and serving to ensure that people are 

protected when they pay some money, to ensure that they’ve 

got a reasonable expectation not to have that money disappear 

in the middle of the night along with the owners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again referring back to the case of the travel agency, where 

the judge that sentenced that individual, Mr. Speaker, there was 

an order made for restitution in terms of paying back some of 

the more egregiously large, outstanding amounts that 

individuals have been left with. But it would be interesting to 

know how this piece of legislation intersects with that and 

whether or not there’s a way to make the legislation more 

responsive to it. 

 

So I guess one of the things that we have in no small supply 

when it comes to this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is our questions. 

And how do we stack up to other provincial jurisdictions? What 

kind of work was done to reach out to those jurisdictions to find 

out what is working and what is not? And you know, even that, 

Mr. Speaker, suggests the interjurisdictional nature of these 

things. We’ve got, you know, work that’s been done to enlist 

Saskatchewan in the New West Partnership agreement, Mr. 

Speaker, but what sort of cross-border protections do we have 

against corporations or organizations that be engaging in less 

than forthright, less than respectable, less than legal business 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

practices, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that again we’ve got that 

consumer protection in place. 

 

I think about the different sort of licensing regimes that are in 

place, Mr. Speaker, that currently are, that do have force in 

Saskatchewan. And I think about other sort of activities that do 

not, and I’ll be interested to see what sort of anticipation is 

made of recent changes in the city of Saskatoon, for example, 

Mr. Speaker, how that is anticipated by the legislation and 

whether or not this piece of legislation has force. 

 

I’m interested to know . . . Certainly over the years there have 

been different stabs made at the question of housing and who’s 

got oversight there, Mr. Speaker. Whether or not there was 

anything contemplated around the licensing of landlords, Mr. 

Speaker, or residential property under this piece of legislation, 

whether or not that was contemplated and for what grounds and 

how that reflected in this piece of legislation. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, referring to the minister’s second 

reading speech, again there’s a fair amount of language around 

consolidation and updating and housekeeping work that has 

taken place, Mr. Speaker. And again, that’s all fair enough. One 

of the things that we’re always interested in, Mr. Speaker, is 

whether or not the good proclaimed intentions meet up to the 

letter of the legislation, and certainly we have a greater 

opportunity to do that in committee. 

 

But for the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a broader job of 

consultation to engage in on this piece of legislation in terms of 

getting out across the business community, across 

Saskatchewan, to talk to people and see what their take is on 

this. And if different problems that have arisen of late, Mr. 

Speaker, certainly this is a piece of legislation where 

technology plays a pretty significant role in terms of different 

ways that people and their situation gives rise to new and 

previously unanticipated measures for consumer protection. 

Certainly that technology is changing all the time. 

 

I think about the flexibility that is anticipated in the legislation, 

according again to the minister’s second reading speech and the 

different types of activity that are covered when it comes to 

consumer contracts, be it “Internet sales, future performance, 

personal development services, travel club, and remotely 

formed contracts.” It’ll be interesting to see how that plays out, 

Mr. Speaker, and whether or not the other types of contracts and 

the new so-called simple mechanism to do so, to cover new 

forms of activity, Mr. Speaker, whether or not that does in fact 

meet the simplicity test. 

 

I guess the measures in the legislation, again responding to the 

different decisions coming from the Supreme Court of Canada 

wherein the minister references, “have caused us to add 

clarification to this section of the Act that prevents contracting 

out of the protections of the Act.” Mr. Speaker, again if . . . It 

was a fairly succinct speech and, you know, that’s appreciated 

more in this place than it might be in other venues, Mr. Speaker, 

but again in terms of what kind of . . . what instances form the 

basis of this new piece of legislation? What was the case law 

being brought forward? What sort of fealty is there between the 

precedent cited and the way that feeds them to process these, 

like the Uniform Law Conference, and then how is that actually 

playing out in the legislation, Mr. Speaker? 

And again, the minister goes on to state that: 

 

This provision has been enhanced to ensure that standard 

form contracts cannot tie consumers into arbitration 

clauses or prohibits them from participating in class 

actions. This will not prevent the consumer from selecting 

arbitration if that’s the appropriate dispute resolution 

mechanism. However, Mr. Speaker, it becomes the 

consumer’s choice, not the supplier’s. 

 

In and of itself, Mr. Speaker, that would seem on the face of it 

to be a good measure. Again, in terms of bolstering consumer 

choice when it comes to protection and ensuring that they’re not 

being jammed into one when if you come into a situation where 

The Consumer Protection Act is involved and there’s a need for 

remedies under the Act, it would, on the face of it, seem to 

make some good sense that a greater range of choice for the 

consumers under the Act and its proposed remedies would 

make some sense. I guess carrying on through the speech, Mr. 

Speaker, wherein the minister states, “Another small but 

important feature is the one that permits Saskatchewan courts to 

have jurisdiction over consumer actions, regardless of the part 

of the Act under which the consumer rights arise.” 

 

Again, modernizing the practice of the Act, Mr. Speaker, does 

seem to be fairly straightforward. But we’ll be taking it out for a 

greater consultation. And to close off, wherein the minister 

states: 

 

. . . the enforcement administration provisions have been 

moved to a part that applies to the whole Act. This will 

make it easier for the consumer protection division of the 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan to do its job. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had limited experience but a largely 

positive experience with the authority, previously the consumer 

affairs branch. And again, sort of straightening out the Act to 

make it more responsive to the situations as they arise, making 

it more durable, more applicable to the situations as they arise 

to serve the very consumers that this Act sets out to protect and 

the business practices it seeks to regulate, that again, Mr. 

Speaker, would seem to be a good thing. 

 

So to close, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 55, The Consumer Protection 

and Business Practices Act, second reading, it’s been a pleasure 

to participate in this debate. We’ve got more consultation to 

engage in, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the measures of this Act and 

the way that the measures as proposed and stated, how that 

measures up all told. But for the moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 55, The Consumer 

Protection and Business Practices Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 55. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

[15:45] 

 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

Bill No. 56 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 56 — The Court of 

Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 

2000 sur la Cour d’appel be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My pleasure to 

weigh in to debate as it relates to Bill No. 56, An Act to amend 

The Court of Appeal Act, 2000 and to offer a few comments, 

maybe a couple of questions as it relates to the changes that 

have been put before us, to work through the changes that have 

been put before us. 

 

I recognize that clause 3 of the bill put forward in a new 

subsection 5.1(1) allows Court of Appeal judges to participate 

in decisions for six months after leaving office on matters 

they’ve heard before leaving office. And then subsection (2) 

allows judges who are appointed to another level of court to 

finish hearing matters they were seized with prior to their new 

appointment, to participate in decisions on those matters. 

 

Now as I read the rationale and purpose of these changes, I 

understand that this is to provide some level of continuance to 

decisions to allow the courts to operate in an effective manner 

to address a challenge that can arise that can present rehearings, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that a practical measure to address the 

challenge of rehearings is more than reasonable for a 

government to act to respond. And certainly the measures that 

have been put forward on this front seem to be reasonable to do 

just that. 

 

A rehearing of course, Mr. Speaker, impacts all parties and 

impacts them by way of cost and also time, but cost is a 

significant factor. And when you think of whether it’s the legal 

fees themselves or the time that one may be away from work or 

the time that one is focused in such a proceeding within their 

own life, it’s more than reasonable to do what we can to reduce 

the number of rehearings. I know that the minister has 

suggested here that this should largely eliminate rehearings, and 

certainly from a practical nature and on first blush and first 

consideration that seems to be more than reasonable. Certainly 

we will be doing our due diligence on this file in making sure 

that the intended consequences don’t result in any unintended 

consequences. 

 

We’ll be doing so, consulting with the Canadian Bar 

Association and the Law Society of Saskatchewan, making sure 

that there’s not some concerns that haven’t been considered by 

the minister or by government in deriving this legislation. But 

certainly the provisions as it relates to addressing and reducing 

rehearings are reasonable and something that I tend to be 

supportive of. It certainly does seem to allow an effective court 

process and allow judges to continue on with cases. And you 

know, whether they’ve retired or whether they’ve taken another 

office and they’re departing their post, it puts it in their court to 

be able to continue to make sure that a decision can be brought 

to the parties involved in hearings or processes that they’ve 

been engaged with. So that seems more than reasonable. 

 

I guess rehearings would potentially occur in the case of illness 

of a justice or death or as well as by choice, if a judge is leaving 

to take another office but chooses not to continue on. So that 

would be under these changes that have been made, where 

rehearings may still be a part of the consideration. 

 

What I understand is that these changes, Mr. Speaker, bring us 

more in line with practice in other jurisdictions in other 

provinces, and that I believe that the actual six-month period is 

a period that’s been chosen by many other provinces, including 

British Columbia, Alberta, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and 

Labrador, Mr. Speaker. And other provinces I believe have up 

to a 90-day period, and we’ve chosen the six-month period. 

Certainly it’ll be part of our consultation with stakeholders, to 

ensure that this cuts the right balance and offers the right level 

of supports. 

 

There’s also provisions that are put forward that support the 

effective court processes and the continuance of processes and 

working towards a decision that would be reflected with some 

of the changes to quorum, that would allow quorum to continue 

in the circumstances here where a judge may be moving posts 

or moving offices or also ill or not well and not able to continue 

in that capacity. Again this is important for us to make sure that 

we’re allowing our courts to be as effective as they can be, and 

certainly reducing rehearings is something that I would tend to 

be supportive of. 

 

And then there’s other changes by way of clause no. 5. That 

deals more directly with making changes to address rehearings 

directly. So I think at first consideration, certainly the 

motivations of this legislation are something that I can support. 

Certainly through our consultation in the days and weeks ahead 

with stakeholders, the Law Society of Saskatchewan, the 

Canadian Bar Association, we’ll be ensuring that there’s not 

some unintended consequences of this legislation, making sure 

that this legislation was derived out of consultation, as good 

policy must, Mr. Speaker. And that’ll be our aim over the 

course of the coming days and weeks. We may have further 

questions as we go, both in this Assembly but also in 

committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But at this point in time I don’t have much else to say other than 

certainly being able to support our courts to operate as 

effectively as they can and being able to put some provisions in 

place for judges that are departing to continue to hear the cases 

for which they’ve been engaged is more than reasonable. It 

seems that being able to go at addressing rehearings and reduce 

rehearings in this province are of benefit to all parties and 

something that we can support. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, and it seems that we’re in line 

with many other provinces all across Canada, and I hope that 

we’ve consulted and learned from their experience on this front. 

And I’m sure that we have. So at this point in time, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll adjourn debate on Bill No. 56, An Act to amend 

The Court of Appeal Act, 2000. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 56, The Court of 

Appeal Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 57 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 57 — The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today to enter the debate on Bill No. 57, An Act to amend 

The Condominium Property Act. What this bill sets out to do, 

and as the minister said in his second reading remarks, there 

were four main areas that the minister has said this covers, and 

it speaks to consumer protection, dispute resolution, condo 

conversions, and insurance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Around consumer protection, I know the minister has said that 

there’s been a great deal of consultation that’s gone on around 

this bill. But on this side of the House we always have some 

concern when the government talks about consultation and their 

lack of it, but he has assured us in this bill that a great deal of 

consultation has gone on. 

 

But in terms of consumer protection, what this Bill proposes to 

do is it’s being amended to require a declaration from a 

developer describing the improvements to the common property 

that are promised as part of a condo conversion. Apparently 

what has happened in the past is if someone purchases a unit 

and that they find out when they move in that there’s a huge 

number of costs involved now at that point in time in terms of 

renovations to the building . . . Actually I know I had a 

constituent, a long-time, a lifelong constituent actually, who 

lived in Saskatoon Riversdale and just, well down the street 

from my parents’ house and just a few blocks from me. I went 

to school with his son actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He left 

Saskatoon Riversdale last year, sadly, Mr. Speaker, he and his 

wife. And they’ve moved in a condo. And shortly after moving 

into the condo, they discovered in fact that the condo board had 

some expectations. There were some huge capital issues with 

the building that they hadn’t been told about prior to moving in. 

So this couple, the senior citizens, move into a building and 

discover that now that there’s going to be an increased cost to 

them, having left their long-time home on Avenue O South and 

now moving somewhere else. They’re huge, huge expenses for 

them, Mr. Speaker. So that piece around the bill makes sense to 

me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The second area that the minister has talked about is dispute 

resolution and needing some new mechanisms in the Act. 

 

The third piece is condo conversions, which actually in 

Saskatoon the issue of condo conversions has been a huge issue, 

probably really peaking in about 2007, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

What has happened is some older buildings have been 

converted into condos and thus leaving the people who are 

renting those buildings basically out on the streets and not being 

able to afford to move into those, having no purchasing power, 

no ability to actually stay in the building that was their home. 

They can’t. They’re not in a position to buy, so they’ve been 

left to try to find something else to rent. But as we know, the 

rental rates are a huge problem here in Saskatchewan and 

continue to be a challenge. 

 

I know in my own constituency I have families . . . Because 

there’s a lack of affordable and appropriate housing for so many 

people. The costs are often exorbitant too as well. So it 

definitely is a supply and demand issue. But what I see in my 

own constituency, in houses, modest houses, 800, 900 square 

feet, multiple families living in a house that was meant for one 

family. 

 

This puts huge pressure on — they’re often younger families — 

huge pressure on the children, the parents, everybody, and 

which impacts actually school outcomes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

How can you, if you don’t have, not necessarily your own 

bedroom . . . I grew up in a family of seven and there were three 

girls in one bedroom in my household. So it’s not a matter of 

kids just having their own bedroom in a huge house and a giant 

bedroom to themselves. But these families, where you have 

multiple families living in a home meant for one family, as I 

said, 8 or 900 square feet, it puts intense pressure on the ability 

for privacy, the ability for quiet time to do homework — some 

enormous strains on families. And then the cost of renting is 

very difficult for many families too, so they discover that they 

can’t afford to live in a place anymore. So they end up pulling 

their kids from the school that their kids started at at the 

beginning of the year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and have struggles 

going from school to school to school and not being able to put 

roots down. 

 

So one of the parts of the bill, it lays out that condo conversions 

won’t take place unless . . . or there’s the vacancy rate has to be 

set at a prescribed level. So I was pleased in the minister’s 

remarks that he says: 

 

It is expected that the prescribed rate will be linked to the 

results of the rental vacancy survey conducted by Canada 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation on a quarterly basis 

for areas where this information is available. 

 

So I’m assuming that that will be in the regulations. It’s 

important. And I’m curious too if this is something that will be 

laid out in the regulations that will in fact . . . So those reports 

come out quarterly? Will the regulations be designed to be 

responsive to that reality that conversions cannot happen unless 

the prescribed vacancy rate is at this point? And I hope that it is 

on a quarterly basis that the regulations lay that out to be. 

 

I know the fourth piece of the Act was around insurance, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. There’s many pieces to this Act, but I know 

the minister highlighted four main areas. And one of them was 

requiring condominium corporations to carry directors’ and 

officers’ liability insurance. Apparently they heard in 

consultations that it’s sometimes difficult to get people to stand 

for election to the board because they are concerned that they 

are assuming liability for the decisions of the board. So there 

was the hope that this amendment should alleviate the concerns 

and encourage those who are part of the condominium facility 

to join the board. 

 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

I know the minister also in his remarks had outlined that this 

obviously . . . has said this bill is designed to resolve some 

housing problems around condominiums. But I would say, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that this bill is only one piece around solving 

housing problems. Again in Saskatoon Riversdale we have 

affordable housing, some beautiful new affordable housing on 

20th street and Avenue P that sits vacant because even with the 

purchasing incentives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people still can’t 

afford to purchase these homes. So these places sit vacant. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So when you look at the housing continuum, you’ve got social 

housing on one end. You’ve got affordable housing in the 

middle, and then you’ve got market-based housing as you go 

along. And the reality is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 

government has focused its energy on affordable housing, but 

the piece that’s been ignored is social housing. And that is a 

huge, huge impact to many people that I work with and see on a 

daily basis, and I know my colleagues do as well. The reality is, 

when you talk about affordable housing, a $220,000 condo is 

not affordable to many people in Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They cannot come up with the down payment. 

Even with incentives, the wonderful incentives that the city has 

supported to put in place, people still can’t afford to purchase 

these places. 

 

So I would encourage the government to look at the social, look 

at that aspect on the housing continuum and look at social 

housing. Rather than selling off 300 units and selling off a 

chunk of land, I would encourage this government that there is 

a role for government to be building housing. And I think at the 

rate we’re going right now, the reality is there are still people 

struggling with housing issues. The cost of housing does not . . . 

takes a huge chunk of people’s monthly income, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, which does not leave a lot else for paying your bills — 

your heating, your water, all your utilities — and putting food 

on your table and just the things that people have to pay for. 

 

So I think I would actually encourage the government to look at 

a model that hasn’t been pursued at all. Again in Saskatoon 

Riversdale, we have a wonderful Sask Housing model that . . . 

Arbor Green, which is in Holiday Park, was built now 11 years 

ago. They just celebrated their 10th anniversary last year. And 

it’s a life lease for seniors. And what had ended up happening? 

How did it come about? The community or people in the 

community who wanted to stay in Holiday Park or on the west 

side committed to purchasing units, and the government at the 

time, through Sask Housing, also invested in the capital 

infrastructure of the building. It’s a wonderful model, and it’s in 

a beautiful area, and there actually . . . I know folks in that 

neighbourhood would love to see a second Arbor Green built. 

But it’s a great alternative for many seniors who are looking for 

housing. They’d like to take the equity from their home and be 

able to keep it invested in something and continue to live in the 

community that they’ve called home for many, many years. 

 

So I’m not quite sure why the government hasn’t looked at 

some of these other models for fostering housing and has 

simply relied on developing, encouraging developers simply to 

carry the ball on that. I firmly believe that the government has a 

role to play in developing some housing. 

 

I think it’s great that the government wants to solve some of the 

issues around condo conversions and some of the other 

problems and challenges condo owners and people living in 

condos have faced. But I think when we talk about a 

government’s record on housing, this is a government who 

won’t even talk about housing first or truly committing to a 

model where the first primary need is ensuring that someone 

has a stable roof over their head, and then they can deal with 

any struggles or challenges they might be facing, whether it’s 

addictions or mental health challenges. So I would like to see a 

government not just introduce a bill that addresses condo 

changes, but I’d like to see a government really tackling the 

essence of where some of our housing issues begin, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So with that I would like — I know that my colleagues will 

have further comments on Bill No. 57, The Condominium 

Property Amendment Act, 2012 — but with that for now I 

would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 57. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into debate here this afternoon as it relates to 

Bill No. 58, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012. 

 

I’ve spent some time reading through the minister’s remarks 

and spent some time analyzing the legislation before us, but 

I’ve also spent significant time taking a look at the committee 

of review’s work that should be the impetus for this piece of 

legislation. That’s some of the analysis that we’re going to be 

doing over the coming days and weeks and possibly months, 

Mr. Speaker, because this is a very important piece of 

legislation and should reflect the good work and hard work of 

the committee of review and as well the importance of this 

legislation and the importance of the Workers’ Compensation 

Board to employees and to employers all across Saskatchewan. 

And maybe that’s just where I would start. 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Board is such a vital and 

important mechanism to provide supports for workers and also 

to employers. And if we think of all the different circumstances 

where an employee, for one . . . And I know when thinking 

across my own constituency and family for that matter, thinking 

of if a work-related injury has occurred in one’s life, it certainly 

has a direct impact on the well-being of one’s self — peace of 

mind, family, all the different circumstances from a social to an 

economic perspective. And that’s why the Workers’ 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

Compensation Board and its Act are both very important tools 

to the people of Saskatchewan, and I’d argue mechanisms and 

tools for which we have to foster a level of continuous 

improvement and working hard to do better for the people of 

the province and the important role this plays to employers and 

to our economy as a whole as well. 

 

Maybe just to start off, I would like to recognize the very good 

work of the committee of review that went out and held 

hearings all across the province, held consultations, listened to 

Saskatchewan employees and employers and then brought 

forward recommendations — did a report, did analysis, did 

study — and brought forward a report that should be the 

impetus that’s driving these legislative changes, something that 

we’re going to make sure in fact does correlate, make sure that 

in fact the good work of the committee of review and the 

recommendations that I have in my hand here today, the final 

report that was submitted in 2011, Mr. Speaker, that that in fact 

is consistent with changes that have been put forward in Bill 

No. 58 that has been introduced to this Assembly. 

 

That’s a very important piece because the very process of the 

committee of review is a very even-handed process, one that we 

should support, one that should actually serve as a model to this 

government as it drives other pieces of legislation and 

particularly as it relates to labour legislation. And it may serve 

as a very helpful model for a government that has not been 

even-handed on any other fronts as it relates to labour 

legislation. And maybe this is one small example that this 

government could draw upon about how to go about engaging 

in meaningful dialogue with Saskatchewan people, employers, 

and workers and working with that co-operative, common sense 

approach that Saskatchewan people and workers deserve and 

expect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And quite frankly, it’s that sort of consultive process that drives 

good legislation, that reflects the realities of workers and 

employers and makes sure as well that there’s been thoughtful 

consideration of not only the intended consequences but the 

unintended consequences. And when I think back to this 

government’s record in driving labour legislative changes that 

have been anything but fair and balanced and certainly against 

the interests of workers all across this province and 

communities in every region of this province, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that this is the sort of process and the sort of model that 

we should be adopting and following when considering 

changes. 

 

But I would like to recognize the good work of the committee 

of review. It represents . . . It’s a six-member panel representing 

employees and employers. Those individuals would include 

Dale Lindemann, Shelly McFadden, Lori Sali, Craig McAuley, 

Marg Romanow, and Kaylynn Schroeder. I’d like to say thank 

you to each of those individuals along with Dr. Roslyn Kunin 

for the work that they provided the people of the province, quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, in going out and holding meetings, 

listening to the public, listening to employers, listening to 

workers, and putting forward in the end, I believe, 57 

recommendations, Mr. Speaker, all with an aim to provide 

improvements in a fair and balanced way to make sure that our 

Workers’ Compensation Board is as effective as it can be. 

 

Now some of the work, the important work, for us over the 

coming days and weeks is continuing the consultation process 

with all stakeholders to make sure that, as I say, what’s been 

reflected in that report, what’s been recommended, what’s best 

practice, is now reflected in this legislation. We’re not certain 

that that’s the case at this point in time or not. I know I’ve 

gleaned from the minister’s comments, the minister had brief 

remarks when he introduced this legislation, so really, you 

know, the devil’s in the details on this sort of legislation. And 

we really want to be thorough and thoughtful as we review and 

analyze this legislation. And for that, we’ll be doing that with 

Saskatchewan people and employers and employees in making 

sure those interests are served. 

 

The minister himself talks about increasing benefits and 

adjusting them annually through indexation. Certainly at first 

blush this is reflective, I believe, of the work of the committee 

of review, and something that makes sense for Saskatchewan 

people. There’s an adjustment here to maximum wage rates, 

and this is important because certainly the cost of living in our 

fine province has significantly increased over the past few years 

and has been a hardship to many on fixed or limited incomes. 

And certainly providing an increase to the maximum benefit is 

important, as are provisions to allow that to occur incrementally 

as we move forward. 

 

So I see measures that have been put forward to do that here in 

the bill. I want to ensure that that’s consistent with what’s been 

put forward by the committee of review by way of their 

recommendations. I’m not sure that that’s the case. And I want 

to make sure that it’s providing the sort of protection and 

certainty and security that Saskatchewan workers deserve and 

require. And so we’ll be doing some analysis around the 

adequacy of the actual numbers, but certainly supportive of an 

increase to the maximum wage rate and a mechanism to ensure 

that incrementally those are improved moving forward. 

 

I recognize that there’s a fine that’s been increased up to — an 

administrative penalty to employers — up to $10,000 that 

would be in breach of their obligations under the Act. And 

certainly this is important, and this may be of improper 

disclosure or non-disclosure of injuries as described and 

required through the Act. And this is the kind of . . . this is 

important for us to have the penalty and the fine in place.  

 

I guess I might have question around the $10,000 and what 

exact analysis has derived that penalty as the right amount — as 

a proper impediment I guess, if you will — to make sure that 

employers are consistent with the Act. But certainly it’s very 

important that we recognize the important role that our 

employers provide to worker safety all across this province, and 

many employers who go over and above to do so. But in sadly 

too many other cases, Mr. Speaker, all across this province, 

where that isn’t the case and where we’re putting the safety of 

workers and families into jeopardy and where of course we also 

see injury and loss, Mr. Speaker, that’s quite frankly 

unacceptable. 

 

When I’m thinking about this Act and the role of the Workers’ 

Compensation Board, I think of those injured workers that 

require support, that are not able to fulfill the work that they 

were carrying on and are limited from a financial perspective 

and the important protections we must provide those families. 

But I also think of when we stand each year and recognize those 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

that have lost their lives, the day of mourning Act and the 

ceremonies. And sadly we still have far too many workers in 

this province that are both injured but also that lose their life 

here in this province, and certainly we need to be strident in 

making changes on this front. 

 

I know that in many ways we have an Act that’s in place, but 

we have an inadequate number of officers to provide the kind of 

support for The Occupational Health and Safety Act. And this is 

something that we really do need to be pushing towards to make 

sure that we actually are increasing the number of officers to 

make sure we’re ensuring safety in the workplaces. And I know 

it’s a continued frustration, and I know this isn’t the specific 

Act, but the fact that farm workers aren’t included in the day of 

mourning Act and that certainly there is a lot of risk presented 

in farm work as well, and we need to pay continued attention to 

those that are injured and lose their lives through work on the 

farm. 

 

I know I recognize changes here of a practical nature to increase 

the borrowing limit for Workers’ Compensation Board, I’m 

going to be reviewing the full rationale on that front. Certainly 

as suggested by the minister, this is something that provides 

flexibility to the organizations, to the Workers’ Compensation 

Board, and certainly something that I’m sure is quite 

reasonable. The minister has spoken of provisions that support 

the Return to Work program, and this is an important program 

that we do need to support. We want to make sure that it’s 

being supported in a way that’s in the best interests of all parties 

and certainly the workers and making sure they can in fact 

return to dignified employment that allows them to sustain 

quality of life for them and their families. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Moving through a little bit more, I know the minister spoke 

about internal processes that have been codified and 

strengthened by the Act here and, I guess, supporting the 

internal ombudsman to make sure that proper appeals are able 

to be made. And I know this is something that’s important. And 

I know many of us as MLAs will have been dealing with many 

cases and constituents who have appeals, and we really do need 

to make sure that we’re dealing with these in a fair and effective 

way, in a balanced way and an effective way. And many of the 

individuals that are going through these appeals are at a great 

deal of stress financially, emotionally, socially and just making 

sure that the changes that have been made are in fact as 

effective as they can be. And I want to make sure as well, as we 

review this, that in fact they are reflective of the committee of 

review’s recommendations that have been put forward. 

 

I know that we also look at this legislation that’s suggested by 

the minister that there is some modernization of language in this 

bill, and that’s important, some refinements to make sure that 

we’re consistent with language used in other Acts and by 

government, and that’s important. 

 

So I guess what I would say is that there has been really 

important work done by a committee of review. There is an 

important body of work that’s been submitted to us here at the 

legislature by way of The Workers’ Compensation Act 

committee of review final report of 2011. But what we now 

need to make sure is that the changes that are being made in fact 

reflect this document and the 57 recommendations that are 

important to workers and to those that are injured and to 

employers across this province, making sure that they’re 

consistent, making sure that the legislation is bringing forward 

changes that are going to allow us be successful in addressing 

the intended consequences that we pursue, but not bringing 

about unintended consequences that haven’t been considered. 

 

And that’s where that consultive process is so important, not 

just in deriving the recommendations that are required, but then 

also in making sure that the Act is as effective as it can be. And 

I guess, you know, when I’m looking again at the Workers’ 

Compensation Board and the review and the six-member panel 

that’s gone out and done consultations all across our province, 

that’s listened to workers and employers, Mr. Speaker, this 

embodies the way that labour legislation should be built in this 

province. This reflects how legislation should be built and 

hopefully would serve as a model to a government that has been 

anything but consultive on so many other fronts, Mr. Speaker, 

but maybe most notably as it relates to legislation that impacts 

workers, families, livelihoods, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think that hopefully what we would see is that this would 

inspire an approach from government that’s consistent with that 

consultive fashion, but I say that at the same time as we’re 

waiting for, so many are waiting for this labour legislation that 

looms before us, this overhaul of the 15 Acts that govern 

workers’ protection and workers’ rights in this province, that’s 

been done so with something that’s been quite frankly a joke of 

a consultation, Mr. Speaker, and something that certainly hasn’t 

allowed the workers of this province to have their rightful say 

into legislation that has the greatest impact on them and their 

lives. 

 

And that’s why I certainly was pleased to participate, along 

with our caucus, to go out and hold your work, your say 

hearings held by our Labour critic, the member from Saskatoon 

Centre and attended by members, every one of the members of 

this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to go out and have that 

conversation and consultation that was never had with the 

workers of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we’re talking about rolling together, as this 

government is, and overhauling labour legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s been built out of co-operation, Mr. Speaker, by workers 

and by employers in well over 100 years in this province and in 

an overhaul without any consultation by government, or 

inadequate consultation, it’s a sad day on this point, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s why I point to the Workers’ Compensation Board 

and the committee of review process that should serve as an 

example that could be followed by government. And that’s why 

I think there’s very important changes that have been 

recommended here, and hopefully the bill is consistent with 

those recommendations, in which case we’d certainly be 

supportive of those changes. 

 

But we would urge that approach from government on other 

fronts, and I know that there’s a lot of anxiety across 

Saskatchewan right now awaiting the legislative changes to 

workers’ rights in this province and certainly a government 

that’s actively worked against the best interests of workers in 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

this province, Mr. Speaker. And in our province, as has been 

pointed out by our Labour critic, in a province that has the 

second highest injury rate, Mr. Speaker, we need to be working 

to protect the workers of this province and make sure that the 

working families of this province in every community are able 

to share in the prosperity of our province. 

 

It’s not good enough for government to boast about numbers on 

a page, Mr. Speaker. We have to do a better job, a better job of 

making sure that the families — the very workers who are 

doing the heavy lifting in our economy; they’re doing the heavy 

lifting within our health services or are doing the work in our 

classrooms; who are doing work all across this province, in our 

farm economy and in our mineral extraction economy — are 

able to share in that prosperity. And sadly we have, you know, 

this government that has failed to consult and has certainly 

actively worked against the interests of those workers all across 

this province and, I would argue, worked against the interests of 

building a strong local economy in doing so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I wouldn’t want to take away from the good work that’s 

been done by the committee of review for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board Act to be improved. I know the report that 

came forward in 2011 was an important document. It sat on a 

desk for some period of time. It’s before us here now. We’re 

certainly going to make sure we’re doing our due diligence with 

all stakeholders to make sure that this document in fact is a 

reflection of the committee of review recommendations, 57 

recommendations to provide improvements to the Workers’ 

Compensation Board — but also making sure then, through 

those consultations, that the very tools that the Act is bringing 

forward are in fact the most effective way of going at 

implementing those recommendations. 

 

But at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to thank 

those that have been involved in the committee of review. I’d 

like to highlight the importance of the Workers’ Compensation 

Board to families, to employers, to our workers, and to our 

economy, Mr. Speaker, but also to highlight that it certainly is a 

proud mechanism but one that we need to continuously improve 

and one that we need to make sure is serving workers of today 

and our economy of today. And hopefully some of these 

changes are bringing about those sorts of changes. 

 

So at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, 57 recommendations that 

have been put forward, 57 recommendations from the 

six-member panel, we’re hoping that they’re reflected there. But 

it’s my pleasure to weigh in on debate here this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker. We have further consultation. We have further 

questions, as do workers. 

 

We hope that this will serve as a model of how to build 

legislation in this province, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to a 

government that believes it knows best and rams forward, 

creating legislation that pursues its own ideology as opposed to 

the interests of workers in this province. That denies too many 

across this province from sharing in the prosperity, rightful 

prosperity of our province, and that has given us the shameful 

distinction, Mr. Speaker, of having legislation, workers’ 

legislation on the books, Mr. Speaker, that’s unconstitutional. 

Shameful recognition from a province that was once a leader, 

Mr. Speaker, in providing labour legislation that was fair and 

balanced and progressive and serving the best interests of our 

local economy and of workers, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 

I’m being heckled by the Minister of Labour. What I’d be more 

interested is when he introduces a piece of legislation that 

impacts such an important body to our province or mechanism, 

being the Workers’ Compensation Board, that he’d have more 

to say than just, you know, a short few words of introduction 

with about four or five items to speak to as opposed to the 

significant body of work that’s been done by the committee of 

review in consultation with Saskatchewan people. 

 

But that’s the same Labour minister, Mr. Speaker, that has 

found that — you know, last week I believe, at the end of the 

week — when we have labour legislation changes that are 

looming over many in this province and a real sense of anxiety 

for many workers and many communities and many families, 

Mr. Speaker, we have a Labour minister who stood in this 

Assembly on Thursday of last week and didn’t know any of the 

changes, Mr. Speaker, pretended not to know any of the 

changes that were going to be brought forward but the next day, 

Mr. Speaker, was out sort of at a business event where people 

bought a ticket to come out to listen to the changes that are 

being brought forward. So I would suggest that that’s less than 

a sincere process, Mr. Speaker, to derive labour legislation. 

 

I urge the minister to make sure that the legislation he’s going 

to be bringing forward is reflective of the interests of workers in 

this province. Sadly we’re concerned that it won’t be, Mr. 

Speaker, because we’ve certainly watched the actions of 

government to date that have certainly been opposed to 

workers’ interests and opposed to families’ and local 

economies’ interests, Mr. Speaker, by way of changes to date. 

But we’ll have many more questions throughout our 

consultation. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I’ll adjourn debate as it 

relates to Bill No. 58, An Act respecting Compensation for 

Injured Workers and making consequential amendments to 

certain Acts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 58, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 59 — The Animal 

Identification Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and make some comments about Bill No. 59, An Act to 

amend The Animal Identification Act. For the general public, 

this is talking about brands on animals and other methods of 

identifying animals that are part of our agricultural and ranching 

businesses in the province. 

 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister stated quite clearly that this 

particular piece of legislation is designed to allow for some 

other methods of providing this service of animal identification 

to the cattle industry, or the animal industry, besides what we 

presently have. The present system is primarily one that is 

operated through the department or the Ministry of Agriculture 

and this particular legislation will allow for the contracting out 

of this service to a third party. And so when you go and look at 

the legislation itself, that is the basic point that’s here, is this 

contracting out of the task. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the way that this is done is obviously not set 

out in the legislation because there are a number of ways that 

this whole area of services can be controlled. But what it will do 

is allow the industry to control that. 

 

Now this is something that we would not be opposed to on this 

side of the House. Over the years the New Democratic Party 

governments have worked with the cattle industry, and many of 

us who have been NDP elected people have owned cattle 

ourselves so we know about the issues that are involved here. 

 

And one of the positive things about this particular legislation is 

that the minister appears to have worked with the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association and the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 

Association. And as a member of the legislature who has had 

relatives involved with both of those organizations, I would say 

that there are some very capable people there who have 

provided some good advice to the minister and to the 

department. 

 

And I think the other positive aspect of this legislation relates to 

the fact that there has been a committee established that looked 

at the whole issue of how there could be an integrated Western 

Canadian approach. And, Mr. Speaker, this is usually an 

important thing to do and I assume, and I recognize the 

information provided also shows that there has been contact by 

those people involved with our friends south of the 49th parallel 

in the United States. Because as we know, many of the cattle 

identification issues actually relate to the transfer of cattle in the 

process of the development of the meat product I guess, if we 

can put it that way. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what is this legislation trying to do? Well 

basically it’s allowing for what the Act itself calls an animal 

identification inspection administration agreement. I’m sure 

they had a bit of fun trying to figure out that term and I’m not 

sure if they will attempt to shorten it by calling it Aida because 

it might get confused with the opera. But practically, it’s the 

whole process of how this work is going to be done. 

 

At this stage there appear to be some suggestions as to how it 

would be done, but we will be watching this process as it 

develops over the coming months. And practically anybody 

who has cattle especially appreciates the fact that this process 

will be similar or the same right across Western Canada and 

hopefully into the northern states so that there will not be any 

issues around the identification of the animals, identification of 

the cattle. And that is clearly the intention. 

 

So what does the legislation do? Well basically it takes the 

existing Act and amends it, modernizes it to reflect this. And 

obviously the most important thing is allowing a third party to 

do the work that traditionally has been done by the ministry or 

employees, although I think there have been some aspects of it 

that have been done by others on an assignment of the work to 

the individual or an agency. So that is the first aspect of how 

this works. 

 

And then it does confirm what I think all people in this province 

want, is that the minister and the ministry will be ultimately 

responsible for all of the matters related to animal identification 

and inspection. And practically, this legislation meshes together 

with the following piece of legislation which we’ll be talking 

about in a while to make sure that the product safety will, rules 

will apply in a way that make sure that the ultimate product is 

one that the public can trust. And that’s a perfectly logical 

reason for legislation. And we need to ask questions and make 

sure we understand how this is going to be done. We don’t want 

any gaps. We don’t want a situation where people do not trust 

what the processes are that are being used. 

 

And so the legislation that we’ve received does leave that 

ultimate responsibility with the minister. And we know that our 

ministers of Agriculture over the years have taken especially 

strong interest in making sure that the products from 

Saskatchewan cattle industry or other animal industries have 

been the best. 

 

Now it is curious to me that last year we got to talk about the 

piece of legislation which was repealed, which had been 

introduced about 10 or 12 years ago as it related to the 

certification of quality of food coming from a specific area. And 

the way that I described it was, it was we know when we go to 

the store to buy a bottle of wine, if you see wine that says VQA 

[Vintners Quality Alliance] on it, vintners quality assurance, 

you know that that product has come from a certain place and 

that it’s been assessed and assured by the department of 

agriculture, department of food in the particular jurisdiction to 

have that clarity as to its origin and to its quality. 

 

And we had legislation like that until last year when the Sask 

Party government brought it forward to repeal it. And one of the 

reasons that they brought it forward for repeal was the fact that 

the federal government was going to be responsible for that 

particular activity. 

 

Now this legislation, and I think the comments of the minister 

as it relates to the following piece of legislation when you look 

at it, shows that there’s been some shifting or changing in the 

national policy around both the identification and inspection of 

meat products. And so that Saskatchewan brand or that 

Saskatchewan . . . or even want to say, you know, Assiniboia 

brand or brand from the Saskatchewan River Valley or 

wherever you would want to do it, that concept which was there 

a number of years ago may have to be reintroduced to tie it in 

together with legislation like this particular legislation. 

 

And I think, looking at the wording that we have in Bill No. 59, 

it does have the opportunity to mesh together with what would 

be called the terroir legislation or legislation that relates to the 

land and the product of the land so that somebody could market 

and sell beef probably at a higher rate or a higher cost but also a 

higher benefit to the producer by saying that it comes from a 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

certain part of Saskatchewan and it’s certified to come from 

there. And the identification information that is part of this Bill 

59 has allowed us to assure you that that particular animal has 

actually been raised in that area or in a number of areas that 

would allow it to qualify for a special designation. 

 

So I think that that’s important as we move forward in a world 

where people are concerned about where their food comes from 

and so much as it, on the face of it, seems to be quite a simple 

bill and a simple proposal which is a positive proposal. It has 

the aspects of providing that identification and, if I can use the 

word, tracking of where our food comes from. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, if there are areas with, after review with 

some of the people who are involved in using this type of 

legislation where some of the tracking parts aren’t as clear as 

they could be, it is possible that in the spring we would have 

some suggestions that would come, maybe from the same 

groups that the minister has talked to, about how we could 

further strengthen the legislation to make sure that the 

possibility of very clear identification of actually where a 

particular animal has been raised and then ultimately 

slaughtered is part of the marketing of the meat product from 

that particular animal. So I think in the legislation itself, the 

actual wording is that the minister would have the ability to add 

further regulations on required actions, but there may be some 

things that we find out about that should be added into this 

before the bill is finally approved. 

 

So when this type of legislation is brought forward, as the 

minister stated, it comes forward from the industry because they 

know what things work the best for the producer in their area, 

but I think we also have to recognize that there are things that 

can be learned from other jurisdictions. And so we know, in this 

time of worldwide supply of food, that we have agreements 

with other countries and with other continents where specific 

provisions around animal identification and the resulting 

tracking and inspection of the meat product, where there may be 

required even more stringent provisions that are set out in this 

legislation. And I’m not entirely clear from what we have here 

whether that particular aspect of the process has been included 

in the drafting of the legislation. 

 

I think we should be able to get some answers about that when 

we get into committee, dealing with the officials. But I know 

that we will be talking to people within the industry to make 

sure that some of the things that they’ve heard about, whether it 

relates to the European market or whether it relates to the 

Chinese market, the Korean market, Japanese market, that the 

ways that we identify animals do meet any kind of tests that 

they have. 

 

And I’ve saved the description about what happens in the 

United States for its own little description. We know that many 

times the movement of meat product into the United States can 

run into interesting hurdles around identification of the meat or 

the animal or inspection of the meat. And as we know from 

September, it was the actual inspection of meat going into the 

United States that allowed for the protection of all the people 

who were consuming meat from the XL meat plant in Alberta. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in this particular legislation, I think it’s crucial 

that all of the provisions are here that would make sure that 

there is no ability to mess, I guess would be one word or game 

the system around the identification of particular animals. 

 

And we all know the stories over the last, I guess, decades or 

maybe even centuries around brands and the issues that arise 

with manipulation of brands. I know I spent some time down in 

the Big Muddy area. And one of the discussions when you have 

the official tour of the Big Muddy is about how brands could be 

amended — much like legislation could be amended — but 

brands could be amended to change their identification so all of 

a sudden they maybe have a Canadian identification when they 

were brought up sort of surreptitiously from the States or going 

the other way, and that applied to horses and to cattle and 

everything else. 

 

And so this is modern legislation. I assume it may have ways of 

doing the identification through DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] 

or through other . . . I know electronic implants and things like 

that. And the wording appears to cover those broad range of 

ways of identifying animals that we have right now. But we 

know that there will be people who for various reasons will 

want to try to get around the rules that are there. 

 

And so I think that we need to watch this legislation very 

carefully. We need to listen carefully to the good advice that we 

get from the people within the industry. We also need to 

obviously listen to the people whose job it is to enforce issues 

around the criminal provisions against cattle rustling or stealing 

of animals to make sure that they will have sufficient proof if 

there’s a case that goes to court. 

 

And so there are a number of people who have interests in this 

legislation besides the stock growers or other organization that 

the minister has consulted with, but we assume that he’ll have 

information when we get to committee about some of the other 

groups involved to make sure that the legislation is the best that 

is possible so that our Saskatchewan products and our 

Saskatchewan producers can be available. 

 

So as we’ve heard, the Minister of Agriculture once a year gets 

to burn the brand at Agribition. And I assume that he maybe 

will talk about this particular legislation in recognizing that, you 

know, five years from now the burning of that brand might be 

doing a DNA tissue sample to make sure that that particular 

animal is monitored right through the whole system in a very 

different way than what our friends and relatives have been 

doing over the last number of years. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important that legislation meet the needs of society now but 

also anticipate the needs of society in the years to come. I think 

the attempt has been made to do that here, but we will end up 

having some more questions. And I know that some of my 

colleagues will have some comments about this as the 

legislation moves forward. 

 

It’s important legislation and it’s important for each of us 

because we — most of us — are interested in the products that 

come from the animals identified. And I think that all 

Saskatchewan people, all Canadian people want to make sure 

that our system works well so that we have very good 

Saskatchewan food available for everyone. With that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I will move to adjourn debate on this particular 

bill. 

 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 59, The Animal 

Identification Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 60 — The Animal 

Products Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to now rise and continue my conversation about animal 

products. And I’m going to talk about Bill No. 60, The Animal 

Products Amendment Act. 

 

And I think the crucial point here that we need to start out with 

is when the Minister of Agriculture made his comments on 

November 13th. He said that in June 2011, the federal 

government made it clear to the province of Saskatchewan that 

the Canadian Food Inspection Agency was going to stop 

providing services to the province of Saskatchewan for the 

provincially-inspected facilities and that this service was going 

to end on December 31st, 2013. And I think this is a bit of a 

surprise to all Canadians that our federal government has made 

the moves that they have as it relates to food inspection given 

that, over the years, the Canadian standards, the Canadian . . . 

the standards around food quality were effectively managed or 

set by the federal Health ministry together with any of the 

federal agencies in agriculture. And so when this announcement 

was made just over a year ago, there were a number of 

jurisdictions that were surprised. 

 

Now one of the things that is true about Saskatchewan is that it 

appears we’re continuing to work with the federal government 

to see if they will perhaps change or adjust their decision 

around getting out of the whole meat inspection business. 

Because I think that having national standards and having that 

Canada inspection seal is good for Saskatchewan, but it’s also 

good for Canada and internationally that there is this type of 

inspection. 

 

Now it appears fairly clear that our federal government is 

attempting to get out of all kinds of areas where they’ve 

traditionally been taking the responsibility, and this is clearly 

another one. I think that our Minister of Agriculture here in 

Saskatchewan and I are in agreement on this one that we would 

ask them to revisit this. Because once again the ability or the, I 

guess in a word, vulcanization of an inspection across the 

country does create some problems as our animal products go 

forward into the market. 

 

And so there’s no question that the whole issue of once again 

food safety, having a good product for people, is the ultimate 

goal. I think there probably is some disagreement with our 

federal government as to how we accomplish that. And it may 

be just a sign of the times of the federal government that we 

have, now that this particular issue is on our plate here in 

Saskatchewan, if I can say that, but what we need to make sure 

we do is that there is no gap in inspection. 

 

And so I think I would say very clearly that that’s what the 

Minister of Agriculture is doing here is making sure that there’s 

no gap, that there’s no time when there isn’t a process in place 

that would be able to complete the inspection of this type of 

food that many of us consume. 

 

So what does the Act do? Well once again it updates what’s 

going on, but it also sets out the clear authority for how a third 

party might do this kind of inspection. And right now we do 

have a number of institutions that are, I guess, provincially 

licensed or provincially managed, but the actual inspection of 

those was done through the federal food agency, food 

inspection agency. And so how this then meshes with what’s 

going to happen in 2014 and beyond is the subject of this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

Another aspect that relates to that, and actually quite separate in 

a way from the sort of food safety, food product issue, is the 

whole issue of a mutual assurance fund or a marketing 

assurance fund. And that’s the situation where all of the people 

who are selling animals into the system would end up setting 

aside a small price of what they receive for their animal in a 

fund that covers the situation where a purchasing auction house 

or livestock group or whatever that buys the cattle, if that 

particular group goes under, then there would be an assurance 

fund that would make sure that the people who have sold the 

cattle aren’t totally left holding the bag. And so I think that’s a 

good thing as well. 

 

Once again, it’s something that takes procedures. And quite a 

bit of the legislation actually relates to the procedures around 

that marketing assurance fund and then who makes the 

decisions as to how much money you would get if you’ve not 

been paid for your animals, and how you have an ability to 

challenge the decision, and to the group that makes that 

decision and then effectively going for an appeal, ultimately to 

the courts, to resolve that issue. 

 

And clearly the officials and minister who have been working 

on this know all of the interesting challenges that arise under 

crop insurance, and so therefore they’ve mimicked many of the 

procedures in this particular legislation around the provisions 

that would be covered under crop insurance. So practically we 

have now a provincial system for doing the livestock 

inspection, and we’re going to do it in a way that allows it to be 

done by a third party. 

 

And so the legislation says the minister is going to be 

responsible for this, but how the minister does it is going to be 

done in some new ways. And it basically includes everything 

involved in the livestock industry, and it includes all of the 

different procedures. And practically I think the public wants 

that. I think the people in the industry want that, but they want it 

to be done in the most efficient manner possible but also to 

make sure that our food is safe. 

 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

And so once again, this is legislation that’s enabling, and it 

therefore lacks quite a few details on how the system will 

actually work. Now hopefully what we’re going to get is 

something like what we have now that is provided through the 

federal government inspectors. The question becomes whether 

there are sufficient places to contract with to do the work that’s 

involved. And I think that there will be the services provided 

that they’re properly compensated. 

 

So then the question comes, is where does that cost go? Like 

who is going to be responsible for paying the cost? Now 

practically we all know it will be the ultimate consumer that’s 

going to pay for that cost, either through their taxes if the 

government does it or through the price of the product that 

they’re going to buy. And the legislation doesn’t totally deal 

with that issue, but it does hint that producers will have a role in 

funding the costs of inspection. And so it goes to that debate, I 

guess, around where and how these costs are allocated, and 

what is the best and most efficient way to do that. 

 

I think that some of those kinds of questions will, can be 

answered, I guess, or yes, may be answered — maybe is the 

best way to say it — when we go into committee because the 

officials in the department who have been working on this 

particular legislation will have some idea of the mechanisms 

that are going to be set up. But I’m not sure that anybody has 

yet decided or sent to Treasury Board and the Minister of 

Finance what kind of fees might be applicable to producers or 

to the plants or the facilities where animals are slaughtered and 

then prepared into reasonable sizes to be consumed by the 

consumer. Where in the whole production line will the fees be 

paid? And I suspect that there may be a few more fees that are 

going to end up at the producer level and probably a few more 

fees that’ll line up there at the butchering facility or other 

facility like that. 

 

And so we need to understand what intention there is from the 

ministry on that because ultimately now we have, I think over 

the last number of decades, agreed that many of these costs are 

part of the cost to all society for having good, safe food. And 

we have paid them obviously through the federal government 

with taxation that goes there. Decisions are being made at the 

federal level that that’s no longer going to be the case. So what 

do we do with this particular proposal? And I would suggest 

that we will be getting some answers around this, about how the 

whole system is going to be paid for. And so it’s interesting to 

speculate when we move into a new system whether because 

we live in a wide-spread province with producers and then the 

production facilities spread in many places that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being past 5 o’clock, this 

Assembly stands recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1981 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1981 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1981 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1981 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1982 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1982 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1982 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1982 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1982 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Diwali Celebration  

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1983 

 Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1983 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1984 

 Recruiting and Retaining Physicians 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1983 

 Life of Pi World Premiere 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1983 

 Agribition Incoming Buyers Program 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1984 

 Government Partnership with the Red Cross 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1984 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Information Services Corporation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1985 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1985 

 Potential Changes to Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1986 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1986 

 Financial Support for University 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1988 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1988 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1989 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1990 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1990 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1990 

 Bill No. 68 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1993 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1994 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1995 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1996 

 Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1998 

 Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1999 

  



 

 Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 

 Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2003 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2004 

 Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2007 

 Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2010 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


