




















































Hansard: April 19, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 32A  THURSDAY, APRIL 19, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1153 

 April 19, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to introduce to all the members of the 

Assembly a group of grade 12 students from F. W. Johnson 

Collegiate from Regina Dewdney. About 25 of them are here 

today along with some of my former colleagues, Mandy 

Gullickson and Donarae Deringer, two fine members of Regina 

Public. 

 

A few of the students wanted me to note that the Wildcats 

hockey team won the city title for the third time in the last four 

years, and they also raised the most money for the Z99 

radiothon of all the schools in the city of Regina. So a proud 

group of students up there. I look forward to meeting them after 

routine proceedings. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. 

 

We know provinces like British Columbia and other provinces 

have brought in several safety precautions through law 

including a requirement that workers cannot be alone during 

late-night, early morning hours, and if they are required to 

work, there must be protective barriers such as locked doors 

and protective glass. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Regina, Moose Jaw, and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to education in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m presenting 

a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in Hampton 

Village and Dundonald. The petition is about the need for a 

new school in Hampton Village: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

children in Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend 

school in their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so the children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on cell coverage. Therefore: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

undertake as soon as possible to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations along with 

the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nations, also known as Dillon; and 

the neighbouring communities of Michel village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nations, also known as 

Patuanak and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nations and the community of Turnor Lake 

including the neighbouring communities in each of these 

areas. 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 

Dillon, from Fort Qu’Appelle, and from Saskatoon, and I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation 

and regulations with respect to trapping regulations, 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

actually standing to ask for leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank all my colleagues for giving me the opportunity to 

introduce a great friend. In the Speaker’s gallery is a gentleman 

by the name of Edward “Eddie” Byhette, and Eddie is 

originally from Dillon which is Buffalo River First Nation 

which is near Buffalo Narrows. 

 

And Eddie is a great friend, Mr. Speaker. His father was 

Francis Byhette and his mother was Agatha Byhette, and Eddie 

was raised in Clear Lake which is about 100 kilometres west of 

Turnor Lake. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Byhette has been an 

ironworker all his life. He’s First Nations and he’s very proud 

of his wife, Linda Faye. And the importance of his visit, Mr. 

Speaker, is Eddie’s grandfather, Raphael Young, signed the 

treaty in 1905 in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And it’s a great honour having 

all these guests here with great history in our area. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you should know that as an ironworker, Mr. 

Byhette has worked in places like Tennessee, Fairbanks, 

Omaha, the Panama Canal, Mr. Speaker, so he’s been all 

throughout the world. And I’d all ask all members of the 

Assembly to welcome Mr. Byhette here to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Agriculture on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the west gallery I’d like to introduce Don Taylor 

who is a director for SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities], does a lot of great work on behalf of 

SARM and the municipalities in the southeast corner. Don is 

also, by the way, a constituent of mine, and we sat on RM [rural 

municipality] municipal council together, and is a good friend. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Don for all the good 

work he does and ask all the members to join with me in 

welcoming to his legislature. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Celebrating Earth Day 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Sunday April 22nd is Earth Day, and across Canada 

and around the globe the people will be celebrating the 42nd 

anniversary of Earth Day, Mr. Speaker. Millions of Canadians 

will join people in 170 countries in raising awareness about the 

critical environmental issues that face our world. Dynamic, 

aggressive action has the power to capture the attention of our 

peers and political leaders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this April, this Earth Day campaign challenge, 

everyone has to do something that’s good for people and the 

planet. To help, they’ve launched two campaigns to get 

everyone involved, running now until the end of April, and 

have offered up 10 top actions people can start doing right now 

and all year round. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our caucus was very saddened to learn recently 

that the federal government is reducing the number of 

departments and agencies that can do environmental work from 

40 to just 3, sacrificing important environmental stewardship to 

speed up approvals for projects. The government is merely 

giving big energy companies carte blanche by dismantling the 

checks and balances that protect our environment. 

 

Our provincial government also made headlines this week for 

all the wrong reasons. The David Suzuki Foundation issued a 

report which had this to say, “The Saskatchewan Party 

government hasn’t simply stalled action on climate change — it 

has reversed it.” The information indicates, “It is difficult to 

imagine a province taking the threats of climate change less 

seriously.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can call all members of this Assembly to engage 

their constituencies and specifically students. Mr. Speaker, 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

happy Earth Day to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Holocaust Remembrance Day 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 67 

years ago the Auschwitz-Birkenau death camps were liberated. 

Today, people across the world remember victims of the 

Holocaust. Sirens sounded across Israel and brought the country 

to a standstill. Millions of Israelis observed a moment of silence 

in recognition of the 6 million Jewish people killed by the Nazis 

in the Holocaust of the Second World War. The existence of 

those victims subjected to life in the Nazi death camps was one 

that can only be described as a man-made horror. 

 

Auschwitz II, known as Birkenau, was the largest Nazis 

extermination centre, housing two very large underground gas 

chambers, two smaller above-ground gas chambers, and an old 

farmhouse — all used to exterminate the prisoners of the camp. 

Prisoners subsisted on 200 to 300 calories of food per day, were 

often worked to death, and many were subjected to medical 

experimentation with mysterious substances. Those who 

appeared fit to work were given a shower, their heads were 

shaved, and a number tattooed on their left forearm. Those not 

fit to work were taken immediately to the gas chambers. 

Seventy-five per cent of the Jews in each transport were 

deemed unfit to work. 

 

We mark these days of remembrance to ensure that monstrous 

actions such as the Holocaust never happen again. Our country 

has successfully used its skills in peacekeeping and arbitration 

to help those in need as situations arise throughout the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 

recognize Holocaust Remembrance Day. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

A Week of First Nations Events 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today in the House in recognition of a very 

successful week last week of events for First Nations people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, the 2012 First Nations Winter Games 

came to a close over the weekend in Saskatoon. Over 3,500 

student athletes from across the province participated in six 

different sports. This year, Mr. Speaker, organizers went the 

extra mile to make the event accessible to every person across 

the province by broadcasting the games over the Internet so 

friends, family, and spectators alike could experience the 

excitement of the competitions in real time. I would like to take 

this opportunity to congratulate all of the athletes, organizers, 

sponsors, volunteers, and the city of Saskatoon for their 

tremendous hard work in making this event such a great 

success. 

 

I’d also like to highlight, Mr. Speaker, that the 2012 First 

Nations University of Canada Pow Wow, the 34th annual 

Spring Celebration Pow Wow, took place April 14th and 15th 

in Regina. As the first powwow of the year, this highly 

anticipated event is considered to be one of the biggest in 

Saskatchewan, and it attracted more than 7,000 visitors and 

participants from right across Canada and the United States. 

Since it began in 1978, the powwow has been held every year 

to celebrate cultural diversity, to unify families and 

communities, and to demonstrate First Nations culture.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I applaud the volunteers, organizers, and everyone 

involved at FNUC [First Nations University of Canada] for 

making this powwow an event to remember. And I’d like to 

give special thanks to Chairperson Richard Missens and elder, 

kokum Florence Isaac for their outstanding contributions to 

building these tremendous events. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night was an 

evening of pride, accomplishment, and success for business as 

the Moose Jaw and District Chamber of Commerce presented 

the Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards. Over 40 

nominations in 11 categories celebrated the achievement of 

business in our community. 

 

It was fascinating to see so many business leaders in attendance 

to recognize and be recognized for the hard work that they put 

into their enterprises. That hard work is the foundation upon 

which Moose Jaw people are creating a growing city and 

contributing to a growing province that is leading the country in 

many economic categories. 

 

Mosaic Potash was presented with Business of the Year, which 

was selected from all the nominees. Mosaic Potash has 

approximately 340 employees plus hundreds of contractors on 

site. They contribute generously to many community causes 

including Hunger in Moose Jaw, which supplies thousands of 

meals to Moose Jaw school children; the Moose Jaw Cultural 

Centre, sponsors of our beloved Moose Jaw Warriors; and the 

Moose Jaw Health Foundation, plus many others. 

 

Charles Vanden Broek was selected as business leader of the 

year. In his address, Mr. Speaker, he recognized the growth and 

enthusiasm generated in this city over the past 16 years. People 

are coming to Moose Jaw to work and to live because they see 

opportunity and they see success in our city. The success is in 

part thanks to the hard work of the business people in Moose 

Jaw. Congratulations to all the nominees and the winners for 

their diligent work in building a positive business climate and 

in their celebration of the Moose Jaw Business Excellence 

Awards. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Autism Services Spring Gala 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

April 14th I had the pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of 

the Government of Saskatchewan and the Minister of Health at 

the 14th annual Autism Services Spring Gala in Saskatoon 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

along with the hon. member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Autism spectrum disorder, ASD, has a profound impact in our 

society. It is estimated that 1 out of 110 children in Canada is 

affected by autism. Autism Services is a community-based 

charitable organization dedicated to providing advocacy, 

support, education, recreational, social, and residential 

programs and services to individuals with ASD and their 

families. Their vision is to make sure that all individuals with 

autism have the opportunity to live with dignity and to reach 

their full potential. 

 

Since our government was first elected in 2007, we have 

recognized that there is a need for increased autism support 

services. In the most recent budget, we increased funding for 

autism to $7.6 million. We have also provided an additional $4 

million for ASD over the next four years. 

 

At the gala, I had the opportunity for conversation with families 

on a personal level about their struggles and joys. It’s by 

attending galas such as this, Mr. Speaker, that we can help 

share a greater understanding of autism and support our 

members in our community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

International Military Ball 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last 

weekend I had the great privilege of attending the 24th annual 

International Military Ball held in Minot, North Dakota and 

hosted by the United States Air Force, the city of Minot, and 

the Minot area Chamber of Commerce. Our delegation was led 

by Their Honours, Mrs. Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 

Governor of Saskatchewan, and Mr. Gordon Schofield and 

included military units from Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and even 

Ontario. 

 

We Canadian visitors were very warmly welcomed and treated 

to exceptional hospitality by our American friends. For many 

the highlight of the week’s program was the ball itself. To 

begin with, the head table was introduced with full military 

honours and accompanied by the splendid Minot Air Force 

Base Honor Guard. The program also included a wonderful 

meal prepared by the Holiday Inn Riverside staff with music 

provided by the pipes and drums of the 26th Field Regiment, 

Royal Canadian Artillery, and the truly amazing USAF [United 

States Air Force] Heartland of America Band, Raptor. 

 

For others, including myself, the opportunity to tour the base, 

see its state-of-the-art facilities and equipment, and meet the 

dedicated personnel was also deeply appreciated. And yes, for a 

select group, the great selection and value offered by Minot’s 

women’s clothing and shoe stores proved to be irresistibly 

attractive. 

 

To Colonel James Dawkins, commander of 5th Bomb Wing; 

Colonel Stephen Davis, commander of 91st Missile Wing; 

Mayor Curt Zimbelman; Mr. F. Bruce Walker, Chair of the 

Minot Area Chamber of Commerce; and the volunteer team, 

sincere thanks and best wishes for continued success. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you I’ll ask for leave for introductions. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for 

introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Due to 

some inclement weather and some difficult roads, to you and 

through you I’m happy to introduce students from the 

Johnson-Shoyama school who are joining us here today. I’ll get 

directly to their names: Everett Berg, Bill Bewer, Shannon 

Boklaschuk, Bonanle Dansu from the school of public health, 

Rosina Foli, Phillip Lashley, Jaime Leonard, Nyankomo 

Marwa, Sara McPhee-Knowles, Whitney Mosley, Justin 

Redekopp, Julene Restall, Travis Reynolds, Kristopher 

Schmaltz, Rasheed Soomro, Jordan Teichgrab, Satpal Virdi, 

Ishmael Wireko, and Lucy Zhang. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all inspiring students. They’re taking 

their graduate studies right here at the Johnson-Shoyama 

school. We know that students today mean that they’ll be 

leaders tomorrow within the province, across the country, and 

around the world. Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members of the 

Assembly to join me in welcoming these students to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to join in the 

introductions please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to do 

introductions. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very quickly, I’d like 

to join with the minister in welcoming these Johnson-Shoyama 

students to the Assembly. 

 

Johnson-Shoyama is doing great work here in the province, and 

we so look forward to the contribution that these scholars will 

be making here in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and most certainly 

abroad as well. So welcome today to the legislature and thank 

you for coming. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

Massey Place. 

 

Tobacco Control 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our province’s 

farmers and those who are counting on old age security are not 

the only individuals feeling the fallout from the federal 

Conservative budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Recently we’ve learned that the federal Conservatives have also 

drastically cut the federal tobacco control strategy. This is a 

move, Mr. Speaker, that will negatively affect tobacco cessation 

efforts here in Saskatchewan. My specific question to the 

minister is this: has his ministry undertaken an assessment of 

what this cut will mean for programs here in Saskatchewan that 

help people live healthier lives? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we haven’t really looked closely at the cuts from the 

federal government, but what I will say is that our tobacco 

control strategy that we put in place, I think, Mr. Speaker, over 

the last number of years has been very effective. We’ve done a 

number of things, not only pieces of legislation that have 

banned little cigarillos, Mr. Speaker — that was a very popular 

move, Mr. Speaker — but we’ve also done a number of things 

regarding education to make sure that people are aware of the 

harmful effects of tobacco, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more to do on this front. We have one of 

the highest rates of tobacco use in Canada. We are taking steps 

to make sure that we reduce those numbers in a number of 

areas, not only through legislation but also through education 

and so that people can break the habit if they so choose, Mr. 

Speaker. We have supports through the pharmacies of our 

province to help with that, Mr. Speaker. More work to do, but 

we’re well on the way to reducing the number of people using 

tobacco in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reduction of 

funding through the tobacco control strategy is going to be felt 

here in Saskatchewan, especially when it comes to supporting 

organizations that help young people to not start smoking as 

well as to help individuals who wish to kick the habit. We also 

know, Mr. Speaker, that this will mean fewer enforcement 

officers here in the province to monitor the display of tobacco 

products in retail stores. My question to the minister: with the 

federal . . . with the Sask Party’s federal cousins once again 

pulling the carpet out from underneath Saskatchewan people, 

what is this minister going to do in order to ensure that big 

tobacco doesn’t regain ground that it has lost here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are a 

number of other programs that we have in the province that 

helps reduce the use of tobacco. We have a strong program that 

goes through the school system. It’s called a View and Vote. In 

fact the member from Regina Dewdney was recently at one of 

the schools to award, to announce the commercial that was the 

winning commercial. So there are a number of programs that 

we have. 

 

Certainly a reduction from the federal government is a concern. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would say that today in Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan advantage of a balanced budget, a have province 

is a far cry from what we used to realize under the NDP who 

were so reliant on the federal government year after year 

because they just didn’t have a growing economy. Mr. Speaker, 

we have a balanced budget. We are the envy of the nation, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes, we would always appreciate more money from 

the federal government but, Mr. Speaker, we are taking steps 

within our province with the money that we have, that we 

generate from our province, to see many of these programs 

through to fruition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can lament the 

reduction from the federal government if he wants but that 

doesn’t . . . This isn’t simply a theoretical discussion, Mr. 

Speaker, about federal and provincial relations. This is a cut 

from the federal government, Mr. Speaker, that will harm the 

health of Saskatchewan people and will also in turn harm the 

provincial health budget. We know, Mr. Speaker, for each 

individual who can quit smoking there’s an average savings of 

$8,500. So this decision to cut funding at the federal level will 

have a negative effect here in Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a bad form of downloading from the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker, and it ought to greatly concern the 

minister, certainly more than what we just heard in that last 

answer. My question to the minister: his government has taken 

very urgent action when it comes to adding more politicians to 

the province — at a cost of millions, I might add. What urgent 

action is this minister going to take in order to ensure that 

tobacco control efforts in Saskatchewan aren’t gutted? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have had a very 

strong tobacco reduction strategy in this province that combines 

legislation; it combines education, Mr. Speaker. We have seen 

and we will continue to see, I think, the rates of tobacco use 

continue to drop in our province, Mr. Speaker. We have been, 

quite frankly, when you look at all the jurisdictions, one of the 

leaders in this front, Mr. Speaker, including issues around First 

Nations use and the number of cartons that they could buy, Mr. 

Speaker, which was controversial, that the members opposite 

failed to do when they were in government for 16 years, Mr. 

Speaker. We have gone a long ways to help try and reduce 

tobacco use. 

 

I am not discounting the fact that if the federal government 

backs away from some of its funding responsibilities, that’s a 

concern, and we’ll continue to raise that with them. Having said 

that, Mr. Speaker, it’s a far cry from when the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] were in power that relied so heavily on the 

federal government because all we would ever be under their 

watch would have been a have-not province. 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Provincial efforts in 

reducing the use of tobacco in the province are of course a good 

thing, Mr. Speaker, but there has been a traditional role and a 

positive role here that the federal tobacco control strategy has 

played in reducing tobacco consumption in the province. 

 

It’s an alarming pattern, Mr. Speaker, we see by members 

opposite on the other side. Whether it’s agricultural cuts we see 

from the federal government, whether it’s changes to old age 

security, Mr. Speaker, that we see, whether it is changes, Mr. 

Speaker, to health care funding over the long term, and now 

whether it’s tobacco control funding, Mr. Speaker, members 

opposite are just happy to take these cuts from the federal 

Conservatives any opportunity that they have. My question to 

the minister: why won’t he do what’s right for Saskatchewan 

patients here in Saskatchewan and stand up and say these cuts 

are wrong and actually take a stand for once as opposed to 

simply just taking every cut that the Harper government’s 

willing to give? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we came in 

with a strong package of legislation that banned tobacco use in 

vehicles which had children under the age of 16. We banned 

tobacco use on school grounds, Mr. Speaker. We’ve taken a 

number of steps in the last four years to reduce the amount of 

tobacco use in this province. 

 

I will say though, Mr. Speaker, there is more work to do. When 

we took government from the opposition, there was certainly 

many areas, and this was just one more of those areas that we 

needed to continue to improve for the health of our citizens. 

 

Again having said that, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t, you know, what 

we want to see, the federal government back away from a 

program. But as I said in my previous answers, Mr. Speaker, if 

there’s ever a time that the province can take on a challenge, for 

example, of tobacco use, it’s under this government with a 

growing government and a growing economy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Midwifery Supply and Training 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Midwifery is 

important to Saskatchewan women and is an option more and 

more women would like to choose. Unfortunately, 

Saskatchewan continues to have a shortage of midwifery 

services. According to a Saskatoon midwife, the number of 

requests for services is more than double what current capacity 

allows. 

 

It has been more than four years since the government 

implemented its midwifery program, yet there are only 10 

midwives available to serve women in Saskatchewan and 

almost half are concentrated in one health region. To the 

minister: what is he doing to ensure Saskatchewan residents 

who want to become midwives are able to receive the education 

they need here in their own province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, again, you know, this 

answer will maybe mirror one of the other answers that I said 

because what I’m going to do is compare the record of the NDP 

to the record of this provincial government over the last four 

and a half years. 

 

Under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, after 16 years of trying to get it 

done and talk about it, they passed legislation but they didn’t 

proclaim legislation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 16 years 

of NDP government, just before the ’07 election, guess how 

many midwives were working in Saskatchewan? None, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past four and a half years, we’ve added to 

the midwife complement, Mr. Speaker, each and every year. I 

am checking my notes. I think there’s around six or seven 

working in the province right now. Well the members laugh. 

The members laugh. Six is a heck of a lot more than none. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because 

Saskatchewan does not have a midwifery education program, if 

you want to become a midwife you have few options but to 

pack up and leave the province to get your education. This is 

not an easy choice for those who have family responsibilities, 

employment here, or financial constraints. Fortunately there are 

a handful of degree-granting, nationally accredited programs in 

the United States offering distance education options, like the 

Midwives College of Utah or MCU. Students can do a portion 

of their study from home, but also must do hands-on clinical 

placements under registered midwives to finish their education. 

 

Currently Saskatchewan refuses to allow its registered 

midwives to supervise senior MCU students to get their 

required births. This is despite the fact there are currently more 

than 25 MCU graduates working as licensed midwives all over 

Canada, and our neighbour to the west, Alberta, allows its 

midwives to supervise MCU students. To the minister: why is 

the level of training offered by the Midwives College of Utah 

good enough for Alberta but not good enough for our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, like many of or all of 

the professional associations that we have, whether it’s the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons, whether it’s the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, all the different 

professions, Mr. Speaker, set standards. They are the 

organization that set standards that is acceptable here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have set up a midwives professional 

organization that will look at education and accept education 

that they feel is appropriate, Mr. Speaker. So when those 

midwives, for example, take training in whichever institution, if 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

it meets the standard of our professional association which we 

take advice from, Mr. Speaker . . . It isn’t the government that 

sets standards, Mr. Speaker. It is the professional association 

that sets standards. Now if she would like to change that, that 

would be very interesting, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly 

they just didn’t get it done when they were the government. I’d 

ask her now if she would respect the professional association, 

or do you think she knows best? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker. 

I’d like to know what this minister is doing to address the 

drastic shortage of midwives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Two of these MCU students are here today. Diane Otterbein has 

already taken much time away from her family at great 

financial expense to complete 100 births in Utah and Africa. 

She only needs nine more births to graduate, Mr. Speaker. Ang 

Evans was receiving supervision at a midwifery clinic in 

Alberta. She recently moved to Regina with her family only to 

learn she cannot work under the supervision of Saskatchewan 

midwives. Diane and Ang want to finish their degrees so they 

can take the next steps to become registered midwives here and 

serve Saskatchewan women and families. 

 

To the minister: will he commit to finding a solution so 

homegrown midwifery students from nationally accredited 

programs can complete the hands-on portion of their education 

here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, we have to rely on the experts in the area. That’s who I 

take my advice from. It doesn’t matter whether it’s the midwife 

association or the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve had many people that have come up to me with a 

doctor, a friend or a doctor that they will say should be 

practising in Saskatchewan. We have to rely on the professional 

associations, Mr. Speaker, to make those calls and to make 

those judgments, and I will continue to do that. 

 

But I will say, Mr. Speaker, again comparing our record to the 

NDP, I remember the NDP talking about how many nurses we 

should have but we would never set a number, Mr. Speaker, 

because we just wouldn’t meet it. Under this government, Mr. 

Speaker, in four and a half years the number of registered 

nurses increased by 900, Mr. Speaker, in this province. The 

number of physicians have increased by 200, Mr. Speaker, and 

the number of midwives have gone from zero to six, or maybe 

even a couple more until I get the latest numbers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Conference Sponsorship 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this year the World 

Congress on Information Technology, WCIT, is being held in 

Montreal, Quebec, between October 22nd to the 24th. This is an 

information technology conference. Mr. Speaker, we know that 

SaskTel International is a platinum title sponsor, spending at 

least $51,000 to be on the banner, Mr. Speaker, and certainly it 

could be more. To the minister: what’s the total amount of 

money being spent, taxpayers’ money, by SaskTel International 

on this conference, and what’s the purpose of these dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of the current 

amount that they’re dedicating towards this particular function. 

I’ll take notice of that question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Note that there 

are no other large telecoms that are sponsoring this conference: 

no Rogers, Bell, AT & T, Sprint, you name it. No one else is 

sponsoring this, but that SaskTel International is. So while rates 

increase under this government, this government’s spending 

thousands of dollars on this out-of-province conference. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the spending doesn’t stop there. When we 

look at the WCIT website, 2012 website, SaskPower is also a 

title silver sponsor, Mr. Speaker. How much money has 

SaskPower spent of Saskatchewan people’s dollars to be an 

out-of-province sponsor for this conference? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, similarly I’ll take notice, 

and we’ll endeavour to get that information. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . It’s sort of 

interesting. There’s no other power companies as well that are 

sponsoring, title sponsor of this international conference. Not 

only has SaskTel International been a sponsor, SaskPower has 

as well, but we also see that Enterprise Saskatchewan is also 

sponsoring this conference. The WCIT website shows 

Enterprise Saskatchewan as one of the main public sector 

sponsors, the other being the host province, Quebec, and 

Montreal themselves. 

 

We’ve heard that Enterprise Saskatchewan is sponsoring this 

conference to the tune of $35,000, Mr. Speaker, while here in 

Saskatchewan we see the Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Association, SEDA, is postponing their 

conference because of a lack of funding. To the minister: what 

is the total amount of money that Enterprise Saskatchewan is 

spending on WCIT, and how’s this benefiting the economy of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ll take notice of that question and get back to the House with 

the information. 

 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s lots of money 

that’s being spent, but not very many answers before 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

An interesting note, Mr. Speaker: there’s no other major 

telecom that’s sponsoring this conference. There’s no other 

power companies, Mr. Speaker, and no other provinces, Mr. 

Speaker, other than the host jurisdiction. Yet this government 

sees fit to spend tens of thousands of dollars, taxpayers’ dollars, 

likely more than $100,000, sponsoring this out-of-province 

conference. It certainly seems like very pricey banner ads, Mr. 

Speaker, with little value for Saskatchewan people. It certainly 

doesn’t seem, Mr. Speaker, to be representative of putting 

Saskatchewan first with this extravagant out-of-province 

sponsorship. It seems more like ministerial and executive 

jet-setting with impacts being felt back home. 

 

My question to the minister: other than increased utility rates 

and local cuts, what are Saskatchewan people getting for the 

tens of thousands of dollars the Sask Party is sending to this 

out-of-province conference? What’s the value for dollar? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll take notice of that question and return to the House with 

the appropriate information. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Support for Economic Development 

 

Mr. Forbes: — [Inaudible] . . . lots of questions, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you very much. You know, Mr. Speaker, in the early 

stage of this government, their flagship program was to replace 

Saskatchewan’s REDAs [regional economic development 

authority] with enterprise regions. This government made a 

clear mistake three years ago in switching from the former 

municipality-based program to the current province-based 

enterprise region program, and this Sask Party government 

experiment has been a failure. For proof we need to only look at 

the recent provincial budget in which funding to these regions 

was cut swiftly and without public consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people involved with these 

enterprise regions are losing their jobs. Communities across this 

province will be diminished. And these are real people, our 

citizens, who believed in Saskatchewan first. Promises were 

made. Now many dreams are broken. Will this minister admit 

that, in regards to enterprise regions, this ministry and this 

government has fallen short of its goals? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. As we’ve said many times over the course of the last 

number of months, we believe that local economic development 

is best handled at the local level. To that end, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve increased revenue sharing very, very significantly, 87 per 

cent over the last four years — $21 million this year, Mr. 

Speaker, $35 million on top of that $21 million next year, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve given municipalities the tools to undertake 

economic development in the best way that they see fit. And 

what we won’t do, Mr. Speaker, is take money away from 

municipal governments as the Leader of the Opposition has 

suggested. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this is what some of the folks are 

saying across this province that had a lot of hopes for this 

program. “The provincial government’s decision to cut funding 

to Enterprise Saskatchewan could set economic development in 

the region back a decade or more.” So says Courtney Vaudner, 

a Melville city councillor and a director of Saskatchewan east 

enterprise region, SEER. And this is a quote: “I’d say we’re 

back to where we were 10 years ago, if not further back,” 

Vaudner told The Melville Advance. 

 

To the minister: will the government now look to reinstate the 

programs like REDA to replace their failed enterprise 

experiment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. As I indicated, we believe and have been very clear in 

saying that we believe that local economic development is best 

handled at the local level. To that end, we’ve increased 

resources to municipal governments very, very significantly 

over the course of the last number of years — $21 million alone 

this year, $35 million next year. Local government does have 

the opportunity, ability, and resources to direct local economic 

development as they see fit. 

 

We see it being more appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to focus at the 

national and international level. To that end we’ve increased 

funding for STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership] very significantly in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re going to continue with aggressive outreach at the 

national and international level. 

 

And frankly, Mr. Speaker, I find it quite hypocritical on the part 

of the NDP to be criticizing Enterprise Saskatchewan when 

frankly it never would have existed under their government, nor 

would the enterprise regions, so why they’re criticizing those 

cuts I find quite strange. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, you know, this is what people 

across the province are saying and in fact in the minister’s own 

backyard, in his own constituency, people are unhappy with the 

decision and even more upset that this government appears to 

be moving backwards. Corey Bowers, the director of economic 

development of 55 west enterprise region said, and I quote: 

“This basically means there’s no more operation here.” That’s 

what he said — no more operation here. 

 

To the minister: when we have hard-working people striving to 

make this economy grow, why are they cutting jobs and paying 

to shut down offices and paying out contracts? 

 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. With regard to the city of Meadow Lake, revenue 

sharing has increased over 100 per cent to the city of Meadow 

Lake over the course of the last four years, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

increased that revenue sharing. I think it’s over $500,000. 

 

You know, the city of Meadow Lake frankly is doing very well, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen growth in our community like we 

have never seen before — like we’d never seen under the NDP, 

that’s for sure, Mr. Speaker. I’ve lived there my whole life and 

we’ve never seen things doing as well as they are right now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the enterprise region he’s referring to, I met with the 

Chair of the 55 west enterprise region only last week, in 

addition to other meetings, and he was very understanding of 

the decision that was taken, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — An interesting way to dismiss the officer out of 

his own backyard there. And I lived in that area too. But when 

people want to see action, they truly do want to see action, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a case now where we see this 

government wants to increase politicians. They want to see 

three more politicians in this legislature rather than develop 

economic progress here in Saskatchewan. And we need to look 

no further, no further than the cancellation of the Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Association, SEDA, conference for 

2012, Growing Saskatchewan. And what a shame that is. The 

Enterprise minister would rather sponsor a conference in 

Montreal and pull funding here in Saskatchewan, pull funding 

here. Mr. Speaker, the SEDA conference has been disrupted 

and delayed for no good reason at all. 

 

[10:45] 

 

To the minister: what other bad news are we waiting for? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

This member wants to talk about economic progress. Let’s talk 

about economic progress, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our population is at an all-time high and right now over 1.067 

million people in Saskatchewan, more than have ever lived in 

this province before, Mr. Speaker. We have more people 

working in this province than we have ever had working in the 

history of this province, Mr. Speaker. We have an 

unemployment rate of 4.8 per cent, the lowest in the entirety of 

the country, Mr. Speaker. More than 13,000 jobs posted on 

saskjobs.ca in February, Mr. Speaker. We’ve a Stats Canada 

forecast more than $20 billion in public and private investment 

in Saskatchewan this year, double from when those members 

were in government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This economy is moving forward under the leadership of this 

Premier. With a balanced budget, we’re going to keep moving 

forward without the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Electoral Representation 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate here this afternoon on an issue that’s 

increasingly being recognized by Saskatchewan people all 

across this province — in Swift Current, in Kindersley, in 

Cypress Hills, Mr. Speaker; did I mention Cypress Hills, Mr. 

Speaker? — and in every region of the province, all across this 

fine province. 

 

We’re speaking to an issue that is very much out of line with 

the priorities of Saskatchewan people and has people 

questioning why this government’s pushing forward with 

changes that certainly aren’t in the best interest of 

Saskatchewan people. At the end of this debate here today or at 

the end of my introduction of this debate here today, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll be moving a motion. I’ll introduce that motion at 

this point in time for the record and which I’ll be speaking to 

here today, motion being and that I would like to move a 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes that spending millions of 

public dollars on more politicians is unnecessary to 

effectively represent the current constituents of 

Saskatchewan; and further 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to withdraw 

the measures set forth in Bill No. 36 because the 

government did not consult the people of Saskatchewan 

before its introduction and the legislation does not 

address the common sense priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the motion we’ll be speaking here today, 

and there’s some important points that I’d like to make. 

 

What I would like to say to Saskatchewan people is that I’m 

incredibly encouraged by the interest that Saskatchewan people 

are showing in this issue, this circumstance where a 

government is introducing something that’s certainly not in the 

best interest of Saskatchewan people. And I’ve been interested 

with the emails, the phone calls, the petitions that are coming 

from all across the province, Mr. Speaker. And it’s no surprise, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s no surprise when you put forward legislation 

like this and put forward tricks and manoeuvres like this, Mr. 

Speaker, that Saskatchewan people will be disappointed. It’s a 

matter of being straight with Saskatchewan people, and in this 

case, this government’s been anything but, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know for certain, Mr. Speaker, that when that government 

went to the people of Saskatchewan in the fall election, Mr. 

Speaker, with their flashy and sleek brochures and their 

platform items, it was never mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that they 

were going to be increasing the number of politicians in this 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

province. Not a mention to Saskatchewan people in the 

election, Mr. Speaker. And further to that, Mr. Speaker, not a 

mention of it in the Throne Speech once this government was 

elected with a large mandate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we accept the choice of voters. We accept 

that there’s a large majority over there, Mr. Speaker. What we 

don’t accept, Mr. Speaker, is for a government to betray 

Saskatchewan people in the fashion that we have and for a 

government to be acting in a manner that’s all about their own 

political, partisan best interest, Mr. Speaker, and having no 

reflection to the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So it’s with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, that we oppose this Bill. 

But we also do so . . . This Bill eliminates the voice of children 

all across this province, of youth, Mr. Speaker, eliminates youth 

in the counting within our constituents and marginalizes that 

voice, both of children, of youth, students, but also of young 

communities, of First Nations, Métis communities, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is something that’s certainly not just 

something that the opposition is identifying. We’re proud to 

stand up to make sure that the voices of children and students 

and youth are represented here in this Chamber. We believe 

they should also be front and centre in the electoral decisions 

made, Mr. Speaker. We also believe that they should be a full 

consideration in the budgetary decisions of government. And 

any move to discount that voice, Mr. Speaker, is an injustice. 

 

And we agree, Mr. Speaker, with the Children’s Advocate, Mr. 

Speaker, who’s come out scathing this piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s important to note that the Children’s Advocate in 

Saskatchewan is an independent role, Mr. Speaker, a 

non-partisan role, there for the best interests of Saskatchewan 

children. The Children’s Advocate, Mr. Speaker, and I quote 

that independent provincial Children’s Advocate, “To eliminate 

those under 18 of the eligibility runs contrary to everyone’s 

right to equal representation. Every citizen has the right to 

effective representation.” 

 

You know, listen, there is no valid reason to exclude the voices 

of children. What we should be doing with children, youth, and 

students is reaching out to youth and young people and young 

communities and engaging them in the democratic process, 

inviting them in to be part of the solutions of today that are 

going to secure the bright future of tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. To 

not do so, and to in fact dismiss, discount, and marginalize that 

voice as we’re seeing here, Mr. Speaker, only for the political 

best interests of their own party, Mr. Speaker, is a sad day in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This week we’ve celebrated the 30th anniversary of the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms, Mr. Speaker. The Charter guarantees 

effective representation, Mr. Speaker, and we see the actions of 

this government running counter to both the Charter, Mr. 

Speaker, in its intent but also to the best interests of 

Saskatchewan young people all across this province, just as 

been highlighted by the Children’s Advocate who says it runs 

contrary to everyone’s right to equal representation, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s sad, Mr. Speaker, and this is discrimination simply 

based on age, Mr. Speaker. Incredibly disappointing. 

 

What I know is interesting, many people highlight as well is 

that in fact we aren’t under-represented in Saskatchewan at all, 

Mr. Speaker. I know I’ve had people from La Ronge make 

contact. We’ve had people from Kindersley make contact. 

We’ve had people from Meadow Lake and Lloydminster make 

contact, Mr. Speaker. And what they’re suggesting, Mr. 

Speaker, what they’re highlighting is that in fact we already 

have one of the smallest constituencies by way of population 

here in this province, Mr. Speaker, than the rest of Canada. So 

they’re wondering why this government’s pursuing big 

government for politicians, Mr. Speaker, to spend millions of 

dollars to pursue the best interests, their own political partisan 

interests, Mr. Speaker, instead of placing those priorities, those 

resources into the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

When they’re looking, Mr. Speaker, I know some of the folks I 

was chatting with, this gentleman up in Melville who gave me a 

phone call, and he had gone online and he had looked at the 

information. He wanted to just make sure what he was looking 

at was correct. This individual, as he described to me, doesn’t 

make these kinds of phone calls usually, Mr. Speaker. In fact he 

described himself as somebody who, well I’ll be frank, Mr. 

Speaker, he said he didn’t vote for our party last election. And 

that’s fine; we work for all people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when he looked at the literature, Mr. Speaker, and he 

looked at the numbers, Mr. Speaker, he wanted to clarify 

because he thought the numbers couldn’t be right. Because he 

said any government in a right mind with an eye to fairness in 

serving Saskatchewan people simply couldn’t be doing what 

this government is in fact and indeed doing, Mr. Speaker, in 

adding three more politicians by spending millions of dollars, 

Mr. Speaker — people’s hard-earned dollars, Mr. Speaker — at 

the same time as they’re piling expenses onto the backs of 

everyday families all across this province, asking seniors to dig 

deeper, Mr. Speaker, into their pockets to pay for prescription 

drugs and other cost of living increases, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s a sad day, Mr. Speaker, a sad day and it reflects 

misplaced priorities. 

 

What this individual highlighted, and the questions . . . It was a 

chart, Mr. Speaker, that highlighted the different provinces and 

how they relate to the number of constituents within a 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, I believe in fact he was referencing 

and been on a Canadian Taxpayers Federation website, Mr. 

Speaker, that put out a bit of a video I guess on this, Mr. 

Speaker, highlighting some of this information. And certainly I 

understand they strongly oppose this reckless move that’s 

certainly not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people or the 

taxpaying public. 

 

But the individual, what he wanted to raise with me, he says, 

how can this be? How can this be that British Columbia, Mr. 

Speaker, their constituencies by way of population, an MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] in British Columbia has 

2.9 more constituents than we do, Mr. Speaker, almost three 

times more. So here in Saskatchewan we serve roughly 18,000 

constituents, Mr. Speaker. And British Columbia, an MLA 

serves 51,764 constituents, Mr. Speaker — almost three times 

as many, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know Saskatchewan people pretty well, Mr. Speaker, 

and there’s a special spirit and work ethic about Saskatchewan 

people, a certain part of their DNA that says we can roll up our 

sleeves, we can work a little harder and we can tend to what we 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

need to do, that we can determine our own future, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have certainly not come across a single 

individual that somehow thinks that we need to create a cushier 

environment for politicians, Mr. Speaker. That’s simply not the 

DNA of Saskatchewan people. What I urge, Mr. Speaker, is for 

members opposite to work a little harder, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s a shared piece that we can all do, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

what Saskatchewan people expect. 

 

But now it’s not just British Columbia, Mr. Speaker, that is in 

this circumstance. In Alberta, Mr. Speaker, when we have only 

18,000 people in our constituencies, in Alberta we have more. 

They have 43,915 constituents, Mr. Speaker — two and a half 

times more than we do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Wow. Repeat that. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The member from Cumberland says, 

maybe I should repeat that. That’s two and a half times more 

constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at Ontario, Mr. Speaker, in Ontario, they 

actually have 6.7 times the number of constituents in their 

ridings, Mr. Speaker. So here in Saskatchewan when the Sask 

Party’s saying, oh boy, we can’t keep up with keeping in touch 

with 18,000 people, Mr. Speaker, in Ontario they serve more 

than 120,000 constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’m not saying that’s the right way to go to have 

constituencies that large, Mr. Speaker, but it proves to serve a 

good point when you see members opposite with a little bit of 

population growth that’s going on in the province — something 

that we’re encouraged by, something we’ve seen for a long 

time, Mr. Speaker — but to somehow pretend that we need to 

crank up the number of MLAs, even with the population 

growth, Mr. Speaker, we have the smallest constituencies by 

way of population in the country,. And that’s a disconnect from 

the way Saskatchewan people are wired and what they expect 

from us as politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been on lots of 

doorsteps, Mr. Speaker. We go out to meetings all across 

Saskatchewan. We hear from Saskatchewan people. And I can 

honestly tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I have never heard a single 

person tell me that we need more politicians, Mr. Speaker, other 

than the members opposite and now a couple of their rabid 

supporters. But most of their supporters in that last election say 

this is wrong. This is wrong. It isn’t what they were offered. It 

isn’t what they were promised and it’s out of line with the 

priorities of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can highlight the discussions that I’ve had 

on doorsteps all through my riding, Mr. Speaker. And you 

know, there’s good discussions around tuition, around cost of 

living, around housing, around education, around health 

services, Mr. Speaker. Never has a single person mentioned to 

me that they want to increase the number of politicians. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it just goes to the point that it just doesn’t pass the 

common sense test, and this speaks to what I’ve said about the 

priorities of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So we’re greatly concerned with this Bill. It doesn’t serve 

Saskatchewan people. It serves the partisan interests of a 

government, Mr. Speaker, a government that I think 

Saskatchewan people wish would have focused on the mandate 

that they had been offered and maybe move forward in a 

humble way as a large majority, Mr. Speaker, instead of losing 

sight of what they maybe had been elected on or what they had 

been telling voters before. 

 

Hearing from all Saskatchewan people, or from many 

Saskatchewan people that there seems to be a change in this 

government from the election until now, Mr. Speaker, that there 

seems to be a disconnect and a lack of understanding of the 

reality Saskatchewan families are facing, Mr. Speaker, a bit of 

an out-of-touch nature of this government in the short few 

months, pushing forward a Bill like this that is all about them, 

Mr. Speaker, and costs Saskatchewan people lots of money and 

at the same time does nothing to serve the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We’re disappointed with this piece of legislation. We’re 

disappointed because it’s needlessly spending millions of 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, to increase the number of politicians. 

We’re disappointed because it marginalizes and takes away the 

voice of young people all across this province when we need to 

be including and taking actually actions to figure out how to 

include young people more and more and more in their 

democratic process and in the decisions that’ll be made to 

ensure their bright future and our bright future as a province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

This is a piece of legislation that was put forward without any 

consultation, Mr. Speaker. It runs counter, Mr. Speaker, to what 

the Children’s Advocate, the independent, non-partisan 

Children’s Advocate here in Saskatchewan is telling the 

government, who’s saying this is wrong, that it takes away the 

voice of children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for all these reasons, we strongly oppose this piece of 

legislation. And we call on this government to withdraw, to pull 

this reckless Bill that’s all about them, Mr. Speaker, and 

nothing about Saskatchewan people. And so, Mr. Speaker, with 

that I would like to move a motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes that spending millions of 

public dollars on more politicians is unnecessary to 

effectively represent the current constituents of 

Saskatchewan; and further 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to withdraw 

the measures set forth in Bill No. 36 because the 

government did not consult the people of Saskatchewan 

before its introduction and the legislation does not 

address the common sense priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the motion I put before the Assembly for 

debate here today. We strongly oppose the Bill that’s been put 

forward, strongly support the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has 

moved: 

 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

That this Assembly recognizes that spending millions of 

public dollars on more politicians is unnecessary to 

effectively represent the current constituents of 

Saskatchewan; and further 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to withdraw 

the measures set forth in Bill No. 36 because the 

government did not consult the people of Saskatchewan 

before its introduction and the legislation does not 

address the common sense priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the . . . I recognize the member for 

Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve often 

said in previous instances, it’s a pleasure for me to join in this 

debate. And this one genuinely is a pleasure to join into because 

it’s so pertinent to my own personal set of circumstances, the 

people of Cypress Hills, and the ability of me to represent them 

fairly and adequately. And I think that there is a lot riding on 

this particular piece of legislation, that is being addressed in the 

motion today, that is going to be of benefit to the people of not 

just Cypress Hills but to the entire province. 

 

You know, I looked at the motion, Mr. Speaker, and it 

references the common sense priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. As one wag has said, the problem with common sense 

is that it’s not all that common any more. And I’m not so sure 

that what our hon. colleague has introduced in this motion 

represents the common sense sensibilities of the people of 

Saskatchewan. In fact I would argue today, and I’m going to, 

that when you put the facts in front of the people of 

Saskatchewan, don’t scare them with hyperbole and drama, 

they will come to understand, and many of them have in my 

conversations with them, that this is an appropriate thing to do 

in Saskatchewan, to increase the number of seats in the 

province by three at this very important time of growth and 

expansion in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, we wouldn’t find it necessary to even consider this 

if the province wasn’t growing, and that’s the fundamental part 

of this equation that the NDP have just sort of ignored. Maybe 

it’s because they aren’t used to growth. They have a record of 

overseeing decay and diminishment of the province. But now 

that there’s growth happening here, they can’t adjust to the 

realities of the new situation facing the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out for the benefit of those that 

are following this debate today that the Conference Board of 

Canada has growth projected at 5.1 per cent for the overall year 

of 2011 for the province of Saskatchewan — the final figures 

are now in — and for the upcoming year, 2012, they’re talking 

about 2.8 per cent growth. Those numbers are among the 

highest and certainly no less than second highest growth rates 

in the entire nation, and we can be very proud of that. 

 

But with that growth, we’ve had some other real benefits accrue 

to the province. At 435,600 full-time jobs, that’s the highest 

number on record for any point in our history. We have a 5.1 

per cent unemployment rate. That’s the second lowest in the 

country. Saskatchewan’s average weekly earnings are the 

highest on record, and we have exceeded the national average 

since August of 2011. Every month since last August, our 

average weekly earnings have been the highest on record and 

have exceeded the national average. The population jumped by 

17,000 people in the year 2011 to an all-time high of 1,067,612 

people. That’s the biggest increase in one year since 1953 when 

the population at that time grew by 18,000. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just from a statistical point of view, you can 

see that a growing economy has one major benefit. It attracts 

people. And it’s brought a number of people — records of 

numbers of people — to this province, and we can expect the 

same going forward. 

 

The reality is that, as I indicated in the outset of my comments, 

the NDP had the worst job creation record in Canada from the 

year 2001 to 2007. That’s a sad record, but it’s their record. 

And they saw the population drop by 35,000 people in that 

same period. Thirty-five thousand people left the province of 

Saskatchewan in that same period of 2001 to 2007. The premier 

at that time even called this a wee province. That’s w-e-e. And 

you know, references like that have a psychological impact. 

And when people heard the premier talk about us as being a 

wee province, they thought we better look elsewhere, and that 

was the outcome that resulted in the huge population loss. So 

you know, we could read headlines from the paper that used to 

talk about the population declining and being the worst in the 

country, that taxes are going up. Jobs are cut. There’s budget 

hikes in sales and sin taxes. Those are the kinds of 

circumstances we lived with when the NDP were the party in 

power.  

 

Now the circumstances have changed. There’s optimism here. 

There’s people here. There’s jobs and economic growth here. 

And as a consequence of that, there is a population requirement 

that would ask us or would demand of us that we provide 

adequate and fair representation for the people across the entire 

province. Right now we’re seeing most of the population 

growth in the city of Saskatoon. There’s huge growth in the city 

of Regina. There’s substantial growth just north of Saskatoon in 

the Martensville, Warman area.  

 

But if we looked at the redistribution of the provincial electoral 

map, which is required by law, and didn’t take into account the 

addition of three seats, we would see a very unfair and 

imbalanced proportion of voters in some constituencies versus 

others. And so this legislation that has got the NDP all hot and 

bothered is really good for the province, but it’s good for the 

individual voters who will have their vote represented roughly 

equally with others that have already resided in the province. 

The new people coming to this province deserve to have their 

vote count at the same level and for the same value as anybody 

else’s, and the legislation that the NDP oppose is intended to 

benefit those people who are coming to our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to reference this whole issue in another 

facet. The member for Athabasca when he first saw this 

legislation commented about it in the legislature here in very 

positive terms, and I want to congratulate him for having taken 

that common sense approach because I know that the area that 

he represents is a huge area geographically. There’s a small 

population; they’re spread all over, and he knows how difficult 

it is to provide proper representation in those circumstances. 

And his automatic response when he saw this legislation, Mr. 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

Speaker, was to talk very positively about it because it made 

sense.  

 

It wasn’t until a day or two later when the NDP realized that 

100,000 people that have come to this province over the last 

number of years, and who will come to this province in the next 

number of years, probably wouldn’t vote for them and they had 

a lot at stake politically because all those new people were 

going to vote some other way, and they didn’t want to lose the 

advantage of the current boundary map that operates in this 

province. But the member from Athabasca when he looked at 

this just from his own instinctive consideration saw that this 

legislation was good and really recognized the value of having 

more MLAs in the province, more equal representation in the 

province, and having a fairer situation for the people who are 

making the province of Saskatchewan home. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in my own case — and I’ve referenced 

this, and I want to put it on the record again — I have one voter 

per square kilometre in the constituency of Cypress Hills. 

That’s probably more than the member from Athabasca has, I’ll 

grant you that, but nevertheless it is a very rural area, a very 

large geographic area, and it makes representation of that 

region very difficult. If nothing was done in terms of adding 

MLAs to the mix when the boundaries are redrawn the next 

time in the course of legal requirement, the chances are that the 

constituency of Cypress Hills and most other rural 

constituencies would get significantly larger. And I really 

believe that if you’re going to take this job seriously, you have 

to make yourself available to the people not just in your office, 

not just by phone or fax or email, but you have to make 

yourself available to the people in person. And going to where 

they are is an important part of this job. 

 

Last Friday night, after a couple of ridiculous letters appeared 

in the Leader-Post, I had the privilege of going to Leader to 

attend to a couple of events there. Mr. Speaker, I drove from 

here to Leader, participated in those two events, and at 10:30 at 

night I drove from Leader to my home. I put on 654 kilometres 

Friday night. I would venture to say that there’s isn’t hardly a 

single member in the NDP caucus who have put on 654 

kilometres since the new year started, let alone in one night, to 

represent their constituents. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a pleasure to participate in this 

debate, and I yield the floor at this point. 

 

The Speaker: — Well if a member will stand up, I will . . . I 

recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m still 

familiarizing myself with the procedures and so I apologize for 

that. 

 

Here we are again talking about Bill 36, and I’m speaking 

particularly to the motion that our opposition has brought again 

today, trying to talk some sense and common sense into this 

government. 

 

So the motion that we’re speaking to is based in two parts, and 

the first part is that about the spending. This Bill is expensive. 

And no matter how the Minister of Justice tries to slice and dice 

it and say, well we’ll have efficiencies in other areas so it 

makes it okay, let’s think about those efficiencies for a moment, 

Mr. Speaker. If he has abilities to create efficiencies in other 

areas, then perhaps it would go better placed to helping seniors 

pay for their prescriptions, or maybe helping municipalities 

dealing with the off-loading of the enterprise regions, or all 

sorts of things that we see, cuts in the public service. So 

perhaps those efficiencies could, the public deserves to see 

those efficiencies across the board and not just to justify adding 

three more politicians to the mix. It just doesn’t wash. 

 

And we’ve seen this math from the other side over the last 

couple of weeks, and I think it’s insulting to the public to 

suggest that we can increase spending in this reckless way 

without . . . and somehow find efficiencies across the way in 

ministries in the form of cuts to justify adding three politicians. 

So that change in rhetoric has really surprised me, and I’m most 

disappointed to see that being headed up by our Minister of 

Justice because I think it’s not fair, and it certainly doesn’t 

make a whole lot of sense. 

 

So that’s the first part of the motion. The second part of the 

motion is about the fact that they didn’t consult with the people 

of Saskatchewan before the introduction and it does not address 

the common sense priorities of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So before I get into my comments on that, I just want to refresh 

a little bit the introduction of this Bill back in December, the 

very late stages of the fall session. It certainly wasn’t brought to 

the public’s attention at any point during the election campaign. 

And I suspect if anybody of us, any one of us who was out door 

knocking or any of our helpers were out door knocking, if they 

had asked and seen a platform item on the Sask Party 

government’s campaign that said, would you like to see more 

politicians added to the mix? Do you think 58 is enough, or do 

you think there needs to more? I can pretty much guess what 

the answer would have been. And I think members opposite 

recognize that and have to admit that, that no one on the 

doorstep would have asked for more politicians. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Certainly the Minister of Justice’s riding has grown 

exponentially in the last 10 years since the census was taken, 

and that’s why we have censuses, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 

we have The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993. That’s the 

exact purpose of that Act is to take a look at changes in 

population, take a look at changes in demographics. There’s a 

commission appointed. There’s three of them put together. 

They have hearings. They go out and talk to people. They take 

a look at the census data. It’s their job to decide how to 

properly realign population changes in this province. And 

certainly that happens in every province in Canada, and it 

happens federally as well. That’s the whole point of The 

Constituency Boundaries Act, and it was brought in with good 

reason in 1993, and it deals with those population demographic 

changes that we keep hearing about across the way. 

 

There’s no need to add politicians to the mix just to deal with 

population changes. Some ridings have less people; some 

ridings have more. And my colleague from city centre has 

provided statistics where 10 years ago his riding was the 

largest; now it is the Minister of Justice’s riding that’s the 

largest in Saskatoon. Those things happen, and that’s the exact 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

reason why The Constituency Boundaries Act and our former 

NDP government had the foresight to pass that Bill to ensure 

that those changes were looked after. It makes total sense, and 

there’s no need to change that. 

 

So that’s the first part of it, but some of the comments . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The member opposite is questioning 

about gerrymandering. And it’s pretty clear that in 1993 there 

was no gerrymandering because there was no changes to the 

number of constituencies. So it made total sense at that time 

that they just left it as it was. 

 

There was no need to add ridings in 1993. There was no need to 

add ridings after the last census because the idea was the 

population was still able to be reflected equally across the 

constituencies, not so much in terms of the increase in 

population. The increase in population is a completely separate 

issue, the increase in population overall. And when we look at 

what this government is trying to do, it is clear that there are 

attempts to benefit themselves in future elections. That’s pretty 

clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at any rate, the minister was talking in his comments back in 

December, as I mentioned, the very last day of the session, 

tucked in just before Christmas, certainly not mentioned in the 

election platform of the Sask Party government. And oddly 

enough, it wasn’t mentioned even in the Throne Speech of the 

Government of Saskatchewan at the beginning of December. So 

they had lots of time in the election period to raise this with 

people. They had time at the Throne Speech. At the time of the 

Throne Speech, it could have been introduced. We have no 

indication why all of a sudden instead of Bill No. 1, this was 

Bill No. 36, and the last Bill that was introduced at the time of 

the fall session. 

 

So the questions are starting to come in now, Mr. Speaker. We 

are seeing concerns raised not only from supporters of social 

democracy but also from Sask Party supporters. We’re seeing 

letters to the editor that say this is a problem. We’re seeing the 

Canadian Taxpayers Federation saying, this is a problem. And 

it is a problem. We’ve repeatedly pointed out the fact that the 

ratio of voters in Saskatchewan is considerably lower than in 

almost all provinces and certainly every province that has over 

1 million people in population. So the rationale that’s being 

provided simply doesn’t wash. So somebody has to question, 

what is the rationale? What is the motive behind this? 

 

One of the things the minister said was that “. . . given that 

census participation is mandatory, we feel it is a better source 

for this information, rather than a voluntary enumeration.” He’s 

talking about the voters list there. And he said, “While the 

census data may include citizens over 18 years of age who are 

ineligible to vote, it will certainly include far fewer ineligible 

voters than is currently the case.”  

 

But now I want to talk about some other ineligible voters, and 

that’s the people that are under 18. They may be ineligible at 

this point in time, Mr. Speaker, but there are a lot of those 

people under 18 who will be eligible voters. And one of them 

for example is my son, Sam. They’ll be able to vote, but they 

won’t be counted as a participatory member in the count that 

creates the constituency. That’s the issue, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 

creating of the constituency. It’s not whether he’ll be able to 

vote or not, but he’s being excluded because of his age. 

 

And certainly we’ve seen the Children’s Advocate, someone 

who’s there advocating for children, has now recently come out 

and told us that in his view, in his legal view that this is actually 

a violation of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. And it’s a 

sad thing to hear that coming out on the 30th anniversary of the 

Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. There’s two sections 

of the Charter that the Children’s Advocate is claiming are 

being violated here. 

 

First of all, it’s section 15 and that’s the section that protects 

people from discrimination. In this case there’s two counts 

where we could say this is a possible infraction of these 

children’s rights. First of all, on the basis of age, clearly 

excluding somebody from being counted in the formation of 

constituencies on the basis of their age could clearly be 

construed as a violation of the Charter. And these are 

vulnerable people in our society, Mr. Speaker. In fact, they 

can’t vote, and that’s exactly why they should be included in 

and part of it. 

 

And it’s discriminatory to families, people that are of lower 

economic levels who have large families and are struggling to 

make ends meet, who are required to go the food bank now in 

increasing numbers because rental rates have increased and 

skyrocketed. And then we’re telling them that we’re not going 

to count them and their issues in terms of how the boundaries 

and constituencies are formed. That is, and the Children’s 

Advocate is saying that, that is discriminatory. 

 

But the other more disturbing feature of this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is its impact on Aboriginal communities. We know 

that the population in Aboriginal communities, often under 18, 

children form up to 50 per cent of that population. And by 

creating a constituency boundary that discounts those children 

is discounting the issues and the very serious issues that those 

communities face. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that there’s some biases in this 

Bill that we hope the public are starting to realize. We’re 

getting more and more petitions in now that people are truly 

concerned about the double whammy of this notion of 

excluding children from the count. It can be discrimination on 

the basis of age and it can also be discrimination on the basis of 

race. And I for one, Mr. Speaker, certainly don’t look forward 

to having to go to the courts to resolve this. And it appears 

that’s the way we’re headed if the government continues to 

press for this Bill to be passed into law. It’s unfortunate. It’s 

disturbing, and it’s something I think people and the public are 

taking great note of. And we worry that this government has 

gone off the rails. It doesn’t make sense. It may be 

discriminatory. And it is simply unnecessary particularly in 

light of the costs and the cuts that we have seen from this 

government in other areas. 

 

And so I’m speaking in favour of the motion, Mr. Speaker, and 

I would hope that this government does the right thing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to join in this 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

debate today. I mean, what we’re talking about is increasing the 

number of constituencies from 58 to 61 by adding three seats 

south of the dividing line. To me, that’s important because we 

talk about that we have the northern boundary line that exists. 

And I support that because I understand, coming from a large 

constituency, how things would work up there compared to 

mine. If it wasn’t for that rule, there would probably only be 

one northern voice in this legislature. But I support, with that 

rule, that they should be allowed that. And I feel that’s why the 

member from Athabasca supported that, like my colleague 

pointed out. And when he first looked at this Bill, he realized 

the fairness of it. Because I represent rural Saskatchewan. I 

represent a large constituency. Both of the northern MLAs 

represent very large ones in themselves, and they know that it 

would, how hard it is to get around. 

 

I’ll use a couple of quotes on the member from Athabasca that 

he made when he first talked about this Bill, supporting it. This 

is a quote from Hansard, page 294: “There is no question that 

as our population growth continues that the question has to be 

asked when we’re getting more seats.”  

 

Then you move, carrying on on page 294: 

 

And the obvious answer is yes, as the population grows. 

And you should have more MLAs as the population 

should reflect that in the number of seats that we have in 

the Assembly. 

 

You go to page 296, he was still talking about it: “I think in the 

overall thrust of the Bill in terms of have more MLAs, and we 

think it’s a great idea . . .” 

 

There, page 297, he also references there’s a growing 

population: “. . . that there’s a growing population and we need 

more seats. We agree with that, that there’s a growing 

population and more seats are necessary. We would applaud 

that . . . 

 

That is the member from Athabasca that made them quotes. 

And I appreciate that he’s respecting the fact of his large 

constituency and how it relates to the southern ones.  

 

Now as we go on, you look at my constituency. The population 

of Saskatchewan right now is at an all-time high of 1,663,535 

people. Now that’s just, that’s what we have now. The growth 

just this year has been 15,241 people, and this province is 

growing. But if you talk to — whether it’s western Canada or 

eastern Canada, southern states, northern states, Australia, 

Europe — your population growth will always be in the larger 

urban centres. That’s where most population is growing. The 

rurals are growing but not at the same rate as the urban areas. 

 

So as we move forward in time, urban areas are going to have 

more . . . [inaudible] . . . than the rural seats. And that’s 

recognized in the States. It’s recognized in Australia. It’s 

recognized in a lot of European countries that they have to 

reflect the voice out in rural Saskatchewan against the city 

centres. And you look in many of the huge cities in the States, 

of the growth there, and yet they still make sure that there is a 

voice out in the rural parts of the States. And that’s all we’re 

asking here with this Bill, as myself as an MLA. 

 

As we go forward, if you look at my constituency, if we were to 

look at the eastern part of it, I would have to, if we don’t make 

this adjustment, we would have to add probably 4 to 5,000 

people to my constituency. If you start on, I’ll say, the 

northeastern, you take Allan — I’ll just use some towns — 

LeRoy, 4 or 500 people. I would have to push into Lanigan; I 

would have to take Lanigan. I would have to push up to 

Humboldt, which would then, the member from Humboldt is 

going to have to be pushed more north. 

 

We move again to my eastern, as we move eastern towards 

Wynyard, that area there. I could look at going up Punnichy, 

which is, I think, a couple hundred people; Lestock, a couple 

hundred people; Leross, you know, 4 or 500 maybe. I would 

have to push to Yorkton. I would be on the edge of Yorkton. 

 

As we keep moving towards Highway No. 2, I would grab 

Strasbourg. There’s a couple other little towns between here 

and Regina. I would have to be pushed into Regina. If I do into 

No. 11, we go up Craik, 500 people; Aylesbury, 68; 

Chamberlain, a couple hundred; Findlater, a couple hundred; 

Bethune, maybe it’s 7 or 800. I would have to basically push 

into Regina Beach, into the edge of Regina. 

 

We go up No. 2 Highway. If they’re going to move me in that 

direction, where would I go? There’s what, on number 

Highway 42, you have Marquis, Keeler, Eyebrow — very small 

towns growing slowly, but at a rate, but not as fast growth as 

what’s happening in the cities. So I would have to grab a piece 

of Moose Jaw. Or I can go along the Lake Diefenbaker. I would 

have to cross the lake and the river and go on the other side. Or 

we go up to No. 11, I come to past Dundurn. So basically you 

would push me into the city. You would grab 3 or 4,000 people. 

 

And when I talk to my constituents, you know, one of the 

things they have mentioned to me over the years is that they 

favour a rural seat, that representatives should be from a rural 

seat, that you shouldn’t have a split with urban and rural. And I 

agree with that. And also the federal NDP agree with that. 

Layton, Mulcair have stated in the province of Saskatchewan 

that you shouldn’t have seats going into the cities, that you 

should have rural MPs [Member of Parliament] who should just 

represent the rural area and you should have MPs representing 

an urban area. Now that’s the federal NDPs that have come out 

on that quite, quite a lot. I’ve read that, them articles over the 

past election quite a bit. So obviously this provincial NDP is 

not in favour with their federal cousins on that. There must be a 

huge disagreement, or they just don’t care what they think 

about that. 

 

But I know from talking to constituents that is an issue, that 

they do not want to have . . . represent part of an urban . Now if 

it works out that I have to represent part of an urban, I will 

represent them as equally as I would the rural. But I’m talking 

about my constituents’ point of views. That’s what they feel 

that a rural seat should be represented. And if we don’t make 

some adjustments, in time that is what’s going to happen. Some 

of these rural seats will have to go into the urban centres. 

 

And also we talk about the size of constituencies. I know that in 

the States and in Eastern Canada they represent more people, 

but when I’ve been down there talking to their MLAs, to their 

State representatives, you know, they envy us that we can 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

actually get out to our towns and talk to people. They say, you 

know, we’re trying to figure out ways how to use the social 

media to pick up information because we can’t get out and do a 

one-on-one. 

 

I have about 20, as we sit right now, I have about 20 towns that 

are between towns —villages, hamlets — I’m like the member 

from Cypress, that I visit as much as I can, either through 

hockey games, sports days, auction sales. If you add another 10 

or 15 towns, it gets pretty hard. And I know that that’s where I 

get most of my feedback from my constituents. You’ll be at an 

event, whether it’s you’re watching hockey, whether you’ll be 

at an auction sale, or sports, they’ll come up. They’ll talk to 

you. This is where they’ll express their ideas. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Because a lot of them, they’re getting pretty fairly computer 

literate, but they’re still not much on firing emails on a certain 

issue. That’s where they want to talk to you face to face. And 

they want to see you at the coffee shops in the morning. They 

like to see you just stopping in in the afternoon, which I’ll do in 

some towns if I’m up visiting an event. I’ll say Wynyard, then 

I’ll stop, if I have time. I’ll go to the local RM office and I’ll go 

to the local town office and I’ll stop at the local businesses for a 

few minutes here and then, you know, you just talk to the 

customers. And they all want to . . . That’s where they can 

express their concerns, how they want to see the province 

moving forward, of the job you’re doing, and different things. 

 

But as we get bigger, our constituencies, if they make them 

huge amounts, we’re going to lose that contact. And I’ll tell you 

what, my constituents don’t want to lose that. And I think, and 

I’m pretty sure it’s even in the urban centres, I’m pretty sure 

they’re the same way. They like the contact that you can have 

with your MLA, that, you know, that it’s the constituencies are 

still balanced enough that they feel you’re actually representing 

them because they can get a hold of you at any time. You still 

have the time, whether urban or rural, that you can go visit each 

and every one of the ones that say, come to my house. 

 

Because in my place, I’ll have a lot of people say they want to 

talk to you. When they have a problem, especially older people, 

they want to talk to you one-on-one. So they say, can you come 

to my house or can you meet me at the coffee shop? And I’ll 

say, yes, I’ll be in this town at a certain time next week. Can we 

meet then? And they’ll say, yes, we can wait. Or I say, I can 

handle your problem now. And they’ll say, no, I’d sooner talk 

to you face to face. I can wait a few days before I express my 

concern. 

 

But, you know, if our constituencies get much bigger and much 

larger, you know, we’re going to lose that. And I don’t want 

that. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? My constituents, they 

don’t want that either. They still like to have the contact of an 

MLA. And that’s why I’m in favour of the member of 

Athabasca when he first looked at this thought this was 

probably a good Bill. This is a good Bill. This is going to help 

our constituents. So that’s why I support what we’re doing for 

the good of the constituents. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it is a 

pleasure to rise again and hear some of the comments from the 

opposite side in terms of this, but I do want to get it on the 

record that I do support this motion. I think it’s a reasonable, 

common sense motion, that many people in Saskatchewan are 

asking, why are we doing this? Why are we increasing three 

more MLAs, three more politicians? Nobody has a problem 

with the Boundaries Commission as it’s set up under the current 

legislation. They’re just saying, why is it? Why is it that we 

have to do this? So the motion that we provided the House 

today is that: 

 

This Assembly recognizes that spending millions of 

public dollars [and it is millions of public dollars on more 

politicians] is unnecessary to effectively represent the 

current constituents of Saskatchewan; and further 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to withdraw 

the measures set forth in Bill No. 36 because the 

government did not consult the people of Saskatchewan 

before its introduction and its legislation, and the 

legislation does not address the common sense priorities 

of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I just wanted to go through some of that. But I just want to 

address some of the comments that were just made by the 

previous speaker, the member from Arm River, where he 

discussed the whole idea of contact with your constituents. And 

whether they’re 18 or not, I think that’s a big issue too, but 

that’s not the issue before us. But we all want to be able to 

connect with our constituents and we all have challenges in 

doing that. We all have challenges. One challenge is the 

distance. The other challenge is finding them at home if they’re 

homeless, all of those things. 

 

But I do want to say this is what the member from Thunder 

Creek had to say about this just a few weeks ago on March 

15th, 2012. He said — and clearly it’s on page 583 of Hansard 

— he said: 

 

We are not interfering in the process in any way, Mr. 

Speaker. We are providing no direction in the Bill or the 

legislation itself as to where these three new seats may be 

situated. This will be for the independent Electoral 

Boundaries Commission to determine under its standing 

terms of reference in the Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting mixed messages. We see one 

member saying, this is going to happen in one area of the 

province and not in another area of the province. And we have 

another government member saying, oh no, we’re not 

interfering; we’re not interfering. So how can you have it both 

ways? How can you have it both ways? Here we have some 

members under the expectation this will go to certain parts of 

the province, and others are saying, hey, we’re going to respect 

the commission. 

 

And you know, and the other interesting thing, and he was quite 

rightfully quoting the federal party in some of those things, but 

I do have to say that he’s omitted a pretty key part of what 

happens at the federal level. They’ve gone through the 

discussion. They’ve gone through the discussion about where 

new seats need to go for the House of Commons. And it took a 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

long time, and it happened before the last election. There was a 

separation between the time the number of seats were given for 

the House of Commons and the election and now where they 

will be placed. So that’s what happens at the federal level. 

 

And we’ve made this point here several times, several times: 

that we knew this population in this province has been growing. 

And we think that’s great; we’re very happy about it. But the 

time to add more politicians was to do it before the last election. 

And if these folks had the courage of conviction to knock on 

the doors and say, we think what we need is more politicians, 

that was the time to do it. It was not after. I mean these folks 

didn’t even mention it in the Throne Speech. It happened the 

day before, right at the very end of the winter, the Christmas 

session. We got the Bill then, and that’s when the discussion 

started. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, that the constituents, our people 

that we talk to, are most engaged, most paying attention, and 

rightfully so, during the campaign, during the campaign when 

we talk about issues and we say, these are our choices; these are 

our priorities. This is what we think we should do with 

taxpayers’ money. And then they vote, and they did vote. But 

one of the things they didn’t, they weren’t told by this 

government was, by the way, we want to spend millions on 

three more politicians. 

 

Everybody knew . . . And I have yet to hear any of those people 

stand up over there and say, you know what? I actually did 

campaign on that and here’s the piece of literature that shows I 

wanted more politicians. I wanted more politicians. We have 

not heard from them about that because they were strangely 

silent on this matter when they had an opportunity to go to the 

people of this province and say, listen, we believe so strongly in 

this. We have the courage of our convictions to actually stand 

and say, listen, of all the priorities that we can talk to you about 

today on the doorstep is, this is the one we want you to think 

about: do you think we need more politicians, or do you think 

we need more services? They did not. They did not. And I think 

that shows a lack of courage, a weakness; that shows that this 

Bill should be withdrawn. 

 

If they believed so strongly in this, why don’t they do like the 

federal government did and talk about this in an open and 

transparent manner, and people can make choices? That’s what 

they did in BC [British Columbia]. They did the same process. 

They said, what do you think? Our population is growing. But 

they had a commission, and they set out to hear the thoughts of 

the people. And as the member from Arm River said, maybe we 

have to have this discussion about rural and urban. But this is 

not the place to do it. 

 

There’s over 1 million people in this province who have an 

opinion on this, and that’s the place to engage people and say, 

so what do you think? And then it should come back to us, Mr. 

Speaker. It should come back to us, but only after a 

well-discussed and -reasoned discussion about the makeup of 

this legislature. Because this legislature is not our legislature, 

and I think this government here is thinking it’s their 

legislature. No, it’s not our legislature. It’s the peoples of 

Saskatchewan’s legislature, and they have a right . . . It’s their, 

it’s their prerogative to say, we want three more politicians and 

we don’t want other things. 

It’s choices we have to make: choices, priorities, and then you 

plan. And this is no plan here. And it shows a mixed message in 

terms of priorities and choices. And, Mr. Speaker, today in 

question period, we had questions about whether you should 

spend money in Montreal on advertising or whether you should 

support economic development here in Saskatchewan in our 

communities. Those are choices a government makes. And they 

were elected to make those choices, but they were not elected to 

make the kind of choice they have in Bill No. 36 where they’re 

saying, three more politicians. That will cost money. That will 

cost money. And they will try to spin that to say no, we’ve 

saved money and it’s not going to cost any money. That’s 

simply not true. We know everything costs money. You have to 

make some choices. And you can cut programs here, cut 

programs there, but I think that we all know everything costs 

and therefore you have to set your priorities. 

 

And this is a misguided priority, an odd priority, because I 

think we all know that we value knocking on doors, talking to 

our people. That’s for sure. But we’ve been able to do it. We’ve 

been able to do it with the new committee structure. We’ve 

been able to work on how can we make sure people get out to 

talk to the people in their constituency. We now have a new 

calendar where we’re in our constituencies on Fridays. We’ve 

been able to double our work up here, be much more efficient 

in the House here so we can have a 65-day sitting calendar 

which is just an amazing, I think, very progressive. But we’ve 

been able to work on that; we’ve been able to solve those 

problems so people can be at home and they can do the best job 

that they can. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in the province is 

happy the population is growing. I don’t know anybody who 

says gee, I wish we could cut it back. I don’t think so. I think 

people see the economic opportunities. But the problem is they 

didn’t say, we want more population so we can have more 

politicians. That’s not what they said. That’s not what they said. 

We want a stronger tax base that’s fair, so we can have more 

services. Our health care can be better. We can treat our seniors 

better. We can have more child care. We can do all those things 

that we take a lot of pride in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so as I said, I think this is really a misplaced priority — 

three more politicians at millions of dollars. And I really 

believe that this government has not done the right thing 

because they did not campaign on this. They did not campaign 

on this and they are silent on this. And they will add up the odd 

story about how they might have talked to somebody in an odd 

way about this and how they all value talking to people. We do 

as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I support this motion and I think it’s important 

that everyone on this side and the whole House vote. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to enter debate on the 

motion before this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, over the last few 

days I’ve heard a great deal from members opposite about 

common sense priorities of the Saskatchewan people. In fact 

I’ve heard odd priorities, misplaced priorities, misguided 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

priorities. Well, Mr. Speaker, our priorities, our priorities are 

the common sense priorities of the people of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. And for me, Mr. Speaker, the common sense priorities 

are very clearly, very clearly articulated in our platform, in the 

platform document of my government. 

 

We talked about health care. We talked about highways. We 

talked about seniors. We talked about people with disabilities. 

We talked about agriculture. We talked about education. We 

talked about fiscal responsibility, lower taxes, lower debt, and, 

Mr. Speaker, a balanced budget. If those aren’t common sense 

priorities, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what are. However, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not going to revisit the platform nor am I going to 

revisit the budget. We’ve been there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it frustrates me to listen to the banter regarding 

criticisms from members opposite as they pertain to our 

children and how they don’t count. Mr. Speaker, our children 

are our future, and this party is prepared to take the steps 

necessary to ensure that our children’s future is guaranteed. Mr. 

Speaker, for me it’s about creating an environment conducive 

to growth. It’s about creating an environment of well-being that 

will guarantee and ensure that future. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Minister, in my former life I was a teacher, a school 

administrator, and a school trustee. I know about cultural 

environments. Mr. Speaker, from 2003 to 2007 while I was a 

trustee, an average of 3,645 students left this province — 3,645 

students, on average, left this province. Mr. Speaker, I can 

speak from first-hand experience, the effect, the effect that this 

loss of students on school divisions, on communities, and 

school staffs have in their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recall a young lady coming into my office one 

morning — a very talented young lady, 97 per cent average at 

mid-term, on mid-term exams of semester 1, absolutely 

outstanding musician, academic leader — to explain to me, to 

explain to me that she was leaving our province. Her parents 

had finally found some work in Alberta, and they were off. Mr. 

Speaker, the atmosphere, Mr. Speaker, the atmosphere in the 

school, the environment in our school changed. The band 

program lost, the teachers were lost, the teachers were affected, 

academic leadership took a hit, our SRC [student representative 

council] lost a leader, and I said to myself, Mr. Speaker, 

something’s not right here. The effect of migration of families 

out of our province, out of this province, was catastrophic. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk a little bit about common sense 

priorities. Let’s talk about ensuring the future of our children. 

And I’ll begin with education because that’s what’s most 

familiar to me. Number one, new funding formula for school 

divisions, a very much common sense priority. 

 

You know the principles of public education, a cornerstone of 

this democracy, a principle that we’ve talked and teach our 

children about, is that of equity. For years, Mr. Speaker, the 

foundation operating grant in this province really didn’t do 

justice to the concept of equity. We had unequal programs all 

over the province. As hard as school divisions and trustees tried 

to make ends meet, that just wasn’t happening. Sixteen years of 

government that did not adequately address the funding needs 

of school divisions is finally getting a good look at through this 

new funding formula. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $1.74 billion in education funding, the largest 

increase in the budget, 5 per cent overall for education — 

funding for teachers, funding for music and athletics, funding 

for academic success, funding for students with individual 

differences, and funding for the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $4.3 million committed to First Nations and Métis 

initiatives. $112 million in capital funding for 21 capital school 

projects. Two new schools in Douglas Park, Mr. Speaker, and I 

can tell you that there’s a lot of excitement in my community. 

Increased support for child care, Mr. Speaker, common sense. 

Five hundred new spaces for schools or post-secondary 

institutions. Fifteen new pre-kindergarten programs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these aren’t pilot projects. These aren’t pilot 

programs. You know, in fact in my travels around the Treaty 4 

area in doing some work with First Nations over the last 

number of years, an elder told me, he says, this isn’t another 

one of those pilot programs, is it? He says, the pile is high 

enough and we don’t need to pile it any higher. 

 

Literacy, Mr. Speaker. There’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that 

literacy and improved outcomes for all of our children lies in 

their readiness to come to school. There’s no doubt, Mr. 

Speaker, that literacy is key. $500,000 committed to summer 

literacy camps to be held in 20 communities across our 

province. But, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many other aspects 

to literacy. There’s family literacy, health literacy, 

technological literacy, and I could go on. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, my government is committed to eliminating 

those silos and is committed to delivering services for children, 

youth, and families using an integrated services approach. 

Witness the development of the initiative of Scott Collegiate in 

Regina, the integrated services model. Common sense 

priorities, Mr. Speaker. We are speaking to the common sense 

priorities of Saskatchewan people. 

 

What about child welfare? Since 2007, my government has 

increased funding to child and family services by 124 per cent. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. This government has established 

a seven-member cabinet review committee on child welfare to 

see how best to integrate services of which I just referred to: 

$34 million for the child and youth agenda, 85 new child 

protection workers. 

 

Let’s talk about common sense priorities: increased funding to 

extended family caregivers and family finders; $15 million for a 

new case management system, the final rollout will happen this 

spring; the second year of the child welfare funding, a 

multi-ministerial task force. And as a result of these initiatives, 

Mr. Speaker, the number of children in care is down for the first 

time in over a decade. Forty-eight per cent reduction in children 

living in overcrowded foster homes. Increased the number of 

children placed permanently with extended family by . . . 

[inaudible] . . . per cent since 2007. Mr. Speaker, we have the 

best interests of our children at heart. There’s no question. 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

What about the active families benefit? The active families 

benefit was legislated by Saskatchewan Party government and 

has been in effect since January 1st of 2009. The active families 

benefit provides a tax benefit of up to $150 per child to help 

Saskatchewan families with the cost of their children’s sport, 

cultural, and recreational activities. To date, the active families 

benefit has provided tax rebates to nearly 26,000 Saskatchewan 

families with the majority having a household income of less 

than $80,000. 

 

And what about scholarships dedicated to those under 18? The 

Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, $2,000 for high school 

graduates attending post-secondary education used directly for 

tuition up to a maximum of $500 a year. The Saskatchewan 

youth apprenticeship industry scholarship, $1,000 to be 

awarded to 80 eligible students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on and on. We haven’t touched 

on health. We haven’t touched on highways. We haven’t 

touched on seniors. We haven’t touched on the disadvantaged. 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to addressing 

common sense priorities of the Saskatchewan people. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, here’s the deal . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The time for debate has elapsed. I recognize 

the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, in 2007, when the member from 

Saskatoon Centre sat at the cabinet table, the NDP spent $13.5 

million on their political staff salaries. This compared to the 

Sask Party’s 2012 spending of $11.09 million. That means the 

NDP spent nearly 2.4 million more on political staff than the 

current government. Mr. Speaker, not only will the cost of new 

MLAs be absorbed in the Legislative Assembly budget, but will 

be a fraction of what the NDP spent on their political staff. 

 

To a member from Saskatoon Centre: why does the NDP think 

spending millions more on political staff is more important than 

ensuring the people of this province have effective 

representation in the legislature? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the question and I know this question is very near 

and dear to this member because he came out of the political 

staff regime. And he’s very close to these folks and he watches 

us very closely. But he knows, he knows he’s got to get in the 

real world. He’s not in the political world of spin any more. 

He’s got to get out of that political world or spin. Everything 

costs in this world and you make choices. And how can he 

defend to seniors and young people who are seeing their drug 

plans go up, go up and we need to pay millions more for 

politicians? How can he possibly live with that decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I appreciate that member setting the 

record straight on that front. But last fall, Mr. Speaker, we all 

went before voters. We went to the doorsteps, Mr. Speaker. 

Whether it was the member from Douglas Park or the member 

from Arm River, no one mentioned in their literature that they 

were going to be increasing the number of politicians, Mr. 

Speaker, at the costs of millions of dollars. 

 

I understand though that the member from Arm River-Watrous 

did suggest and did say that he would be supporting Nokomis 

School in its fight to remain open, Mr. Speaker. Instead we see 

nothing on that front from that member to support that school. 

So we see, what we do see is in those glossy brochures, Mr. 

Speaker, things that haven’t come forward. Instead they’re 

spending millions on more politicians, adding costs to seniors, 

eliminating the property tax discount, Mr. Speaker, and cutting 

in education. 

 

To the minister from Arm River: did the member from Arm 

River, did he tell any of his constituents his real intentions and 

did any of the people on his doorsteps suggest that they need 

more politicians, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — If that member wants to talk about education, 

now we put $1.74 billion in total school operating funding, a 5 

per cent increase. That government under its regime closed over 

167 schools. We’ve met with parents. We’ve put in, we’ve put 

in a limit where schools can be under review. We brought in 

schools of opportunity, schools of necessity, a 40 K [kilometre] 

. . . where a school kid can’t be on the bus more than 40 Ks. 

 

You closed 167 schools and did nothing. You did nothing. You 

decreased funding. You let 167 schools close under your 

regime, and you have the audacity to get up and talk about 

education. We’ve increased funding. We’re working with 

parents to keep our school open, unlike you that closed 167. 

 

The Speaker: — I would remind members to put their 

questions and answers through the Speaker. I recognize the 

member for Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today’s motion 

for debate states that more politicians are unnecessary to 

effectively represent the current constituents of Saskatchewan. 

However, Mr. Speaker, on March the 5th the member from 

Athabasca said in this House, “There is no question that our 

population growth continues that the question has to be asked 

when we’re getting more seats.” To the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana: now that the population has in fact grown, is 

there still a divide in the NDP caucus over this issue or has the 

member from Athabasca, has he been told to keep his views to 

himself? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I’d like to thank the member for his question, 

Mr. Speaker. The issue here is about Bill 36 and whether it’s 

necessary or not. Do we need to spend millions of dollars on 

more politicians? Do we need to exclude our children from the 

count when we form our electoral boundaries? It’s going to 

have a serious impact. Do we need to listen to what the 

Children’s Advocate is saying and saying that this could be 

unconstitutional? Do we need a long court case to go through 

this to find out whether it is? 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

This is unnecessary. It’s uncalled for. Population growth is well 

within the national average. We are well below the national 

average. We don’t need more constituencies. We don’t need 

more MLAs. We can do this work ourselves. There’s enough 

politicians already and that’s the focus. And we’re saying in 

this motion that this Bill should just disappear. In fact let’s 

throw it, tie it to a rock, and throw it in the bottom of any lake 

in Saskatchewan because it’s completely unnecessary. And this 

is what the debate is about today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We had an 

interesting speech there from the member from Douglas Park 

and he seems to be gunning for a cabinet position because he 

never really talked about the motion at hand, talked about 

everything else. But I really want to know this answer from 

him. How many seniors did he tell to their face when he was 

out knocking on doors during the election that he would be 

gunning for three more politicians and they would be paying 

more for their prescriptions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

opposition for the question. You know, our entire platform was 

about the growth of this province. It’s about addressing the 

common sense priorities of the people, and certainly seniors are 

dealt with in the program. We’ve increased the funding for the 

seniors’ income plan, Mr. Speaker. It’s all about creating an 

environment that’s conducive to growth so that we can continue 

to look after the seniors and their welfare. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

has posed the question quoting that our legislation does not 

address the common sense priorities of the Saskatchewan 

people. To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: what were the 

common sense priorities governing the former NDP 

government when it watched thousands of its citizens 

out-migrate from the province, lost millions on expensive 

boondoggles, created an economic environment with the worst 

job creation in the nation, and neglected such fundamental tasks 

as regular water quality tests in Lake Diefenbaker? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

member for his question. Once again the debate is about the 

Bill 36, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what we’re talking about today. 

Common sense, if we used common sense and applied it to this 

Bill, this government would get rid of it immediately because 

we know there’s concerns about Charter violations in sections 

3, in section 15 in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

We’ve celebrated that anniversary of that important part of our 

history as a country yesterday, the 30th anniversary. And here 

we see the Children’s Advocate saying that this is a possible 

violation of the Charter. In his view, it is a violation of the 

Charter. Of course, we don’t know what the courts are going to 

say, and it’s up to the courts. If it’s up to the courts to decide 

this, if this government’s going to force it through, it will cost 

taxpayers more money including the money that it will cost to 

have extra politicians in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit like popcorn here today. 

I would like to ask the member from Douglas Park a question, 

and it’s actually a math question. I know he’s a teacher, so I’m 

hoping he can help me out with this. So tell me this, I’m asking 

the member to tell us this: does 700,000 times four years equal 

more than $1 million? For example, would he agree that three 

new politicians will spend millions of dollars more? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Again, Mr. Speaker, one of the fundamental 

principles of democracy in this country is that each vote should 

have roughly equal value. Mr. Speaker, our government is all 

about creating that environment that’s conducive to people 

living in this province and staying in this province, and we want 

to be able to best represent them in a fair and equitable way, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during the last 

four years of the NDP government the population of 

Saskatchewan only grew by 7,832 people. But since the 

Saskatchewan Party government was elected in 2007, 

Saskatchewan’s population has grown by 58,452. That’s seven 

times the population, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: given our 

record-breaking population growth and the fact that the NDP 

member from Athabasca said in March, and I quote, “we need 

more seats,” why does the NDP insist that our government is 

nothing for representing . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time for 75-minute debate has elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Support for the Keystone XL Pipeline 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Stewart.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

enter the debate on the private members’ motion made by the 

member from Thunder Creek, and the motion read: 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

That this Assembly calls upon all parties in the federal 

Parliament of Canada to unite in support of the Keystone 

XL pipeline project without further delay. 

 

And certainly it’s a very important question that it poses. It’s 

interesting, today on the news there’s been some developments 

down in the United States. The House of Representatives have 

passed approving the construction of the pipeline, but I 

understand, of course, the Obama administration will probably 

veto it because of their concerns. But also TransCanada also 

announced that they’re applying to have a different route in 

Nebraska, which is the contentious issue, trying to go around an 

aquifer that is . . . there is some concern in the US [United 

States] government and citizens in Nebraska, if there was a 

potential leak. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on that very topic of safety, I would just like to 

read into the record the work that was done by TransCanada. 

And TransCanada’s worked with US Department of State in the 

past three years in what has been by far the most exhaustive and 

detailed review ever conducted of a crude oil pipeline in the 

United States to ensure Keystone XL would be the safest 

pipeline ever built. A draft supplement, a supplemental draft 

and final environmental impact statement were all issued for 

Keystone XL, totalling over 10,000 pages. 

 

Since 2008 more than 100 open houses and public meetings in 

six states took place. Thousands of pages of supplemental 

information and responses to questions were submitted to state 

and federal agencies, and the DOS [Department of State] 

received over 400,000 comments on the project. Fourteen 

different routes for the Keystone XL were studied, eight that 

impacted Nebraska. They include one potential turn of route in 

Nebraska that would have avoided the entire sand hills region 

and Ogallala Aquifer and six alternatives that would have 

reduced pipeline mileage crossing the sand hills or the aquifer. 

TransCanada hopes this will serve as a starting point for the 

additional review and help expedite the review process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as in Canada and the United States, there’s 

very intensive studies done in environmental impact, and 

naturally the public has a lot of input into the construction of 

various projects that come up. And I guess what the point I 

want to make though is what we’re doing in Canada and what 

the motion is speaking to is the hope that all federal parties and 

the federal parliament would support this pipeline because it’s 

very important to Canada. It’s very important to Alberta, 

Saskatchewan, moving oil sands oil into the US [United States] 

market. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, the problem is that not all 

Canadian federal parties were united in support of this project, 

in particular the federal NDP. And it’s quite outstanding to hear 

what the now leader of the federal NDP had to say about 

various topics, and there’s a couple here that I just want to put 

on the record. Thomas Mulcair speaking on the oil sands, and I 

quote, “As a result, the tar sands might now be taking more 

money out of the Canadian economy than they are putting in,” 

Mulcair wrote in Policy Options. 

 

And it’s an incredible statement to make, but I guess when you 

look at the NDP policy and NDP governments provincially in 

the past, well I guess you’re not surprised by those types of 

comments because, at the end of the day, the NDP party both 

federally and provincially and in many different provinces have 

been very anti-business, anti-development. I’m not quite sure I 

understand how the NDP party expect to form government 

federally with comments like that, how they’re going to run a 

country basically putting down one of the major projects — the 

oil sands projects — in Canada and basically running it down 

and discounting it as something that’s good for the Canadian 

economy. 

 

My colleague that spoke before me has entered a number of 

statistics concerning the job creation and the economic 

development from the oil sands and from the construction that 

will take place when the pipeline is built. So it’s very . . . Well 

it’s quite disturbing to see that the new NDP leader federally, 

which is the Leader of the Opposition federally now, that would 

make comments about. Of course you notice he says the tar 

sands and it’s not the tar sands; it’s oil sands. And it’s very 

fundamental to the economy of Western Canada. 

 

But I’ll go on to state some of the important facts that need to 

be put on record. Speaking of the NDP and the new leader of 

the NDP, Thomas Mulcair, if their opposition is rooted in 

ignorance to the facts, I would like to use this opportunity to 

inform them of the state of energy in Canada and 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan is Canada’s second largest producer of oil, home 

to a large part of the Bakken play — a formation the US 

geological survey says is the largest conventional play in North 

America and one we share with both Montana and North 

Dakota. Our province is the third largest producer of natural 

gas. In Saskatchewan we produce 20 per cent of the world’s 

uranium, and 5 per cent of the lights in the US are lit up by 

Saskatchewan’s uranium. We have 45.6 billion barrels of oil in 

place and more than 38 billion barrels of oil that cannot be 

recovered using existing technology. If we would increase our 

recovery rate through innovation and technology by just 5 per 

cent, it would be triple our recoverable reserves of oil. 

Increasing our recovery rate by 10 per cent would increase our 

recoverable reserves sixfold. 

 

Today’s motion is that energy security in North America in 

general is also specifically the Keystone XL pipeline. Here are 

the facts for the Keystone XL pipeline. There will be 20,000 

new North American jobs in construction and related 

manufacturing created by this project. There will be more than 

118,000 spinoff jobs generated during the two years of 

construction. 

 

Without Canada’s oil, America’s dependence of oil from 

Venezuela and the Middle East will continue. A life cycle 

comparison of North America and imported crude prepared by 

Jacobs Consultancy shows that oil from Venezuela and Iraq has 

about the same carbon dioxide footprint as Canadian oil sands 

oil and less than California heavy oil and Nigerian crude. These 

findings were confirmed by the United States Department of 

Energy. 

 

The Keystone XL pipeline enters Saskatchewan near McNeill, 

Alberta and continues southeast to Monchy, Saskatchewan. The 

total length of the pipeline in Saskatchewan is approximately 

259 kilometres. The Keystone XL pipeline is a National Energy 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

Board regulated pipeline. The majority of the route follows the 

existing Foothills pipeline construction in 1981 within Great 

Sand Hills, and the same route is followed. Routing through the 

Great Sand Hills includes crossing through approximately 3.1 

kilometres on the extreme southwest edge of the Great Sand 

Hills. Environmentally sensitive areas within the Great Sand 

Hills are zoned as either environmentally sensitive 1, ES1, no 

development allowed, or environmentally sensitive 2, ES2, 

development allowed following the submission of 

environmental protection plan and adhering to strict 

development conditions. The portion of the Keystone pipeline 

that crosses the Great Sand Hills fall entirely within the ES2 

area. 

 

The crossing of the pipeline is not within the proposed 

biodiversity conservation area identified within the Great Sand 

Hills regional environmental study. The Great Sand Hills 

advisory committee and rural municipalities influenced by the 

program have been consulted. No concerns have been raised to 

date. Some of the special development conditions included: all 

main watercourses to be directionally bored, main line valves to 

be installed on both sides of major watercourses, specific 

mitigation for identification of species. In addition, a specific 

reclamation plan for the Great Sand Hills areas have developed 

and submitted as requested by the National Energy Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now know that the state of Nebraska voiced 

concerns in the past over this pipeline being routed through 

environmentally sensitive areas. But TransCanada has since 

agreed to divert the 1,700-mile project away from the sensitive 

Nebraska sand hills region. Investors are also united in their 

support for this pipeline. In fact, Murray Edwards, one of the 

top investors and entrepreneurs in Canada’s energy sector, 

regards — quoting — building pipelines as one of the top 

issues in 2012. A November 29th op-ed piece in the National 

Post quotes: Edwards said, “Existing pipelines will likely fill up 

around 2015 to 2016 as oil sands production expands. That 

gives the sector a window of only three or four years to obtain 

regulatory approval and build . . . [one] capacity.” 

 

Pipelines such as the proposed Keystone XL one serve an 

important purpose, one that is obviously overlooked by those 

blinded by partisan ideology. Oil needs to get to market and 

most markets are not located near the oil. It would appear to be 

a no-brainer, but I wouldn’t assume what does or doesn’t go on 

in the minds of the NDP. Local demand isn’t sufficient to 

consume the amount of oil extracted from the oil sands and in 

some cases there isn’t enough labour or resources to handle the 

sheer number of projects going on. A lack of labour and 

resources can make these projects economically unfeasible, 

thus jeopardizing a province’s economic strength through the 

loss of jobs. This pipeline means jobs on both sides of the 

border. 

 

[12:15] 

 

In fact support of this pipeline is overwhelming. The American 

Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations, 

AFL-CIO, has voiced its support for the Keystone XL pipeline. 

On November 17th, the building and construction trade 

department of the AFL-CIO announced that it “unreservedly 

supports the Keystone XL Pipeline.” They also said, and I 

quote: 

Keystone XL will create longer term employment in both 

Canada and the United States in refinery conversion 

projects, operation, and maintenance. Moreover these 

jobs will keep an enormous amount of money circulating 

within North America. Energy security for North 

America comes from developing the oil sands and other 

Canadian energy projects. 

 

That same news release went on to quote Joseph Maloney, 

chairman of the CBDT Canadian executive board and 

international vice-president for the International Brotherhood of 

Boilermakers, stating that: 

 

Jobs in Canada’s oil sands are vital to North America. 

They support a standard of living and to be blunt, what is 

better for the North American economy, to support the 

United States and Canada or to support unfriendly foreign 

regimes? 

 

The NDP has apparently turned its back on this country’s 

labour movement by effectively ignoring the concerns of an 

organization that represents over a dozen labour organizations, 

including: United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices 

of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry of the United States 

and Canada; International Union of Operating Engineers; Sheet 

Metal Workers’ International Association; International 

Association of Heat and Frost Allied Workers; International 

Union of Elevator Contractors, Operative Plasterers’ and 

Cement Masons’ International Association; Teamsters Canada; 

International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers; International 

Union of Painters and Allied Trades; Laborers’ International 

Union of North America; International Association of Bridge, 

Structural and Ornamental Iron Workers; United Brotherhood 

of Carpenters and Joiners of America; and the International 

Union of Bricklayers and Allied Craftworkers. 

 

So why would the NDP be so opposed to something that is vital 

to the interests of Canadians and which also has the unreserved 

support of Canada’s labour movement? Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

can only assume that NDP has become star-struck. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, they saw an opportunity to rub elbows with a few 

celebrities who turned faltering acting careers into a launch pad 

for ill-informed activism. 

 

How else would you explain the fact that two federal NDP MPs 

went to Washington to lobby against the Keystone pipeline? 

Megan Leslie, the NDP Environment critic, and Claude 

Gravelle, the NDP Natural Resources critic, both lobbied the 

US federal government to reconsider the Keystone project. 

With their new-found status as official opposition, these two 

might be extending themselves a bit too far. Why they would 

take the side of Robert Redford, star of the innocent proposal, 

and Daryl Hannah, star of the TV movie, Attack of the 50 Foot 

Woman, over the side of jobs for tens of thousands and energy 

security, Mr. Speaker, is confusing the situation. This pipeline 

isn’t about star-struck NDP MPs; it’s about jobs and energy 

security for North America. 

 

We know that objections to this project for fear of an 

environmental catastrophe are unfounded. In August of 2011, 

the United States Department of State bureau of oceans and 

international environmental and scientific affairs released its 

final environmental impact statement for the proposed 



April 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

Keystone XL project. This report consulted the pipeline and 

hazardous materials safety administration, which is the primary 

federal regulatory agency responsible for ensuring the safety of 

America’s energy pipelines. Both organizations determined that 

with Keystone agreeing to special conditions, the Keystone XL 

pipeline would “result in a project that would have a degree of 

safety greater than any typical constructed domestic oil pipeline 

system under the current regulations, and a degree of safety 

along the entire length of the pipeline system that would be 

similar to that required in high consequence areas as defined in 

the regulations.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this may be one of the most heavily scrutinized 

pipelines, and for good reasons. It’s important that energy 

security does not come at the expense of public safety and the 

environment. Most importantly we’ve seen TransCanada Corp 

and the governor of Nebraska agree to reroute the proposed 

pipeline after concerns were raised by environmentalists. 

Everyone from state governments to organized labour to private 

industry has done their homework on this project, and the 

evidence is overwhelmingly in support of this pipeline. The 

only ones who haven’t are a handful of ill-informed celebrities, 

and a few of them remaining fans in the federal NDP. 

 

Here are a few more facts about this pipeline — facts. A recent 

report by The Heritage Foundation stated the following, and I 

quote: 

 

Delaying or even rejecting the construction of the 

Keystone XL pipeline will not achieve the 

environmentalists’ goal — to shut down Canadian tar 

sands production itself. Whether the pipeline crosses 

through the U.S. or not, the oil from Canadian tar sands is 

not staying in the ground. Canadian Prime Minister 

Stephen Harper told President Obama that while the U.S. 

delays its decision, Canada will begin diversifying by 

shipping its oil to Asian markets. Harper said of the 

delay: “This highlights why Canada must increase its 

efforts to ensure it can supply its energy outside the U.S. 

and into Asia in particular. Canada will step up its efforts 

in that regard and I communicated that clearly to the 

President.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we see that opposition to this pipeline is 

not rooted in any reasonable agreement. The same report also 

highlights how opposition to this project may have led to 

undesirable, unintended consequences for environmentalists. 

And I quote: 

 

With . . . [Canada’s] rapid economic growth, it is no 

surprise that that country would welcome the opportunity 

to import more oil from Canada. In fact, Canadian 

Natural Resource Minister Joe Oliver said that China was 

“. . . eager” to import oil from Canada. In addition, 

Enbridge, another Canadian company, is proposing to 

build a pipeline from Alberta to British Columbia to ship 

the oil to refineries in China. From an environmental 

standpoint, this means that Canada will ship the oil 

overseas in tankers, a much less efficient method of 

transporting oil. It also means that China will refine the 

oil in refineries that are subject to fewer regulations than 

those in the United States — causing more, not less, 

environmental harm than if the pipeline were built in the 

U.S. Furthermore, the U.S. will have to import more oil 

via tankers from overseas, or carry crude oil from Canada 

in trucks or rails. The pipeline would also support the 

dramatic increase in oil production in North Dakota, 

where pipeline infrastructure is lacking. Shutting down 

the Keystone XL pipeline project means that the 

environment — and Americans who would benefit from 

jobs and economic growth — lose out. 

 

Is this the scenario the NDP have in mind? Less efficient 

shipping routes, jobs overseas, increased reliance on foreign oil 

from oppressive regimes, the risk of greater environmental 

danger — these are the consequence of delaying and preventing 

this project. In addition to being on the wrong side of energy 

and food security, the federal NDP has resorted to insulting 

supporters of the Keystone XL in our House of Commons. 

When the NDP’s Megan Leslie isn’t chasing celebrities who are 

long past their prime or supporting efforts that jeopardize 

hundreds of thousands of North American jobs, she’s lowering 

decorum in our House of Commons by calling Canada’s 

Natural Resources minister a, I quote, “grumpy old man” 

during debate proceeding about the Keystone pipeline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, name-calling isn’t appropriate for this important 

issue. Yet this is what the federal NDP has been reduced to. We 

are, however, pleased to see that yesterday where the US House 

of Representatives were able to pass legislation forcing a quick 

decision on Keystone XL pipeline. It is our hope that President 

Obama along with the US Senate and all federal parties join in 

the support of this very important project. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here’s what the oil and gas industry contribute 

to Saskatchewan’s economy. The oil and natural gas sector 

represents 16.3 per cent of the economic value created in 

Saskatchewan measuring current GDP [gross domestic 

product]. The oil and gas producing industry continues to be 

one of the largest contributors among . . . [inaudible] . . . 

industries to the provincial GDP. Industry investment in new 

exploration and development in 2011 was approximately $4.5 

billion and $4.3 billion estimated for 2011. In 2010 . . . 

[inaudible] . . . oil and gas industry accounted for 

approximately 30,400 direct and indirect jobs, and 31,850 

estimated for 2011. Sixty-five per cent to 70 per cent of 

Saskatchewan crude oil production is exported to the United 

States. 

 

On average during 2010, Saskatchewan produced 423,000 

barrels of oil per day, and 662 million cubic feet of natural gas 

per day. The combined value of oil and gas sales for 2010 was 

approximately $10.8 billion and 11.7 billion estimated for 

2011; 2,730 oil wells were drilled in 2010. As of the 1st of 

November, 2,899 oil wells had been drilled in 2011; 1,531 

horizontal oil wells drilled in 2010. As of the 1st of November, 

1,643 horizontal oil wells have been drilled in 2011. Total land 

sale value for the 2011 calendar year amounted to $248.8 

million, making 2011 the fourth best on record for land sale 

values. There are approximately 81,500 oil and gas wells 

currently capable of production in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can see that our oil and gas sector is vitally 

important to Saskatchewan’s economy. Of course it’s 

reasonable to assume that the oil and gas sector is equally 

important to other economies within North America — 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2012 

pipelines, essentially, to ensure the safe and efficient 

transportation of oil in various states of production. 

 

If Canada only produced as much oil as it consumed, the 

national economy would be decimated. Exporting oil from 

Saskatchewan and Canada is vital to the national interests. For 

the US, importing oil from Canada is better than the alternative 

of importing oil from countries that do not aspire to the 

democratic values of Canadians. So in a sense, Mr. Speaker, 

this is not just about energy and food security, nor is it simply 

about creating new jobs for Canadians and Americans, although 

these are worthy goals of themselves. Mr. Speaker, this is about 

providing our neighbours to the south with a product that is 

recovered and transported from a country that is ethical. Our oil 

and oil sands are without a doubt ethical when you compare our 

nation’s policy to that of other major oil producing nations. 

 

On all fronts, this Keystone XL project has been shown to 

benefit all stakeholders, notwithstanding the whining and 

bleeding of a few ill-informed NDP MPs and celebrities. And 

with the new leader, we hope that the provincial and federal 

NDP will now throw its support behind the Keystone XL 

pipeline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one more quote I’d like to make just before 

closing, from Thomas Mulcair. It was a quote that he made on 

temporary foreign workers, and I quote, “. . . the already 

large-scale importation of low-paid foreign labourers deprived 

of [all] their full rights is eerily reminiscent of the opening up 

of the Canadian West by the Chinese workers who were 

brought to BC to build the first railway,” he wrote in Policy 

Options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the federal NDP and its new leader is, 

well, out to lunch or delusionary. They don’t live in the same 

century that the rest of us do. And it’s that kind of attitude, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that causes concern in not only in 

Saskatchewan, across Canada, but across North America about 

the position of the NDP both federally and provincially.  

 

And this motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, really speaks to what is 

the position of the provincial NDP and do they agree with their 

new federal leader, Thomas Mulcair, and the federal NDP on 

this topic as well as many other that the federal NDP come out 

that is detrimental to Saskatchewan and Western Canada. So 

thank you very much for the opportunity to speak to this 

important motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

order to facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 

Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1153 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1154 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1154 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1156 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1156 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1154 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Celebrating Earth Day 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1154 

 Holocaust Remembrance Day 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1155 

 A Week of First Nations Events 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1155 

 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1155 

 Autism Services Spring Gala 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1155 

 International Military Ball 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1156 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Tobacco Control 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1157 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1157 

 Midwifery Supply and Training 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1158 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1158 

 Conference Sponsorship 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 

 Support for Economic Development 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1160 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1160 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Electoral Representation 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1161, 1171 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1164 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1165, 1171 

  Brkich ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1166, 1171 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1168, 1171 

  Marchuk ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1169, 1172 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1171 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1171 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1172 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1172 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Support for the Keystone XL Pipeline 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1172 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


