




















































Hansard: November 19, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 14B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2013 

 November 19, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It being 7 o’clock, I’ll call the 

Assembly to order. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 60 — The Animal 

Products Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will continue 

to talk about Bill No. 60, An Act to amend The Animal Products 

Act. And effectively this bill is about food safety, about the 

ability of the provincial government to put in place a system 

whereby animal products are produced and then processed for 

human consumption. And the reason that this bill appears now 

is that the federal government has announced that they’re 

stepping out of the field of providing inspection through the 

Canadian Food Inspection Agency, and so as a province it is 

important to put in place a process that will allow for the 

inspection of animal products. 

 

And so what I intend to do is talk some more about the actual 

process. And I was reminded over the dinner hour about the 

nature of food produced in Saskatchewan when I looked at 

some packaging of some meat products that I purchased over 

the weekend that were produced in Saskatchewan, and they had 

very clearly on the package the Canadian Food Inspection 

Agency stamp as part of their marketing strategy. And so the 

issue becomes, in 2014, just over a year from now, what kind of 

stamp or what kind of certification will be there when a 

consumer purchases a product which is produced within 

Saskatchewan? 

 

We’re one of the provinces that has few if any places that are 

sort of federally inspected operations. I think the minister stated 

that there were 12 provincially registered facilities in the 

province when he spoke on November the 13th, but it relates to 

those particular places and also any new businesses that might 

be established. What will the process be to make sure that the 

product can be marketed throughout Saskatchewan and 

hopefully throughout Canada and other parts of the world? 

 

And so the main purpose of this Bill is to set up the process 

whereby a third party can be engaged to provide the inspection 

services. And I spent some time already talking about that, but 

now I want to talk about the section in the Act which is . . . I 

guess I’ll give you the exact section. It’s section 4 of the Act, 

and it’s talking about new sections 2.1 to 2.3. 2.1 sets out the 

responsibilities and powers of the minister; 2.2 sets out the 

animal products inspection administration agreement, which I 

just talked about. And then 2.3 is the clause that I now want to 

talk about and I haven’t talked about before. 

 

This is the clause that’s titled “Matters arising from entering 

into an animal products inspection administration 

agreement.” And then it talks about the specific provisions and 

what that means and how this agreement or this contracting out 

of providing the inspection will work. And it’s an interesting 

question as to what type of agency. You know, presumably in 

2014 it will be a newly created entity. Maybe it will include 

some of the inspectors that used to do the work for the federal 

government through the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, but 

we don’t know. It may be people that will come up from the 

States or from another province. We don’t know. 

 

But one of the things that’s set out in this section 2.3 which I 

think is quite interesting is that it allows for the setting, 

charging, and collecting of payments for the inspection services 

rendered. And so basically in the contract it gives the ability to 

create these particular fees. And it’s not entirely clear what the 

process will be, but my question would be, what kind of 

contribution to that process of setting fees will the producers 

have? What contribution will the processors have? Will there be 

any ability to bargain, and what will happen in this whole 

thing? Because right now when the government sets the fees, 

there’s accountability through the MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly]. There’s accountability through the 

legislature around the fees. Will that continue even though it’s 

probably a couple of arm’s lengths away from the government, 

or what is going to happen? 

 

This whole new agreement will also give the . . . This animal 

products inspection administration agreement will also give 

whoever has signed the agreement the ability to enforce 

collection of inspection fees. So what does that mean? Does that 

mean they would have their own enforcement mechanism? 

Would that mean that they go to collection agencies? Or will 

they have the ability to come back and rely on provincial 

government enforcement mechanisms which have traditionally 

been used when people do not pay fees for services that are 

provided by the government? It’s not very clear in this enabling 

legislation how that’s going to be done, but that’s a practical 

matter that may be of concern to the local meat processing 

shop. It also doesn’t really say whether this will extend to every 

butcher shop in Saskatchewan because they’ll be provincially 

located, or will it only apply to the 12 facilities that are 

mentioned? What’s the extent of the reach of this type of a 

process? 

 

Now it does say that these contracts will have requirements for 

reports back to the minister providing information and 

documents, and that’s a good thing. But how often will that 

happen? Will it be sufficient that within the Ministry of 

Agriculture they can monitor the quality of our food? Will these 

reports also be shared with the Ministry of Health and all of 

their public health inspectors that are located there with the 

regional health authorities? How does this all fit together within 

a whole system that protects the health and safety of the public? 

 

And it also, this whole animal products inspection 

administration agreement will also have provision that allows 

for these contracting agencies to maintain and issue licences or 

certificates and to make sure that some of these, some of the 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

decisions around that whole process of licensing different 

producers will go to whoever the contracting agency is. 

 

So there are a whole number of questions around what the 

process will be. And I can see why the minister suggested that 

he is still in the process of trying to keep the federal 

government in the process because we know how that process 

works. We have had good service over many decades from the 

Canadian Food Inspection Agency. 

 

And this legislation attempts to do all of those things but in an 

entirely new way with all kinds of possibility of difficulties 

arising. So I know that there are a number of consequences of 

the legislation that we won’t even really know what the 

practical aspects of it is until 2014. And we’re anticipating that 

whatever arrangements are made will be in place before January 

1, 2014 so there’s continuity of our food inspections, but we 

don’t know for sure whether that’s going to happen. 

 

Now the other side or the other aspect of this particular 

legislation relates to the marketing assurance fund that’s in 

place. And it’s also a new creation, and it’s I think got some 

good goals insofar as it’s been set up. But I thought it was quite 

interesting in looking at the legislation that the section 6, I think 

it is, repeals section 16 and 16.1 of the existing Act, and those 

sections set up something called the Livestock Patrons’ 

Protection Fund. So effectively it was supposed to be a fund 

like what this new legislation is going to put in place, but what 

it says in the information that we received is that that fund was 

never used. It was there, but it was never used by the livestock 

industry because it was too restrictive. 

 

And so what’s been suggested is that the new version that’s in 

the legislation now will have some more options to it, so 

therefore it hopefully will be used by the industry. But there 

doesn’t appear to be any guarantee that this one will meet the 

needs either, and I think practically where the whole thing will 

either survive or not survive relates to how much it will actually 

cost to participate in the fund, and that’s something that we 

have no information about at this stage. 

 

So there’s a whole number of issues as it relates to this 

legislation. It’s important legislation for the protection of the 

public in Saskatchewan. It’s important legislation for the 

livestock industry to make sure that their products are properly 

prepared and marketed, and I think it’s important for our 

economy. So we very clearly want to have this all work 

properly. 

 

I know some of my colleagues will have some further 

comments about this, and we’ll be looking forward to hearing 

from some of the people who will be affected in addition to just 

the ordinary consumer. And so we’ll gather those comments 

and further add them to the debate as we proceed. But at this 

point I would like to move adjournment of the debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 60, The Animal Products 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 61 — The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to wade into the debate on Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment 

Act, 2012. 

 

What this bill sets out to do, or what The Railway Amendment 

Act does, it outlines the railway abandonment process which 

requires railway owners to offer to sell their railway lines to 

interested parties before they’re allowed to permanently 

abandon the railway. 

 

I know in the minister’s second reading comments he outlined a 

couple of problems that this bill aims to address. He had 

mentioned in his remarks that: 

 

The abandonment process requires that a railway owner 

first advertise their intentions to either sell or abandon the 

line and invite any expressions of interest from the 

buyers. [But right now] Currently the Highway Traffic 

Board has insufficient authority to remedy a situation 

where either the seller or the potential buyer is negotiating 

in bad faith. 

 

The other issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is: “In the government 

purchase phase, a municipal government is required to either 

decline or accept the offer to purchase the net salvage value 

within 60 days of receiving the offer, and they can only request 

a net salvage value after they have accepted the offer.” The net 

salvage value is the value of a railway track that’s going to be 

abandoned and sold as salvage. Generally this is the amount a 

railway could expect to receive if they paid to dismantle the 

railway and then sold the materials. So “As a result . . . 

[municipalities] are forced to make a critical decision without 

knowing what the exact purchase price will be.” 

 

So those are the two issues that the minister outlined in his 

second reading comments. And he has said that it was 

proposed: 

 

. . . that The Railway Act be amended to adopt the 

following provisions. To address bad faith negotiation 

allegations against the seller during the sale phase . . . 

[this government is] proposing to give the Highway 

Traffic Board new powers to evaluate the disputes and, if 

necessary, issue an order to the parties to enter an 

agreement that the board believes is fair and reasonable. 

Alternatively if the board believes the potential buyer is 

negotiating in bad faith, the board has the authority to 

relieve the seller of their obligation to continue 

negotiating with the interested party. 

 

The second piece, the second remedy that is found in this bill is: 

 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

In order to give the municipal governments more comfort 

in their decision to accept the offer to purchase . . . [the 

government is] proposing an amendment that will allow 

municipal governments the opportunity to request a net 

salvage value cost estimate before accepting the offer. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So those are the changes that this minister is proposing. And it’s 

interesting when we talk about shortline or regional railway 

lines, did you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are 13 

shortline railways in Saskatchewan? And actually one you . . . I 

can tell that you’re nodding and you most certainly do know 

that. The newest one actually came online, I understand, just 

this late summer or early fall and this is the Long Creek 

Railway, which is interesting. 

 

So number 13 here just a couple of months ago and a group of 

investors purchased the railway from CP [Canadian Pacific]. 

And trains haven’t run on that line in decades, and the goal is 

— so that’s a long time, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but the goal is, 

although they may consider passenger travel in the future, but 

for right now they’re only hauling bulk commodities. 

 

The passenger travel piece is interesting to me, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I’ve grown up here in Saskatchewan and my 

grandmother actually lived in Melville. That’s where my mom 

is from. And my grandpa actually worked for the railway. My 

grandma, in her almost 100 years, didn’t once set foot on an 

airplane. Her whole travelling days were on trains. She’d come 

to Saskatoon on the train or she’d go to Toronto. Actually my 

uncle, one of her sons, lived in Toronto. So my grandma’s 

whole travelling time was spent on the train. 

 

And I grew up, actually until I was 19 I had never, never been 

on a train myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it was such a huge 

part of my life growing up though. I had an older sister who had 

the opportunity to travel with my grandma, and I always felt 

like I was missing something by never getting to travel on a 

train. 

 

And I know, I know that there’s many days, coming between 

Saskatoon and Regina, and I think about shortline travel but I 

also think about that opportunity — wouldn’t it be nice if we 

had a train, a high-speed train going between Saskatoon and 

Regina or elsewhere? I know many of us would take advantage 

of that. And I think high-speed, a high-speed train would be a 

wonderful thing, speaking from experience, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The other thing actually, as I said I had never been on a train 

until I was about 19 years old, and I had an opportunity to travel 

to Europe. And it amazed me, actually. In London, my brother 

was living in London playing hockey, and to travel on the tube 

within London was amazing, but elsewhere as well across 

Europe getting on a train. And that was such an efficient and 

amazing way to get around. And I wish train travel was a little 

bit more affordable these days. Actually, it’s not inexpensive 

now to ride the train. 

 

So I appreciate train as a method of travel, and the short time 

that I did have an opportunity to spend in Europe, it was a 

wonderful experience to get to travel that way. But actually I 

was thinking, just thinking about this little rickety train line in 

Switzerland riding up to a mountain called Jungfraujoch, 

actually. It was interesting on this . . . So they have these 

amazing trains, but it was like a little circus train, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, going up to this, to a glacier actually. And my sister 

was with me and we rode this very rickety, interesting train 

straight up a mountain. It was beautiful and amazing, but it was 

kind of a scary experience as well. But getting to see this glacier 

and visit this was quite a tourist attraction and was kind of nice 

as well. 

 

But we think about trains, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 

importance here in Saskatchewan as we look at our highways 

and look at the damage that big trucks often do to our highways. 

And I know I was thinking about a trip that I took last summer 

to pick up my daughter in southeast Saskatchewan on Highway 

15, travelling at highway speeds — not any faster than I should 

have, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I almost lost the 

undercarriage of my car at that point in time. And I think about 

the importance of supporting, the importance of supporting 

shortline rail, in large part to ensure that with truck traffic . . . I 

think producers would like the opportunity to get their 

commodities to market in this fashion. And I know as someone 

who travels on the highways, there are many people who think 

that train travel would be easier, much easier on our highways 

than some of the big trucks. 

 

Trucks keep getting bigger and bigger, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

know that all of us here in this legislature are on the road a lot, 

and you see these large trucks that undoubtedly do inflict a huge 

amount of damage to our road — big rigs. Whether they’re 

hauling grain or oil or any other product, logging, the reality is 

there is huge damage to our roads. And I know this government 

talks about their great investment, but anybody who’s out and 

about on the highways in Saskatchewan know that, as this 

government likes to say, there is more work to do, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I remember last year actually, I can’t remember what the exact 

phrase was, but as you head down to almost going through 

Lumsden, there was signs on the road that said surface failure. I 

can’t remember the exact, exact wording, but on a really 

important highway that’s regularly used and that had been 

repaired not long ago was already having some difficulties. 

 

My brother is a civil engineer who has many, many, many years 

of experience, and right now he’s actually in Egypt working for 

about six weeks for that government, working on asset 

management. I know he has all kinds of comments and issues 

and concerns with asset management here in Saskatchewan and 

with regard to our infrastructure and particularly our highways, 

that he has some huge concerns with the way that resources are 

being managed here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The one thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, too, that he has flagged — 

or, Mr. Speaker; it’s good to see you, Mr. Speaker — the one 

thing that he also has flagged is some capacity . . . My brother 

has been an engineer in Saskatchewan for, I believe, about three 

decades, actually a little bit longer than that possibly, and he has 

flagged some concerns around capacity in the Ministry of 

Highways right now. So we think about train travel and 

supporting shortline and regional railways and the importance 

there, but we also think about smart investment in highways. 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

And I think that this government has a long way to go when it 

comes to making smart investments in highways. 

 

But with respect to Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment Act, I 

know the minister has laid out a couple of problems and a 

couple of solutions that he believes will resolve these issues. 

And I know that there’s many people who worked very hard in 

the early days to get shortline railways going and make sure that 

this is a way to support producers, so we’ll be reaching out in 

the next weeks and months to ensure that this bill does address 

the issues that the minister has said that it does. 

 

So with that, I know that I do have colleagues who are 

interested in wading into this debate and with that, for now I 

would like to move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 62 — The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure after 

supper to have the opportunity to join in on the discussion on 

Bill No. 62, An Act to amend The Parks Act. 

 

I think it was just last week, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity, 

the enjoyable opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to make some 

comments about regional parks. And it’s a pleasure to have the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to talk about our provincial parks, a 

complementary yet unique feature of our park system here in 

Saskatchewan and our park system here in the country. 

 

Provincial parks, of course, are very important to our province. 

And every individual, most individuals in the province have 

perhaps a favourite provincial park that they like going to as a 

family, either for holidays or maybe a family cabin nearby or at 

the park. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an important aspect in a 

number of ways. 

 

One, it’s important in an ecological sense because in provincial 

parks there’s the opportunity to protect the environment of the 

area, to ensure that standards are being followed; also, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that there is adequate enforcement with 

respect to the guidelines and the regulations related to the park. 

And provincial parks are important in an ecological sense, Mr. 

Speaker, because they do cover the province. They go north to 

south, east to west. So it covers the different types of terrain and 

geography and ecology that we have throughout our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So whether we are in the North or the South or whether we’re in 

a really remote area or an area that’s close to cities and towns 

and a good amount of development, provincial parks are 

important in an ecological sense of protecting the environment. 

We also know, Mr. Speaker, that provincial parks are hugely 

important when it comes to serving our economy also. It’s 

important not to overlook this fact. Yes, they’re there for the 

protection of the area and for the citizens’ enjoyment of nature 

but, Mr. Speaker, they’re also important in an economic sense 

because of the activities that are associated with provincial 

parks. 

 

And last week — I believe it was last week — when I spoke 

about regional parks, there are many examples where regional 

parks are a very important factor in the financial well-being of a 

local area, the support of a town or a community. And the same, 

Mr. Speaker, stands for provincial parks. Because of the quality 

of our provincial parks, because of the uniqueness of them, 

they’re a big draw, a big draw for our own residents here in the 

province. And we also know, Mr. Speaker, they’re an attraction 

for campers coming from other provinces or for people 

travelling through the province on a road trip perhaps and 

stopping at a regional park. We know people care about 

regional parks because, I believe, many members have had 

individuals contact them when it comes to reservations of 

camping spots. And people have patterns and have favourite 

spots that they like to go. And when that’s disrupted, it is an 

issue. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we care about provincial parks because they 

matter to our province in a big way. They matter in an 

ecological sense. They matter in an economic sense. They also 

matter, Mr. Speaker, in a cultural or historic sense. And we 

know that there have been many of the provincial parks that are 

long-standing also have connections to our provincial history, 

which I think is very important to remember. Whether it’s the 

early settlers or whether it’s the activity and the traditional areas 

of First Nations or Métis people, provincial parks also greatly 

are connected to our stories and our sense of place, the things 

that make people proud to be from Saskatchewan, among the 

things that make people to be proud from Saskatchewan, and 

among the things that people brag about perhaps when they go 

to other provinces. We talk about our lakes often, or we may 

talk about a favourite golf course. 

 

So it’s important because of the ecological, because of the 

historical and cultural, and because of the economic 

significance of provincial parks. It’s important that we get it 

right and take the right steps when it comes to protecting and 

promoting and enhancing the existing parks but also, Mr. 

Speaker, when we have any sort of discussion about the 

addition of parks or the adjustment of park boundaries, it’s 

important that we ask all the right questions to make sure, to 

make sure, Mr. Speaker, that the considerations of the 

environment, the considerations of our history and sense of 

place, and the considerations of the economy are in fact being 

taken into consideration as the way they need to be in order to 

ensure that the correct and proper decisions are being made 

about our provincial park system. 

 

So the legislation, Mr. Speaker, the amendment that has been 

introduced by the minister, it’s Bill No. 62, as I said earlier, An 

Act to amend The Parks Act. And second reading was given by 

the minister responsible on November 13th, 2012. And in the 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

minister’s second reading speech, a number of items were 

identified. And I do, while I’m sure the minister is engaged in 

his file, I do compliment the people within the ministry who 

drafted his second reading speech and nicely crafted it in an 

easy-way-to-understand way. 

 

There are four components that are identified, Mr. Speaker, 

with what this piece of legislation is doing. The first 

component, Mr. Speaker, is the creation of a new park. And the 

minister suggests that this new park be tentatively named the 

Anglin-Emma Lakes Provincial Park, Anglin-Emma because 

those are the two largest lakes in the area that is being proposed 

as a new provincial park. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a general principle, the addition of provincial 

parks is something that I think is good, and I’m encouraged by 

this step. Who wouldn’t want more parks? In my opinion, I 

think it’s a very important step. But when we’re making 

changes and we’re making additions to new provincial parks, 

it’s important that it be done in a way that respects traditional 

activities in the area. It’s important that it be done in a way that 

respects those who currently live in the area. It’s important that 

it respects the history and the considerations for the region 

because with the increased protection of our provincial park and 

some of the implications that come from having a provincial 

park present in the area, local people will be affected. And so 

it’s important to ensure that consultation has taken place. 

 

According to the minister’s remarks, a good number of people 

have been identified where discussions have occurred between 

ministry officials and the local area. So I hope that that has been 

as thorough as we would hope it to be, Mr. Speaker, and that 

the residents in the area — whether it be people involved with 

the RM [rural municipality] or whether it be First Nations and 

Métis groups — I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that there has been 

a good discussion that has been two-way and that their 

considerations have been accommodated as best they can be 

and that they have been respected through the process. I think 

that’s important. The government is hit and miss when it comes 

to how they engage in consultation. So I hope this would be an 

example where things have been done properly as opposed to 

incidents when things have been done improperly. 

 

There are some considerations. I see the minister suggests that a 

new name be used to replace the temporary name of the 

Anglin-Emma Lakes Provincial Park. I would be interested to 

have a bit more information on how that exactly will occur, 

whose interests will be considered in that process. I imagine the 

minister would likely have ultimate say in that but it would be 

good to know that, it would be good if that was a way to engage 

the communities affected in order to ensure that they know that 

their views have been respected and heard. 

 

The other interesting component, Mr. Speaker, to this 

discussion, and actually just coming out of the news at the end 

of last week and through question period today is how this 

provincial park, which includes Anglin and Emma lakes, how 

this affects the Kenderdine Campus at Emma Lake. I think 

that’s an important consideration. When we think of how the 

park, or we think of where the park is in the boreal forest . . . 

And in the minister’s own remarks he talks about the 

significance of that area in an ecological sense and in a 

historical sense as well, I suppose. We know that the 

Kenderdine Campus has also been playing an important role in 

the promotion of those ideals and the promotion of those 

considerations. 

 

So with the campus essentially, well not essentially . . . It is shut 

down now for at least a period of a number of years and with its 

ultimate future really unknown, some major questions there, 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to how the provincial park that’s 

being proposed will interact with the land and the property and 

the function of what has been the Kenderdine Campus. I think 

that is an important consideration as we think of the future of 

this very important area and when we think of the future of the 

very important Kenderdine Campus, what may in fact be in 

store for the campus and how that is connected or not connected 

to the proposed provincial park. 

 

So I think that is an important point to note. And when we have 

future discussions and ongoing discussions on, whether it be 

with the provincial park or the Kenderdine Campus, it’s 

important to keep this fact in mind, that there will be . . . Each 

will be affected by the other. And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, 

that both can have a bright future, that both can serve the goals 

of protecting the boreal, that both, Mr. Speaker, can serve an 

educational and a constructive role in promoting the area and 

sharing the wealth of the experience and the ecology with more 

people. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, as Kenderdine Campus, has been a 

traditional spot where individuals have come to learn, to 

experience the area, and to promote its ecology and to learn 

about its ecology. Provincial park matters to that, Mr. Speaker, 

so it’s necessary that one is not at the expense of the other. And 

it’s necessary, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t turn a blind eye to 

one area while the other area at this time looks like it may be 

turned into a provincial park based on the legislation. So that 

was the first area that the minister identified as an area of 

concern — not a concern but as an area being changed by this 

piece of legislation. 

 

The second area, Mr. Speaker, that’s being addressed is the 

Coteau Bay area. And this is in Danielson Provincial Park along 

Lake Diefenbaker, Mr. Speaker. And what we see here is 31 

hectares of the park being taken out of protection and out of the 

park boundaries and to be used for development of cottages, I 

believe the minister’s remarks said, Mr. Speaker — cottage lot 

development. 

 

The minister states that this area is of low ecological value 

because of the process of the construction of the Gardiner dam. 

So in a sense of protecting native prairie or native prairie 

grasses, that’s not as much of a concern, according to the 

minister’s remarks. The minister’s suggesting that the 31 acres 

will be offset by adding 65 acres of native prairie grassland. So 

I would be interested, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the nature of 

that swap, to ensure that it is appropriate and that the quality of 

the land being exchanged there is in fact an upgrade and that the 

part of the park that is being taken out of protection, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is in fact damaged in an ecological sense, Mr. 

Speaker. So I’d be interested in knowing the specific details and 

a bit more information about that. 

 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

But I do want to make a few remarks about the proposed 

purpose for the 31 hectares that are being taken out for cottage 

lot development. I have some questions, Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to what that will actually look like in terms of the type 

of development and who the developer will be, what has been 

proposed so far, what sort of work has been done up to this date 

— so the details around that sort of development. Is it combined 

with the creation of a resort or is it strictly cabin lots? Are there 

other plans for the area or is it simply the cottage lot 

development as the minister’s remarks would suggest? 

 

And I’d be interested to know, Mr. Speaker, who the main 

players are in that arrangement. I think for the sake of 

transparency and the sake of having a full understanding of 

what the implications of this legislation will be. I think those 

are important points to bring up and important questions that, 

perhaps in the committee process, the minister will be able to 

shed some more light on those issues. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that the swap being 

proposed is in fact an upgrade and we want to make sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that the development of the area for cottage lots has 

been well thought out and that any questions about its future use 

are being addressed in a way that is transparent and a way that 

is in the best interest of the area. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation, the amendment, 

affects four different areas. It creates the new park, the 

Anglin-Emma Lakes Provincial Park. It causes the swapping of 

some land to do with Danielson Provincial Park. And the third 

area, Mr. Speaker, where the amendment changes some of the 

rules or the guidelines for our provincial parks, has to do with 

the interaction between residents and nature, specifically in the 

sense of wildlife. 

 

And we know people like going to parks because they are in 

fact in nature, and people — for those of us that live in a city or 

live in a developed area — we like going to parks because it’s a 

break from the regular routine of being in the city and it gives 

us exposure, it gives our children exposure to the things that we 

love about the province. But, Mr. Speaker, whenever humans 

do go into creation, go into nature, there is interaction. And 

sometimes there are problems and sometimes our activities can 

cause concerns for the wildlife who make that area home. 

 

This amendment, the third component of the legislation that is 

proposed by the minister, addresses the issue of bears and 

addresses how campgrounds can attract bears to the area. And, 

Mr. Speaker, from travelling and working in a number of 

provinces and wilderness areas, I know it is a concern when a 

bear wanders into camp. And once bears know where a food 

source is, Mr. Speaker, and have familiarity with an area and 

have a high level of comfort with humans, it is a problem. And 

in the vast majority of cases it ends poorly for the bear, Mr. 

Speaker, which is sad because when you see a great animal like 

a black bear in Saskatchewan, to have them have to be shot for 

safety reasons is a real tragedy and a concern. So anything that 

we can do to reduce the number of times that humans can 

interact with bears and reduce the items which may attract bears 

into an area where humans are, I think that’s a good thing. 

 

So this bit of legislation would allow park staff, Mr. Speaker, to 

deal with campsites when the campers aren’t there. And so if 

there’s food left out or other materials, dirty pots and pans that 

are attracting animals to the area, it gives the park staff the 

authority to gather those things up, put them somewhere where 

they can’t attract the animals, and deal with the matter by 

giving proper notice to the campers at the campsite and deal 

with it in that manner. 

 

To me, Mr. Speaker, this does seem reasonable and I think is a 

good step. If it’s something that makes it easier to prevent more 

interaction between humans and bears, I think that’s a good 

thing and so long as the rights of and the property of the 

campers are respected in a reasonable manner, I think that’s a 

fairly fair thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the first area this amendment to the Act addresses is the 

creation of the Anglin-Emma Provincial Park. The second area 

affects the boundaries with respect to land purposes in 

Danielson Provincial Park. 

 

The third area allows park staff to deal with campgrounds when 

there’s bear interaction and humans are part of the problem in 

the situation. And the fourth component, and the final 

component that’s being addressed in this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, is a mapping issue to deal with Steele Narrows 

Provincial Park whereby the descriptions of the park is being 

adjusted to improve mapping of the park, according to the 

minister. And this affects the area close to Makwa Lake. 

 

As the minister suggests in his own second reading remarks, 

Mr. Speaker, he stated that the current boundary of the parks are 

part of the provincial park and he seeks “. . . to remove a sliver 

of land separated from the main park area by Highway 699 so it 

may be transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture.” 

 

The minister goes on say that his ministry “. . . has worked with 

the Ministry of Agriculture and Information Services 

Corporation to ensure agreement with the legal description and 

that mapping of Steele Narrows Provincial Park meets with 

their approval, and they have assisted with this amendment.” 

 

So the change, based on what the minister states here, Mr. 

Speaker, does not seem overly extensive or major. I’m not 

personally very familiar with the area so I can’t speak to what 

this is actually doing from first-hand experience. I would hope 

that the minister’s remarks are accurate in the sense that it is a, 

it would appear to be a minor change, but if it is major I would, 

if it’s more extensive than what it would appear in his brief 

remarks here, I would look forward to him bringing more 

information to the committee process when this piece of 

legislation is considered in committee, or if he wanted to 

provide that information earlier on. But at face value, based on 

the limited comments I have, based on his remarks and what’s 

been provided in the legislation, it does not seem to be as 

perhaps as significant as the other parts. But with my limited 

knowledge of the area specifically, I could be incorrect in that 

statement. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about the four areas 

identified by the minister and raised some questions and some 

concerns. With respect to the creation of a new park, it’s 

important to consider the Kenderdine Campus at Emma Lake 

and how that decision affects the proposed new park. It’s also, 

Mr. Speaker, important to ensure that the proper consultation 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

has taken place with the many groups in the area and that’s it’s 

been done in a respectful way. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important 

that as the planning continues and a final name is achieved, that 

that be done in a way that serves the best interests of everyone. 

So those are some of the comments I made about that. 

 

The second component, Mr. Speaker, with respect to Danielson 

Provincial Park and the swapping of some land in order to allow 

for cabin development, the questions about the ecological 

nature of the two areas in order to ensure that the remarks made 

by the minister are accurate, I would be interested in that and 

more transparency with respect to the proposed development. 

Who has been engaged? Who will be engaged? What are the 

timelines? Who is to benefit through the process and what is the 

proposed benefit to the area? I think those are fair and 

reasonable questions. 

 

The third component, Mr. Speaker, that I addressed with respect 

to bears and the power of park officers to remove dangerous 

wildlife attractants as it is stated seems like common sense to 

me and I would, in my own opinion, generally support those 

measures. 

 

And the fourth component seems like more or less an 

administrative step with respect to changing some of the 

mapping to reflect one specific area. If it is more extensive than 

that, I look forward to the minister’s remarks in committee to 

suggest that it is greater than that or to hear from people from 

the area, which would be appreciated as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are a few remarks I’ve made concerning 

Bill No. 62, An Act to amend The Parks Act. As I said, parks are 

important. Last week I enjoyed talking about regional parks, 

and today I enjoyed talking about provincial parks. But I know 

other colleagues would like to speak about it, so with that I 

would move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 63 — The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to join in the debate on Bill No. 63, An Act Respecting 

Regional Parks and making consequential amendments to other 

Acts, a very important Act because it deals with a very 

important issue in our communities right across this province of 

regional parks. And I have a fair bit to say. I know that many 

will want to talk about this, but I think this is one of the unsung 

heroes or undiscovered things in our province that is truly 

something that we value. And you know, it’s the strength of 

many communities, the local regional park, and I want to spend 

some time talking about this because this is a very thorough 

overhaul of the regional parks and I’m not sure what the 

consultation is. But I do want to talk a little bit about some of 

the background of what happened this summer that sort of 

caused regional parks to come forward in the news and made 

everyone sort of sit up and say, what’s going on here? 

 

You know, we’ve seen different kinds of levels of consultation 

from the Sask Party government. And we’ve raised concerns 

here, whether it be the new labour legislation, the overhaul there 

and the lack of public consultation there, and talking to people 

in a public forum. But with the regional parks, the one at LeRoy 

really hit a low when the Leisureland Regional Park sale fiasco 

happened this summer. 

 

So I do want to take some time for the folks at home because 

they may have been on holidays when this all happened. And it 

was quite a furor; quite a lot of concern was raised. And I do 

want to say that this highlights how important consultation is so 

that we have confidence in our provincial government to 

oversee what happens throughout Saskatchewan, to make sure 

it’s done in a fair and transparent and accountable manner. I 

mean, this is what the Sask Party talks about being elected on 

— being fair, being transparent, being accountable. And I 

clearly . . . What happened in August hit a new low, hit a new 

low. 

 

And this is a true story. I mean this what The StarPhoenix had 

reported. This is what happened on August, the end of August. 

And I’d like to actually review this so it gets into the record for 

people at home because they may not know what’s going on 

and we don’t want to have this in secrecy, in a cloak of secrecy. 

And I think that it’s important that we get it on the record. 

 

This is an article that was published August 21st, 2012 by Jason 

Warick from The StarPhoenix and the headline was, “Regional 

park sale raises . . . [furor].” And he starts by saying: 

 

Concerns are being raised about the unprecedented sale of 

a Saskatchewan regional park. A group of Vancouver 

investors has been lined up by the local park board to buy 

LeRoy Leisureland Regional Park, located a few 

kilometres from BHP Billiton’s proposed Jansen potash 

mine project. 

 

Now I quote. I want to make sure that people understand this is 

not me saying this. This is what the park manager, Maggie 

Hamilton, had to say. She said, “This stinks. A lot of this has 

been a secret, but the public should have known about this.” 

This is what the local person was saying, the regional park 

manager. 

 

Now, maybe some of the members opposite disagree or know 

more. They probably do know more because they’re in on the 

secret. They’re in on the secret. But other people weren’t in on 

the secret and had a lot of concerns. So here we had: 

 

A public meeting on the subject takes place on 

Wednesday evening in LeRoy, located about 130 

kilometres east of Saskatoon. Hamilton and others plan to 

attend and ask the park’s eight-member board to 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

reconsider. 

 

To rethink it, rethink it, and make sure that they let everyone 

know, not just those who were on the inside. And this is what 

Maggie says. She continues by saying, “We’re hoping there’ll 

be enough people there making enough of a stink that they’ll 

have to take another look at this.” 

 

Now this park apparently was opened in the late 1960s, has a 

nine-hole golf course, camping, swimming pool, and other 

features. And she believes, the park manager and others say the 

park is a busy, valuable community asset. 

 

But she goes on, and this is what the reporter says, “The general 

public was not informed or asked for input on the months-long 

negotiations . . .” So this negotiation wasn’t something that was 

done over a weekend, but actually took months, took several 

months, it appears, to make this happen in secrecy because it 

only had come out in August. Why is this happening, all right? 

 

Now it talks about someone in the government said, officials 

with local RMs, towns, and the provincial government 

consented to a non-disclosure agreement. So everybody was in, 

and this is the way they were going to move forward. 

 

Darlene Friesen, the executive director of the Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association, called it, and I quote, “a very 

unusual development. This is the first time for this. It is what it 

is.” 

 

So this is what Ms. Friesen calls the situation, and clearly 

there’s a concern — first time, first time for this kind of thing to 

happen. It’s highly unusual. Now she goes on to talk about 

“Many years ago, a couple of parks closed due to lack of 

volunteers or resources. This is the first time such a sale has 

been negotiated.” So there you go. 

 

And this is what the park board’s treasurer, Leona Wakelan, 

had to say, that she “. . . confirmed the park has been ‘sold,’ but 

said it will remain open . . . [but] the park’s future is unclear.” 

She calls it a good news story, but she wouldn’t give the details 

until the Wednesday meeting. 

 

And so, “The provincial government’s director of park 

management services, Bob McEachern, said the government 

agreed to the ‘dissolution’ of the park,” and it’s several months 

to go on. 

 

So I think it’s important that we get this on the record because 

many people don’t know what actually happened, or what is 

happening today, because we don’t know whether this is 

actually concluded. We don’t know whether this sale is 

complete. And this is very important that when you have this 

. . . when you operate in a cloak of secrecy, what really are the 

facts? We can only go by what the public record is, and this in 

this case, this is The StarPhoenix on August 21st. So the 

government evaluated the park’s value and what the plan was: 

“. . . proximity of other comparable services, the dispersal of 

park assets and other factors.” 

 

So in the end, the minister agreed to let the board, the local 

board proceed. That’s what he was going to do. All right. And 

then he says, the minister says, the regional park . . . or Bob 

McEachern says this, not the minister: “The regional park as we 

know it would not be a regional park.” 

 

And he goes on to say, “. . . there is nothing in provincial 

legislation requiring the public to be notified before a park is 

sold or shut down.” So here we have before us some legislation 

and we have to make sure that’s in there. Is the public going to 

be notified when there are changes like a park being sold or 

shut down? So we have that question. 

 

All right, now it talks about there’s “. . . been no other 

dissolution applications filed by any of the [other] boards of 

Saskatchewan’s nearly 100 regional parks.” So we have these 

Vancouver investors, or go on that it says: 

 

. . . are also interested in purchasing land adjacent to the 

park and in other parts of the region, according to people 

involved in the process. 

 

The area could be home to BHP’s Jansen potash mine, 

which, if approved by the BHP board, would be the 

world’s largest. 

 

And that’s a matter of public record that that’s what they’re out 

there saying. So clearly if you’re investing in that area, it’s not a 

bad idea, and buying a regional park would be a good idea. 

 

You know, the writer, the reporter, Jason Warick, wants to 

create some context. He talks about the: 

 

Regional parks were created decades ago to give outdoor 

recreation options to Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Some are owned by park boards, while others are owned 

by municipalities or leased. Once designated a regional 

park . . . [the] control shifts to the park’s volunteer board. 

 

Talks about how, and Ms. Friesen goes on to say the provincial 

minister does have the power to intervene, but that’s never 

really happened. So and then she goes on talk about how as for 

funding, most of the parks generate significant revenue, and 

capital improvements were cost-shared. And there’s a lot of 

revenue that happens in these parks and I’ve wanted to talk a 

little bit about that. 

 

I want to go on. And then this is the news story that posted 

August 22nd and updated August 23rd. And this is from Sarah 

Mills of CKOM on August 23. She goes: 

 

People in Leroy, Saskatchewan are seeing something the 

province had never seen before — a sold sign across 

Leroy Leisureland, a regional park east of Saskatoon.”  

 

So the park is being sold to a Vancouver private investor, but 

many locals are not happy about this. But we know that there 

was that public meeting, and they went on. 

 

This is the background to all of this, this idea that the Sask 

Party yet again . . . You know, and I really appreciate that 

sometimes they talk about how they won’t take lessons from us 

on consulting. But if this is their style of consulting — 

completely in secrecy about a public asset, about a public asset 

— then I think there’s some real . . . We won’t take any lessons 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

from them, Mr. Speaker. We won’t take any lessons from them. 

 

This is really something that when the history books are written, 

and we talk and we look under C for consultations and what the 

Sask Party government has done in terms of consultations with 

the people of Saskatchewan, whether it’s the wildlife habitat 

Act, now Leisureland, there’s some real lessons to be learned 

from the future generations about how not to do, how not to do 

public consultations. 

 

If you want to have the trust and the confidence of people 

across the province, this is not what you do. You do not allow 

negotiations to go on for months in secrecy. This is not how you 

. . . On one hand, they campaigned to say they’re going to be 

accountable and transparent . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 

the member from Moose Jaw, the member from Moose Jaw, 

he’s woken up. The member from Moose Jaw has woken up. 

He has to know, he has to know . . . Maybe he hasn’t read their 

campaign literature. They campaign on being transparent and 

accountable, and yet he hollers across, he hollers across. That’s 

not what they want to do. That’s not what they want to do. 

When they’re elected they get to do whatever they want, 

whatever they want. And right away they do these kind of deals 

with Vancouver investors in secret, in secret. And the member 

from Moose Jaw thinks that’s quite A-okay, that’s quite 

A-okay. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to go back and say that clearly this 

is an important Act because the regional parks are an important 

component of our communities here in Saskatchewan. And they 

do really, really good work. And the regional parks association 

is an outstanding organization that I’ve had the pleasure to get 

to know many of the people involved. And they are deeply 

committed, deeply committed to providing the best services 

possible at the local level to ensure their park system is strong 

and viable and sustainable. It’s really important that they are 

because they are such an important part of our communities 

right across the province. 

 

And as we know, there’s nearly 100 of these and they have a lot 

of challenges. It’s not easy to run a regional park. There’s high 

expectations, high expectations in terms of the quality of 

services that you provide. That whether it’s camping or whether 

it’s a golf course, cross-country skiing, swimming pools — 

swimming pools are critical when we get those hot days in 

Saskatchewan — that clearly they play an important role. And 

the wonderful thing is about it because they are locally operated 

and they have a really strong sense of purpose and they do an 

outstanding job. And what happens is that they do work that 

really reflects the needs of the communities. The communities 

identify whether it’s a golf course they want, whether it’s a 

swimming pool they want, or whether it’s cross-country skiing 

or snowmobiling, whatever the particular area feels would fit 

their needs in terms of recreation. They can really establish the 

get her done, the go-forward plan. 

 

[20:00] 

 

But quite often that isn’t the case. They’ve had challenges to 

make ends meet. They’ve had challenges around particularly 

accessing infrastructure dollars on a regular basis because quite 

often they’re seen as an add-on and if the government is doing 

well, then they will get funding but if they’re not doing well, 

then it’s a challenge, you know. 

 

And this information sheet that many of us received in response 

to the bill coming forward talks about some of the challenges 

that they have. Part of the issue is how to work with local 

municipalities to make sure that they get access to some of the 

infrastructure dollars that are out there. And she talks about how 

sometimes that is a challenge for municipalities because 

municipalities themselves have challenges to meet in terms of 

where to spend infrastructure dollars because they are limited. 

 

And I know my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale raised the 

issue around asset management. And this is clearly a case of 

when you have municipalities across the province identifying 

what’s in their local areas, what do they value, what do they 

need to support, it’s important that they recognize the regional 

parks. 

 

I just want to quote from this information bulletin. It says there 

are a few regional parks receiving funding from their 

municipalities, but the majority of the funding seems to be 

supporting the swimming pools that are located in these parks. 

Most municipalities are contributing less to their regional park 

financially. There’s some anomalies and there’s some in-kind 

assistance, but the original contribution level is not being seen 

any longer by the majority of regional parks. So this leaves the 

regional park raising funding they need to operate and renew 

infrastructure on their own in many cases. 

 

It goes on to say many people believe the municipalities share 

extra resources of revenue that they’ve been given with the 

regional parks, and other than a few cases, this also doesn’t 

happen. And these municipalities have many projects that need 

funding as well. 

 

Number 4, regional parks are seldom allowed to participate in 

federal-provincial infrastructure programs that are offered to 

municipalities. The password for these programs is sent out to 

municipalities, and it’s usually a closed system unless a 

municipality does not have the need for funding and allows the 

regional park to use the application. 

 

So what do they need? They need awareness, because clearly 

this is an important issue for them because they have a lot of 

costs. 

 

One of the things they wanted to talk about is that dollars 

invested by — and this is for just the past year, I believe — 

dollars invested by regional parks in the province was $7.9 

million. That’s huge. Huge. Return on investment for every 

public dollar they spend, about three and a half dollars. So 

that’s really, really critical. They’ve completed 719 major 

infrastructure projects which include new campsites, 

campgrounds, picnic tables, barbecues, fire pits, washroom 

upgrades, shower upgrades, water systems, 19 golf course 

upgrades, 12 ball diamonds, playgrounds, computer software 

for booking, snow-making line upgrades, and the list goes on. 

Swimming pool upgrades, 33; new buildings, 127; equipment 

of course for mowers, trucks, maintenance equipment, 

concession equipment, 153 of those pieces or projects were 

bought; 19 golf carts. And the list goes on. Clearly, clearly an 

important issue for these folks. 

 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

So they’re anticipating for the projected projects that are 

coming up, computers again for reservation systems, again new 

buildings, quite a few. New equipment, that type of thing. So 

about 201 new projects they want to see. So this will be very 

important that we support them, that we support them. 

 

They’re anticipating, I think, getting about $1 million from 

funding through the various government levels; 61 parks will be 

participating. The total project value of the capital projects will 

be 4.3 million. So this is quite a return that if we invest $1 of 

public money, they will invest another $4.2. So it’s clearly a 

good deal for us, and it really does, really does meet the need. 

 

So I want to take a minute here, Mr. Speaker, to review what 

the minister said when he talked about why he thinks this is an 

important Act. And I think it’s important that we take a look. 

Every time a minister makes comments, their second reading 

speech, it’s important to review this because then that sets the 

context, sets the stage for the legislation because if we don’t 

really review that and we don’t understand it, then we’ll maybe 

miss some significant parts. And the next time we get to hear 

from the minister is actually in committee, and that could be 

quite a while. Because I think there may be groups who will 

want to talk about this and ask some questions or want some 

clarification about this. 

 

So he rose and spoke about this and talked about the “. . . new 

legislation is being proposed to improve the effectiveness and 

efficiency of regional parks governance and to provide 

additional clarity to the regional park authorities that rely on 

this legislation and the subsequent regulations to guide their 

operations.” So clearly that’s an important thing. 

 

He acknowledges that this is, these parks offer “. . . a wide 

range of outdoor recreational services and facilities, which 

fulfill a need for local tourism and recreation opportunities.” 

And clearly they do. We know many people plan their summer 

holidays. They plan winter outings, whether it’s snowmobiling 

or cross-country skiing because these folks really, really do care 

about their parks. 

 

Now he talks about how the Act hasn’t really been upgraded 

since 1970s or even the ’60s and that he will want to really 

focus on five critical areas, and that will send a signal to our 

municipal, non-profit partners that they are working together. 

Maybe in secrecy they’re working together, but the public 

needs to know as well. 

 

“The first area of improvement . . . is to provide a much clearer 

description of the minister’s powers with regard to the regional 

parks . . . [system].” So he wants to lay out what they can do or 

what they can’t do as a minister, and I think that’s important 

and critical because there’s too many questions, particularly 

when we saw the LeRoy Leisureland situation where there’s too 

many questions about this minister and his Act. 

 

The second critical area of improvement, Mr. Speaker, talks 

about “. . . the authority to delegate certain minister’s powers to 

the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association via a formal 

administration agreement.” 

 

So again recognize the important role of the SRPA 

[Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association] and how they play 

a pivotal role in the administration of programs that are in the 

parks right across the province and how they serve, not only for 

a voice for the regional parks, but also providing important 

services like accreditation, marketing, provision of advice, and 

so on. Because you know, when you have these boards — and 

there’s some nearly 100 boards, I understand — if there’s 100 

parks, clearly there’s a lot of work and there’s a lot of capacity 

building. You can’t have people working on boards, it’s not a 

good situation if you’re asking people to assume responsibilities 

and you’re not providing training, you’re not developing them 

in terms of capacity to do the kind of things that people are 

expecting. And more and more people are expecting higher, 

higher standards from parks or any tourist service. We expect to 

be treated in a safe and hospitable and enjoyable manner. And 

how do you do that? It’s not just an easy thing that comes 

naturally. It takes a bit of work. 

 

And as well, how are you going to deal with the provincial or 

federal capital funding for infrastructure? It has to be done in a 

fair manner. It has to be done in a way that makes sense. And 

again I think it’s important that when we talk about asset 

management — and clearly we need to talk about regional parks 

in that manner, that they are a significant asset in a province 

like Saskatchewan — that we don’t take things for granted and 

say that things will continue on forevermore, that we actually 

have to have some strategic plans to support the kind of 

developments that we want to see in the regional parks. 

 

And he talks about how the role of the SRPA has grown 

significantly since the 1990s and how it’s important for them to 

develop structures and methods of how you move forward. And 

whether that’s peer-developed and -reviewed criteria in terms of 

funding, that’s very, very important. 

 

So it talks about how they’ve worked together with the 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association to develop this 

legislation. I think that’s very important and clearly we need to 

know more about that. And I hope that the SRPA will be letting 

us know if there’s any errors or omissions, because we know 

that when you work with a group, the group may be expecting 

that everything they’ve said is in the legislation, and lo and 

behold, some key, key pieces are missing and then you have 

unintended consequences. It may make a lot of sense to the 

provincial government and to the minister, but to the people on 

the ground, they have a big question mark and they’re not sure. 

They’re not sure why things have been left out. 

 

The third area that the minister wanted to address and highlight 

is the formal recognition of community and non-profit 

organizations in the establishment and operations of the 

regional park authorities, where previously only municipalities 

had this form of recognition. And so that leaves us with some 

questions about does he know, are there on the horizon some 

non-profit organizations that would like to form regional park 

authorities? Or are there some community groups that are out 

there? What kind of groups are these? Would they be service 

clubs like Kinsmen or a Lions group that are looking at this 

type of thing? Or is it environmental groups? 

 

So we have some questions about that because clearly when it 

was left up to the municipality there was some local 

accountability process in place, but moving this over to 

non-profit organizations, hopefully there’s still a line of 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

communication so that the local municipality knows what’s 

going on. Because it’s important, as we see in the Leisureland 

fiasco, when people don’t know because there is a secrecy or 

there’s a need-to-know-only basis, people are left out of the 

loop and miscommunication can happen. 

 

It’s clearly a situation where surprises can happen. And I know 

this government does have a lot of . . . It seems to operate by 

the surprise factor. That seems to be their mode of operating. 

They feel it’s quite all right to make big announcements that 

weren’t a part of their campaigns. We find that odd. We think 

that you should be upfront; you should be transparent and 

accountable. 

 

This is the oddest way we’ve seen of a government to operate, 

with the kind of surprises they put forward, whether it be the 

three more MLAs, or whether it be the labour legislation that 

this government did not campaign on. Clearly we think that it’s 

important that this government rethink this surprise approach to 

governance. We think that it doesn’t fit well with their 

accountability, transparency mantra that they’ve often talked 

about but don’t seem to care much about. Maybe it’s something 

they should do a little reading on, about how to do proper 

consultations. 

 

But clearly this is an area that we need to talk a little bit about 

and we have some questions about, you know. And I mean the 

minister talks about the “. . . changing demographics in rural 

Saskatchewan and the critical role that community 

organizations have come to play in supporting municipal 

partners in the management and operation of regional park 

authorities.” So we’ll be asking him to expand on what that 

really means in terms of the changing demographics and that 

link with community organizations and how that’s different 

than it was 20, 30, or 40 years ago. So very, very interesting to 

know more about that. 

 

Of course we always want to have our legislation updated and 

any redundant references removed and make it more clear, and 

if that’s the case, then that’s good. He talks about how the 

original piece of legislation was written in 1960 and how that 

several pieces have been moved to regulation, policy, or simply 

deleted. So if this an overhaul . . . And we need to know. We 

want to make sure there’s no unintended consequences because 

things have been left out or just ignored. 

 

So I think this is relatively straightforward in terms of that 

there’ll be lots of questions. But I do want to take a minute or 

two now to review the bill itself. We’ve got the framework for 

the minister. We know the context of what happened this 

summer, whether that’s the driving force of this, where the 

minister needs to get some more legislative powers or clarity 

around that because of some of the things that happened this 

summer, some of the challenges that have arisen from that. 

We’re not sure. We’re not sure what happened, what the end of 

that, what the final outcome of the sale is, but we know that 

he’s put it in a framework of five, five main reasons for driving 

this forward to do the overhaul of the regional parks overhaul, 

as I’ve said. 

 

And we have before us this new piece of legislation. And of 

course we want to talk about, we’re looking, we’re going to be 

carefully scrutinizing this so we don’t have any unintended 

consequences. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So as we go through it, it’s always interesting to take a look and 

talk about the definitions. And they’re relatively 

straightforward, but there are some that are missing. And I’ll 

come back to one that I don’t see in the interpretation, the 

definitions, and I think that we need to spend a little bit of time 

on that. 

 

But clearly what I do like about this piece of legislation is the 

purposes of the Act is clear. There are three main purposes. 

One, 3(a): 

 

(a) to encourage the appreciation and use of . . . cultural 

and recreational resources throughout Saskatchewan; 

 

(b) to assist municipalities, local government agencies 

and organizations in establishing and operating regional 

parks with a view to making the natural, cultural and 

recreational resources of Saskatchewan available to the 

public; 

 

(c) to facilitate the establishment and location of regional 

parks in such a way that the majority of Saskatchewan 

residents will be within a reasonable driving distance of a 

regional park. 

 

So I think that’s a laudable goal. It’d be interesting to know 

what we mean by a reasonable driving distance, as has changed 

in the last 30 or 40 years. But I think if that’s the goal, and these 

are the purposes of the Act, that’s a good thing. 

 

I am curious to know if they are anticipating more regional 

parks coming on stream, that there has been many people come 

forward to say, I’d like to . . . or if there’s been municipalities 

or community groups say, if it’s at all possible, could we be 

setting up more regional parks? That would be of interest to 

know, and we’ll have that question for sure. 

 

And then of course this talks about the administration of the Act 

and the clarity around responsibilities and powers of the 

minister, regional parks administration, where it talks about 

entering into administration agreements and how this may be 

done. And that’s all very well straightforward. 

 

I want to go to page 5 though, and this is one that really caught 

my eye. And I think this is a key point, and I do want to spend 

some time on this, Mr. Speaker. In fact we’ll be talking a lot 

about this in committee because I do have some questions about 

this. Part III, Regional Park Authorities, section 8(1): 

 

Constitution of regional park authority and 

establishment of regional park 

 

8(1) On receipt of an application pursuant to section 7 and 

if the minister is satisfied that it is in the public interest to 

do so, the minister may, by order: 

 

(a) constitute the regional park authority; and 

 

(b) establish the regional park to consist of the land 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

described in the application. 

 

The key word, Mr. Speaker, that I have and I’d like to explore 

further, is around the public interest. Now we all have in our 

own minds, what does public interest mean? We can all think 

about that, and we think we’re all on the same page and, you 

know, or what they could have maybe used, that if it makes 

common sense to do so, then to have the park. We all think we 

have an idea of what common sense is. But I was looking for 

the definition of what is public interest. If it is in the public 

interest to do so, then he will create the authority and grant the 

park to happen. 

 

I looked in the definitions area, and there’s no definition of 

what public interest is. So there’s no set of benchmarks about 

what public interest is. So we could’ve used any phrase. As I 

said, we could’ve used common sense. If it makes common 

sense to do so, the minister might do this and that. So I have a 

real concern about what does public interest mean. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government is not silent on what public 

interest is. In fact, I find this more and more of interest in this 

area because as I’ve been the Municipal Affairs critic, I’ve 

come to appreciate the work that’s been done around statements 

of provincial interest. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and other members and folks at home, this 

is something that . . . Municipal relations, it’s on their website, 

and it’s very, very important because this really speaks about 

what is public interest. They call it statements of provincial 

interest, though. And I think when we get into the committee, I 

will want to know why aren’t they using statements of 

provincial interest, or if it’s in the provincial interest to do so, 

they will create the park authority and establish a regional park 

to consist of land described by the application. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to describe for the folks at home, and 

maybe for some of the folks here in the House who aren’t clear 

of what the statements of provincial interests are. And it’s really 

easy to google; you can just google Saskatchewan provincial 

interests, and up it comes. And it’s a very . . . I have to say this 

is a very forward-thinking document of talking about how do 

we, how do we say, how do we state what is in the best interest 

for our province, the people, the land. What is our best interests 

here? 

 

So now some folks may say, you know, the member is going 

out on a limb here because it’s only used for planning. But I 

think everything we do here in this House really reflects and is 

connected to planning. So I want to just reflect on what this is. 

This comes from the community land use and subdivision 

section of Municipal relations. 

 

Statements of Provincial Interest 

 

Municipalities are authorized under The Planning and 

Development Act, 2007 to set policies governing the 

development of their communities . . . 

 

Now if you’re making regional parks, I think that could fit 

under development of communities by preparing and adopting 

official community plans and district plans containing policies 

to guide land use and community development, zoning bylaws 

and subdivision bylaws.  

 

These planning documents express community priorities 

and goals, and allow developers, business owners and 

homeowners to make informed decisions about purchasing 

and developing property in their community. 

 

Now there sounds like a case for those folks who bought 

Leisureland. They may want to make an informed decision 

about what they’ve just . . . if they purchase Leisureland. 

 

The Statements of Provincial Interest Regulations provide 

guidance to municipalities on a complex series of land use 

and development issues for municipalities, enabling them 

to facilitate the development of vibrant, safe, self-reliant, 

and sustainable municipalities. 

 

This is what the Municipal Affairs municipals relations website 

says. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the provincial oversight to ensure 

consistencies with these occur through official community plans 

and so forth. The 14 key areas of common planning interest to 

the province and municipalities are, how about agriculture? 

Talk about biodiversity, First Nations and Métis engagement, 

heritage and culture, intermunicipal co-operation, mineral 

resource and exploration, public safety, public works, recreation 

and tourism, residential development, sand and gravel, shore 

land and water bodies, source water protection, and 

transportation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there was ever a good statement of what the 

public interest is, it’s these that are called statements of 

provincial interest. And so I’m wondering why this legislation 

uses an archaic term like public interest when they should be 

using the provincial interest. And the minister should be 

measuring against these 14. Now some aren’t necessarily going 

to be relevant, but clearly some of them are when you’re talking 

about regional park authorities. When you’re talking about 

developing new regional parks or selling or transferring 

regional parks, it’s really important that the minister has some 

sort of lens other than this archaic term of public interest that’s 

not defined in the Act. Now maybe he has a sense, or the next 

minister will have a sense of what means. But we do have, we 

have identified what the provincial interests are. And why can’t 

they use these in determining when a regional park authority 

can be constituted and a new park be developed? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk a little bit about, go into 

some detail about what these provincial interests are all about. 

And I think it’s important. What I’m reading from are the 

regulations that were updated effective March 29th, 2012, so 

not that long ago. So clearly this government has been working 

on these and updating these. And this, I think, is a very . . . If 

we’re talking about new regional parks or how we’re going to 

work with regional parks and we’re updating things to 

modernize the language, then clearly they should coordinate 

with their municipal relations and their land use planning folks 

because they are the ones who can bring a lot of skills and 

expertise to the table. And if we’re going to just let that idly sit 

by and, as I say, use the public interest connotation which, 

undefined, leaves it up to anybody to decide what that means. 

 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

They talk about the introduction and I just want to read from the 

introduction so people at home get a sense of what this is all 

about. It comes from The Planning And Development Act, 2007. 

 

Land use planning facilitates the orderly development of 

land, resources, infrastructure and services, with a view to 

securing the economic, environmental, social and cultural 

well-being of urban and rural communities. The driving 

force in planning is often the need for change, the need for 

improved management or the need for a different pattern 

of land use, dictated by changing investment 

circumstances. 

 

And it goes on, talks about: 

 

These Statements of Provincial Interest link provincial and 

municipal objectives for land use planning and, as a result, 

directly affect the use of land and impact community 

development, economic growth and environmental 

stewardship. These Statements of Provincial Interest 

reflect the diversity of issues affecting Saskatchewan’s 

communities and regions, recognizing that wise 

management of development involves facilitating, 

promoting and sustaining growth, based on cooperative 

planning principles. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, clearly these would make a lot of sense when 

you’re talking about regional parks and how regional parks 

should be using all the skills available to make the best possible 

wise choices. And in fact the minister even alluded to how can 

we help regional parks and help the Regional Parks Association 

develop capacity on the boards. And clearly there’s a link with 

this. 

 

So I want to talk about what the planning principles are, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think that clearly if we’re going to talk about 

the public interest and we’re moving forward, this is the time to 

get it right. If we don’t get it right, then we have a problem. 

 

Talking about the planning principles: 

 

Both local decisions that meet the interests of the 

province and the planning process and principles that 

guide the decisions affecting land use and development 

are important in planning. The following principles 

provide a context for decision-making, are relevant to the 

design of . . . plans . . . 

 

And so forth and so on. 

 

(a) They should be comprehensive and sustainable; (b) they 

should be responsive and sensitive; (c) they should be respectful 

and balanced; efficient and effective; informed and innovative; 

and co-operative. 

 

Now I just think that makes a lot of sense. That makes a lot of 

sense when we’re talking about, how do we help people in their 

communities make the most of their local community and that 

they work co-operatively; they’re informed; they’re innovative; 

they’re efficient, effective, respectful, and balanced. I think this 

makes a lot of sense. 

 

So again this is why I think that when the minister talked about 

the public interest, we should be talking about provincial 

interests and talking about the statement so people have 

something to connect with and say this a very, very important 

piece to go on. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So I want to talk a little bit about what these statements of 

principles are. And the first one of course in rural 

Saskatchewan, this is key. The first statement of provincial 

interest is regarding agriculture and value-added agribusiness: 

“The province has an interest in supporting and promoting a 

sustainable and dynamic agricultural sector that optimizes the 

use of agricultural land for growth opportunities and 

diversification in primary agricultural production and 

value-added agribusiness.” 

 

So we have to take a look. Does that one meet the test of 

working with regional parks? I’m not sure, but I think we 

always have to think about that when we’re talking about rural 

Saskatchewan. What is the connection with agriculture? 

 

Number two, biodiversity and natural ecosystems. And the 

statement is, “The province has an interest in conserving 

Saskatchewan’s biodiversity, unique landscapes and ecosystems 

for present and future generations.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, clearly, clearly this is one where we would 

think it would make a lot of sense for the minister to take a look 

at. 

 

So in the provincial interest we know that we should be 

thinking about biodiversity and natural ecosystems. Is that 

minister going to take that into account when he talks about 

public interest? We don’t know. They’re using that archaic 

term, and I think they should replace it because we know that 

part of the provincial interest is biodiversity and natural 

ecosystems. This is clearly, clearly an important part when we 

come to regional parks. 

 

It goes on to talk about: 

 

To assist in meeting the province’s interests and 

biodiversity and natural ecosystems, planning documents 

and decisions shall, insofar as is practical: 

 

Consider the ecological value, integrity and 

management of wetlands . . . 

 

And so on and so forth. How to minimize, mitigate, or avoid 

developments that hurt the ecological integrity of wetlands; it 

really spells it out. So I think it’s important. “Consider 

dedication of critical or threatened habitat . . .” areas, and 

recognize the Crown rights and responsibilities and so forth. So 

this is very important. 

 

Here is another one that the Act is silent on and that is the third 

statement of interest regarding First Nations and Métis 

engagement. “The province has an interest in enhancing the 

participation of First Nations and Métis communities in land 

use planning and development processes.” 

 

The Act is silent on that. Doesn’t have to be because if it 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

referred to the provincial statement of interest, that would be 

part of it. I think that’s critical when we’re talking about parks, 

that we acknowledge that we need as part of our mindset to be 

thinking about First Nations and Métis and the engagement, if 

there needs to be a full consultation, that it’s there. And that’s 

so, so critical. 

 

The fourth one, heritage and culture. Clearly, clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, this is one that should be thought of when we’re 

talking about regional parks. They can do so much to help with 

heritage and culture. In fact that’s what the minister’s alluded to 

several times in his speech, but he’s silent when it comes to the 

legislation. And it doesn’t have to be that way. But I do want to 

make sure we understand that the province has an interest in 

ensuring that Saskatchewan’s culture and heritage resources are 

protected, conserved, and responsibly used. And clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, we cannot be silent on that, and yet in this piece of 

legislation the bill should not be silent either. 

 

Intermunicipal co-operation: “The province has an interest in 

promoting inter-municipal cooperation that facilitates strong 

partnerships, joint infrastructure and coordinated local 

development.” So, Mr. Speaker, here we have a case and, you 

know, sometimes we hear that we have too many RMs and this 

type of thing, but really what we need to do is make sure the 

RMs are co-operating. And we have a provincial interest to do 

what we can to facilitate that co-operation. We know we’re all 

in this province here together and if we can co-operate and 

make this province a little bit better, particularly in rural areas, 

then that’s a key goal that we need to do. 

 

The next one talks about planning documents and decisions to 

make sure that where you have strong planning . . . We also 

talked about mineral resource exploration. Clearly, you know, 

this is, this probably speaks to LeRoy directly when it talks 

about mineral resource exploration and development. How do 

you have development in rural Saskatchewan? And you need to 

. . . And I think LeRoy’s a prime example of where we may be 

seeing the largest, the world’s largest potash mine. And how do 

we make sure that development happens in a way that is 

sustainable and transparent and everybody is supportive? So it’s 

very important that we have that kind of happen, that thing 

happen in an orderly, thoughtful way and that there is an 

interest. The province has an interest in ensuring that happens. 

 

The seventh one talks about public safety and clearly, you 

know, in a province unfortunately like Saskatchewan where we 

do have a high record of accidents, and you know, this is one 

that we cannot take lightly or treat lightly, but it’s one that 

really . . . More than ever we see issues around public safety, 

and whether that’s the safety and security of individuals, 

communities, and property from natural or human-induced 

threats. And I think that when you have regional parks, the 

issues around snowmobiling, the issues around water — all of 

those are critically important. 

 

And so this is an interest in terms of public safety. You know, 

we talked about the foresters’ Act just a couple of days ago. 

And I know the government’s thinking about public safety but 

we should not be silent when we talk about regional parks. We 

don’t want to see issues around public safety when we talk 

about recreation. We want recreational activities happen in a 

safe, safe manner. We don’t want to see hazards and issues 

around that be left unaddressed. You cannot leave them 

unaddressed. You must deal with the issues and whether it’s 

snowmobiling or whether it’s water safety or whatever, you 

know, or whether it’s forest fires, grass fires, whatever, we need 

to make sure the issue around public safety . . . 

 

So again an important consideration when we talk about the 

provincial statement of interest, a much better phrase then the 

public interest because the public interest, if it’s undefined, 

really has no meaning at all. And I think when you have a 

statement that the government has worked on and is continually 

working on — we see it’s been updated just as recently as this 

March — clearly we need to make use of it. 

 

The eighth one talks about the public works and clearly this is 

one that the regional park folks are thinking a lot about because 

they’re concerned about funding. How do we make sure that 

regional parks have safe, healthy, reliable, and cost-effective 

public works? And this is important. This is in interest of the 

province. How do we make sure that happens in an organized, 

strategic, systematic way throughout the province? And clearly 

there is a way of planning for that and making appropriate 

decisions. So I think that again it’s just a few words, but why 

not use the tools and why is the government silent when it 

comes to provincial statements of interest when it should just be 

part of the Act that’s before us regarding regional park 

authorities? 

 

The ninth one, recreation and tourism. Now there’s one that 

relates to the regional parks, and the statement of interest says 

— I’ll read it: “The province has an interest in supporting a 

high quality of life for Saskatchewan’s citizens and visitors by 

providing and actively promoting recreation and tourism 

opportunities.” 

 

It talks about what we need in planning and how you make 

some of the decisions about that. It seems to me to make 

common sense that we should be talking about that when we’re 

talking about regional parks, and yet we’re not using that, the 

tools that we have to connect the dots. So that’s what we need 

to do, Mr. Speaker, is connect the dots because clearly the folks 

who really are committed to regional parks, who see this as a 

lifestyle in Saskatchewan, that’s an important component of 

who we are. But let’s do it in an effective, efficient manner, and 

I just think that connecting the dots here is hugely, hugely 

important. So I am curious to know why the minister is silent on 

talking about provincial interests and would rather use the 

archaic term of public interest. I have no, I really have no idea 

and I wish that when we get to committee and we’ll be asking 

about, would this be more appropriate language to be using. 

 

The 10th one talks about residential development, and more and 

more we’re seeing people move into cottage country, and of 

course that speaks to the public works; that speaks to the public 

safety. It talks about all of these components of our statement of 

interest. But clearly this is important, you know, and it talks 

about, “The province has an interest in citizens having access to 

a range of housing options to meet their needs and promote 

independence, security, health and dignity for individuals, 

enhancing the economic and social well being of communities.” 

 

Now quite often we often think of social housing, affordable 

housing, but in this case it is living in cottage country. Clearly 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

though, those folks have as much interest in being served well 

by good planning, whatever resources the province or the 

federal government can bring to the table, so clearly we need to 

pay attention to this — another check mark that should be 

looked after. The next one, sand and gravel, may not be so 

much but I think that we have to be aware that that is something 

that we think a lot about. You never really know what the 

impacts are for that. 

 

The 12th one, shore lands and water bodies. And this is an 

interesting one because clearly most regional parks like to have 

some water body within the park boundaries, and it’s important 

that we think about this in a meaningful, meaningful way. 

 

The statement of interest is, “The province has an interest in 

environmental stewardship, responsible development and public 

access to provincial water bodies and shore lands.” So here you 

have it clearly articulated that we do have an interest in what’s 

happening with our provincial water system. And I know the 

Minister of Environment has brought forward a water security 

Act, formerly the watershed authority Act. We’ve come a long 

way in understanding the importance of water in terms of the 

importance of life on earth, in our province, and how we cannot 

take that for granted. And this statement of interest articulates 

that and what happens along the riparian edges, shore lands and, 

you know, this is clearly, clearly important. 

 

And you know, we see the federal government actually moving 

a bit backward in this recently when it comes to Bill C-45, 

when they’ve talked about the changes to the navigable waters 

Act and the impact it will have. But we should be vigilant on 

this, Mr. Speaker. Clearly this is important. And regional parks 

is completely relevant to them because most regional parks 

value having a source of water that, in some form or shape, that 

brings a special component to their park. And source water 

protection — that we have an important commitment to 

protecting source, water sources that provide safe drinking 

water. And clearly in rural Saskatchewan and in parts that are 

more removed from where providing safe drinking water is a bit 

of a challenge, that is clearly a challenge. And we need to be 

thinking about that because we just assume, we assume that we 

will have safe drinking water in most places, and we want to do 

as much of that as we can. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I went on at length but I really do 

feel that these statements of provincial interest are very 

important. And I know that the minister talked about in his 

opening remarks that they had consulted across government 

with different departments, different ministries. So I am curious 

about why that was left out. It just seems to make a lot of sense 

to be using a tool that we already have in municipal relations 

that people have taken some time to develop. 

 

And it’s not a stranger, it’s not a strange one to the 

municipalities or to the RMs, I hope. And clearly they speak to 

lofty goals that we should all be aspiring to and what makes this 

province great and can make it even better. And clearly, when 

we think about our park systems — whether it’s provincial 

parks, federal parks, or regional parks or municipal parks, but 

tonight we’re talking about regional parks — they are 

something that we really value and makes our province so 

special. 

 

And so I think that we have some real concerns, clearly. I hope 

the minister will be thinking about what does he really mean 

about public interest. Why doesn’t he use statements of 

provincial interest instead? That would make a lot of sense to 

people and then we could all know what does he means by that. 

There are 14 benchmarks that are enunciated, clearly 

enunciated, whereas public interest is becoming kind of an 

archaic term. And it’s one that’s kind of odd that he would 

choose to use that term when he talks about modernizing 

language but he chooses a phrase that takes us back several 

decades. And I don’t know if it has meaning; maybe it does. 

And that’s what we’ll find out when we go to committee. 

 

[20:45] 

 

But I really think that we have an opportunity that we can make 

sure that we see these parks be as sustainable as they can be. 

And that in fact it’s a pleasure to be part of a board: you’re 

working in a co-operative manner; you’re feeling like you’re 

really, you know, contributing to your community that you’ve 

got the capacity to do all the things; and you have a sense that, 

you know, you’ve met all the benchmarks that the province has. 

And I think it’s important that they are updated. Clearly, they 

were updated as recently as March of this year and I don’t 

understand why that would be a problem. 

 

So we’ll have lots of questions about the remainder parts of the 

Act. I know I would like to go on even further about the land 

acquired for regional parks. We know a few years ago we had 

quite a debate. We had a good debate about The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act and how many acres are in these 

regional parks and is there come connection that we could talk 

about biodiversity and protecting biodiversity. I see that we 

don’t really have, under the lands contributing to the RAN 

[representative area network]. Regional parks aren’t part of that 

necessarily. Now they may be if they’re a Crown land, but I 

think that that’s not part of the discussion. But we’ll have that 

conversation later. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that while the minister has 

talked about the five reasons that he would like to see this move 

forward, I think there’s a lot of good reasons for it. I know that 

the folks at the Regional Parks Association, particularly 

Darlene, they do phenomenal work, phenomenal work, and they 

work to make every dollar count. And as they’ve pointed out, in 

fact it’s a multiplier effect, a significant multiplier effect. So 

they’re huge contributors to our communities. 

 

But we could even make this Act better if there aren’t those 

little gaps. And as I said, I just saw that public interest, and it 

just threw up big red flags for me. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

would now like to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 63, An Act 

respecting Regional Parks and making consequential 

amendments to other Acts. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

Bill No. 64 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 64 — The 

Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012/Loi de 

2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure indeed to speak tonight on Bill No. 64, The Regional 

Parks Consequential Amendments Act. And I think it’s an 

important piece of legislation. Of course it’s always interesting 

to read the amendments because really it focuses on the alcohol 

— there’s three parts — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act and talks about the impact of the authority not considering: 

 

. . . any application for any type of permit, other than a 

permit allowing the sale and consumption of beverage 

alcohol at a special occasion, for . . . premises located in a 

municipality that has passed a bylaw . . . [etc., etc.] 

 

But I think this is an interesting one. And I remember, as the 

minister of Environment, dealing with alcohol issues in certain 

weekends related to parks. And so I don’t know if this is related 

to that, but when I saw this, I thought, oh yes, I remember this. 

And so it’s clearly important to have all, as I said, I said it’s 

important to have all the i’s dotted and all the t’s crossed, and 

lessons learned in other parts can be brought forward into the 

new legislation. So this is an interesting one; I’m not sure if 

that’s the case. But we’ll be asking questions about the issues of 

alcohol and talking about alcohol bans and campgrounds and 

what that’s all related to. So I think this is a relatively 

straightforward piece. 

 

But then it talks about the fines and clearly this is . . . When 

we’ve talked about alcohol in parks, that it is one that we make 

sure we do the right thing. Clearly people want to enjoy their 

camping experience, and we know that in this day and age 

there’s always new challenges, new thoughts around using 

alcohol, and what does that mean in terms of our campgrounds. 

So we’ll have a lot of questions about what this really means. 

But we want to make sure everybody has an enjoyable 

experience when they come to the regional parks in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It will be interesting to know more background around this 

particular Act because, and maybe we’ll get that from the 

Regional Parks Association, because clearly they will have had 

a lot of experience with this and the impact that it has on the 

regional parks system because it’s a very different system in 

some ways than the provincial parks. But they have their unique 

challenges, and I’m sure that we’ll hear if this helps or hinders 

them in making sure that their camping experiences are as 

pleasurable as possible and that it meets the needs. 

 

And yet again if I may say, Mr. Speaker, this speaks to the 

provincial statement of interest. Because if there was ever a 

case for public safety, it’s around this issue and that was the 

case that was made around the May long weekend discussions. 

So clearly just to tie this all together . . . And again I would ask 

the minister to take a look at those statements of provincial 

interest because they do speak to public safety. 

 

And if this is the concern here, then that’s what we really need 

to talk about because not only are we talking about several of 

those interests — and whether that’s the tourism and making 

sure people want to come, they are felt welcomed and that they 

can have an enjoyable time — but also the whole issue about 

public safety and that we all need to be able to have a good time 

at a park and that there aren’t the long weekend fiascos that we 

had experienced a few years ago, and that’s come to an end. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that I know many of my 

colleagues have a few comments they want to say tonight about 

some of the other bills. But with that, I would now move 

adjournment of Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 65 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 65 — The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to have 

the opportunity to make a few remarks on Bill No. 65, An Act to 

amend The Securities Act, 1988 and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation mostly addresses one area 

identified by the minister in his remarks but also has a couple of 

other areas where the legislation makes some changes as it 

relates to The Securities Act. Prior to getting into the details of 

the three specific areas that are being addressed in this piece of 

legislation, it’s of course important to say that when we’re 

dealing with financial products it’s important that we ensure the 

appropriate protections are in place for investors. We know that 

individuals are encouraged to invest. That’s a good thing, Mr. 

Speaker, when people have a high level of financial literacy and 

they’re able to make decisions about their future. 

 

Last week I had the chance to talk about changes to the 

municipal pension plan, I believe it’s called, Mr. Speaker, and 

made some other comments about the need for individuals to 

have a high degree of confidence when they’re making financial 

decisions about their retirement and about their investments. It’s 

important, Mr. Speaker, for individuals to know that there’s a 

system there to protect them and a system to look out for them, 

Mr. Speaker, because with investments, of course, there is an 

aspect of risk. That’s normal and that’s expected. But, Mr. 

Speaker, individuals should have as many safeguards as 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

possible and have a clear understanding of what they are 

entering into when they consider different investment options. 

 

So when we’re dealing with securities, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

simply the realm of Saskatchewan, of course. This affects and 

has a huge interaction with what occurs nationally and what 

also occurs internationally, as we are not an island and we 

invest in markets that are around the world. 

 

So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that when we’re making 

decisions, when we’re looking at legislation, that we have the 

big view and the more narrow view to the province, Mr. 

Speaker. On a large level, we need to ensure that our actions are 

consistent with what is happening nationally and responding to 

what is happening internationally. But at the end of the day, 

we’re the Saskatchewan legislature and we have to take the 

interests of our constituents, the interest of Saskatchewan 

residents very much to heart and ensure that our actions are in 

fact in their best interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation, the main purpose as 

identified by the minister has to do with, it’s to introduce a 

regulatory framework for financial products known as 

over-the-counter derivatives. And the minister goes on to say in 

his speech: 

 

An over-the-counter or OTC derivative is an agreement 

where the price, value, delivery, or payment obligation is 

derived from an underlying interest. OTC derivatives are 

used to transfer the financial risk that an underlying 

interest poses to a company, an institution, or an individual 

to another entity that is willing to accept that risk. 

 

And the minister goes on to state, and this is an important 

differentiation to note, is that this legislation which is mostly 

addressing this issue of OTCs, Mr. Speaker, is different than 

derivatives that are traded on an exchange. So there is an 

important distinction there that listeners at home should not be 

confused about. 

 

An over-the-counter derivative, as the minister states, 

“Over-the-counter derivative trades, however, are not 

standardized or cleared in this manner. They are executed only 

through bilateral negotiation.” And the need for this legislation, 

it goes on to say, is because of the opaque nature of the OTC 

derivatives market. So, Mr. Speaker, I compliment those that 

drafted the speech because opaque does not show up in every 

second reading speech, and it’s nice to have that description as 

a reason for why this needs to occur. 

 

The piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, this is really 

Saskatchewan’s response to what is happening nationally. So 

it’s not the province acting in isolation on this particular issue 

as I understand it, but it’s Saskatchewan interacting with other 

provinces, ensuring that what’s happening in this province is 

consistent with what’s happening in other provinces. So there’s 

the need for it to be transferable across jurisdictions is 

important.  

 

And as the minister points out, with changes happening 

internationally and specifically within G20 [Group of 20] 

countries, it’s appropriate that Canada responds in such a way 

that the needs of potential investors here are being addressed 

and the necessary protections are in place as Canadian investors 

interact with or would enter into an OTC with another 

jurisdiction, which is important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s an important point, and it does have to do with, Mr. 

Speaker, how we do regulation here in the province and how we 

fit into the national scene. I would hope that the necessary 

discussions have occurred between the provincial level and the 

other jurisdictions. It is fairly complicated. It’s a fairly 

complicated issue. It’s not something that the average person 

would deal with on a regular basis but because it is not as 

common is no reason of course to not have the proper 

examination, proper legislation in place. And I apologize for the 

very awkward construction of that statement I just made, Mr. 

Speaker. What I’m trying to say is that even though this may 

not affect people on an everyday basis, it’s still important that 

we get right. That’s important that we do that. 

 

So I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the minister has had the 

correct negotiations with national counterparts in other 

provinces so that what’s happening with OTCs here in 

Saskatchewan, from this perspective of legislation, that it would 

be consistent and appropriate with respect to our interaction 

with other provinces, our interaction at the national level, and 

our interaction with other jurisdictions abroad. So that is the 

main area of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, that the minister is 

proposing this discussion of OTCs. 

 

The second area, Mr. Speaker, which isn’t as lengthy as the first 

one, as the minister describes in his statement: 

 

. . . this bill also provides that certain confidential records 

and information gathered by officials with the Financial 

and Consumer Affairs Authority may not be publicly 

disclosed. These include records relating to examination 

of market participants and self-regulatory organizations, 

review of reporting issuers, continuous disclosure records, 

investigations into alleged contravention of securities law, 

and enforcement proceedings. 

 

And the minister goes on to state, “Protecting the 

confidentiality of these records is critical to ensure the effective 

enforcement of securities legislation . . .”  

 

[21:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s identifying instances when certain records 

are withheld in order to allow the enforcement agencies to do 

their work. Different but not completely unrelated to or 

dissimilar to some of the legislation we looked at this afternoon 

that I spoke to with respect to when information can be 

withheld with respect to The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act. It’s the idea that there are instances where 

information should not be shared in order to facilitate the 

enforcement aspect, and that is an important thing, Mr. Speaker. 

Of course we still need to operate within an overall framework 

of transparency and openness and accountability to the public, 

so I would hope that this proposed change would strike that 

balance and would not needlessly tread on the principles of 

openness and transparency. So that may be something the 

minister may care to address when we get to the committee 

stage in providing a bit more information on that. 

 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

The final component, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation 

addresses, the amendment seeks to make, is to allow the fine 

collection branch with the Ministry of Justice, giving it 

authority to enforce and collect financial compensation orders. 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, the ability of the branch to obtain 

penalties from those that committed a wrongdoing in order for 

the victims of the crime to receive some sort of compensation 

for what has occurred. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of the first component 

of the legislation, the idea that we want a financial system that 

is predictable, that has high standards, provides accountability, 

transparency but also ensures that the right safeguards are in 

place. Because we’ve seen in instances, Mr. Speaker, over the 

course of time and in recent years where individuals who have 

invested their dollars, have trusted someone, have been taken 

advantage of. And often this happens, Mr. Speaker, with those 

that are vulnerable. It can happen with many different types of 

people. No one is immune to that sort of activity. But it’s 

important that we as legislators have the correct framework in 

place in order to allow this to happen as seldom as possible. 

And so I think that is a very important point. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if this third component that allows the 

collection branch of the Ministry of Justice to do its work, I 

hope that work can be done, Mr. Speaker, so that the interests of 

Saskatchewan people can be first and foremost, especially for 

those who have been taken advantage of or have found 

themselves in a situation that has hurt their financial well-being. 

That’s a situation that none of us would wish on anyone of 

course. 

 

So those are my remarks, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 65, covering 

three main areas. As I said, the primary area had to do with 

over-the-counter derivatives or OTCs. The second component, 

Mr. Speaker, was a bit more brief, addressing the particular 

issue of the Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority 

withholding information in appropriate cases. And the third 

component, Mr. Speaker, was allowing the collection branch of 

the Ministry of Justice to do its work in order to go after dollars 

that may have been obtained fraudulently or illegally. So with 

that I will conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 65, 

and move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 65, The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 

(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 45 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise this evening to join in debate on Bill No. 45, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

Two particular pieces of legislation involved in this item, Mr. 

Speaker: The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 

And why I mention that, Mr. Speaker, is that it will become 

apparent in terms of the discussion of the explanatory notes, but 

two main provisions would seem to be presented in this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. One is the reporting requirements as 

relates to the purchase of property by the corporation wherein 

under one of the pieces of legislation, the threshold for 

reporting is $100,000. Under the holding company legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, that threshold is $200,000, but wherein those 

thresholds will be removed and then set at the pleasure of the 

order in council provisions made by that government. The 

second of course, Mr. Speaker, is to change the borrowing limit 

for bonds available to SaskTel to 30 years. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I guess it’s interesting in these two 

provisions, for a government that has talked a lot about the need 

to be transparent . . . And I think their claim from the 2007 

platform was the drive to be the most transparent government in 

the history of the province. We hear a lot about accountability. 

We hear a lot about clarity. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 

interesting in these two measures, and again with one sort of 

variation for the holding company legislation and another for 

the SaskTel legislation, pure and simple, and then again, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of expanding the time limit on bonds 

available to borrowing for SaskTel to 30 years, 30 years, Mr. 

Speaker — three-quarters of my, you know, current lifetime — 

it’s again, Mr. Speaker, two measures that I don’t think have a 

lot to do with transparency, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think they 

have a lot to do with that constant sort of stewardship and the 

vigilance that needs to take place in terms of making sure that 

the corporation is responsive to current times. You know, that’s 

certainly part of the task of ensuring proper management of the 

corporations. And certainly there’s some lip service paid to that 

in the second reading speech from the minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again when you square these measures around (a) moving 

from a statutory reporting obligation in terms of the assembling 

of property on the part of SaskTel and the moving to a 30-year 

bond limit, Mr. Speaker, term limit, in the time involved in the 

maturation of those bonds, you’ve got two sets of measures that 

don’t add to accountability. They decrease accountability. They 

don’t provide for greater transparency, Mr. Speaker. They 

provide for less transparency. And I guess in the instance of the 

threshold matter, Mr. Speaker, again $100,000 in one piece of 

legislation and $200,000 in another. 

 

There are a few different talking points brought forward by the 

Minister of SaskTel when this legislation was provided in the 

House. One has to do with that minister saying that in terms of 

the increased expense involved in the assemblage of land for 

the purchase of cell tower locations, well if we’re going to be 

responsible as a corporation, the minister seems to argue, we 

need to remove this accountability provision.  

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, the accountability provision as it is 

isn’t raised to $300,000 or $200,000 being brought across in 

both pieces of legislation. There’s nothing akin to that, Mr. 

Speaker. What is done is that it’s removed altogether, and then 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

says, cabinet will now police itself on this. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, we find that very interesting because these measures 

were there for a reason. And certainly if they’re not keeping up 

with the times, that’s one thing. But there’s not a rationale being 

put forward in terms of what is a more appropriate threshold. 

What is being put forward is that we’re doing away with this 

altogether. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the arguments marshalled 

by the minister in the legislation, I don’t think it really cuts it, 

Mr. Speaker. And it certainly doesn’t square with what we’ve 

heard on the record previously about the claimed intent on the 

part of members opposite to be the most, most transparent 

government in the history of Saskatchewan. Well when we see 

measures like this, Mr. Speaker, we think something 

diametrically opposed to that is afoot. 

 

In terms of the 30-year change, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

borrowing for terms of 30 years, again they lay it at the feet of 

the Department of Finance in terms of this being a changing 

standard being promoted by the Department of Finance. And 

see now there’s . . . You know, what can they do but follow the 

directive of the Department of Finance? 

 

But it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the legislation that 

is affected. Part of it has to do with the financial administration 

bill, Mr. Speaker, or statute that was brought forward in 1993, 

in the early ’90s in this province, and that was in response to the 

Gass Commission. And the Gass Commission, of course, was 

struck after the ’91 election to open the books and get a very 

clear picture of where the finances were at and to try and rein in 

some of the practices that brought this province to the brink of 

ruin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in terms of these accountability provisions, like you know, 

$100,000 reporting threshold and how that relates to significant 

transactions and how they’re supposed to be registered with the 

Crown and Central Agencies Committee and how it relates to 

things like borrowing with a 30-year term limit, Mr. Speaker, 

that regime that was set in place after the disastrous sort of 

managing of the province’s finances in the ’80s, and how that 

came to light after ’91, how that was examined by the Gass 

Commission in ’93, and how pieces of legislation like The 

Financial Administration Act were brought in to try and close 

off those or remove the sort of rotten practices that had 

permeated a lot of the province’s books — and again, Mr. 

Speaker, that wasn’t the last word on things. And there are 

improvements to be made from thereafter. 

 

But that we would go take a step backwards like this, Mr. 

Speaker, with no, you know, increase the term limit but no sort 

of attendant improvements in the accountability provisions, and 

then in the case of the thresholds, Mr. Speaker, to remove them 

altogether and say that cabinet will do as it will, again, Mr. 

Speaker, this isn’t a measure, this isn’t a piece of legislation 

brought forward that helps accountability. This is a piece of 

legislation brought forward that hurts accountability. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, one of the . . . You know, it’s not very long 

ago that we’ve had some pretty amazing problems brought 

forward to the public’s attention that had a disastrous sort of 

impact on not just the North American economy but on the 

global economy, Mr. Speaker. And I’m speaking of what 

happened around some prime mortgages. And one of the 

problems with those mortgages, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that 

instead of the normal sort of 10, 15, 20 years was the way that 

they extended out into the future. 

 

And one of the reasons why I am sure it appeals to this 

government opposite, Mr. Speaker, is that if you can go to 

30-year borrowing, again you can amortize it over a much 

longer period of time and so it makes your current year 

financial statement look that much better. You can then go forth 

and cut ribbons on things. But how that jives with the 

amortization of the assets and the way that those depreciate, Mr. 

Speaker, well we’ll be interested to see how that plays out. 

 

But we’ll also be interested to see, Mr. Speaker, what sort of 

legacy is being left for not just the next generation but the 

generation after that. Because when you’re making 30-year 

financial commitments on behalf of the province, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not just about your kids but it’s about your grandkids that 

will be on the hook for this. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what happened in the ’80s 

in this province and the way that in the main that had to be paid 

for in the ’90s, and in some ways it’s still being paid for today, 

Mr. Speaker, you know, those kind of practices . . . And the 

Gass Commission in particular came forward to bring the kind 

of safeguards to bear that would hopefully put an end to that. 

 

[21:15] 

 

But in this case here, Mr. Speaker, we see backsliding. We see a 

return to practices that in a lot of ways didn’t foster the 

transparency that people demand, that didn’t provide the 

accountability that provides people with that ongoing sort of 

information where they can sit back and say, you know, I don’t 

know what kind of shell game you’re playing with the finances, 

but you’d better cut it out because it’s not just my well-being 

that you’re messing around with. It’s my children’s well-being 

and it’s my children’s children’s well-being. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you get into this government’s, you 

know, moving forward with 30-year borrowing provisions, I 

don’t think it’s a stretch to say, you know, you’d think we’d 

have learned that lesson in the immediate history of this 

province. But you know, I pray to God we don’t get into a 

situation where we have to learn the kind of lessons, the kind of 

hard decisions that were necessitated, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the way that the finances of this province got so badly screwed 

up by many of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that we 

thought we’d never be going back there again. But here we are 

with a measure that removes accountability, and here we are 

with a measure that not just, you know, for the next 5, 10, 15, 

20 years down the road, Mr. Speaker, but sets that borrowing 

out to 30 years. 

 

So when we look at this legislation, we’re going to be asking 

those questions, Mr. Speaker, about, what are the motivations? 

How does this jive with the financial health of the people’s 

books altogether? And again, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s, you 

know, it’s presented in fairly benign terms in terms of the 

second reading speech. But if you judge it against the history of 

this province and you judge it against the way that measures 

like this in the past have been used to get the people’s finances 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

into such a screwed-up situation that it takes literally decades to 

pay for it, when you see a 30-year borrowing horizon like this 

being stretched out in front of the province, Mr. Speaker, it 

can’t help but be cause for alarm. 

 

I know that many of my other colleagues desire to participate in 

this debate. And so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I will move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 45, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 46 — The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise again in debate this evening on Bill. No. 46, The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012. Again, 

Mr. Speaker, some of these measures in this province are 

questions of shared responsibility and shared activity between 

different sectors of not just levels of government but 

particularly in the case of the Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Commission, Mr. Speaker, dealing with employees from school 

divisions, from urban and rural municipalities, regional 

colleges, regional public libraries, and other local authorities 

within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MEPP or the municipal employees’ pension plan, Mr. Speaker, 

the membership consists of over 16,000 members and 4,000 

pensioners. And again, Mr. Speaker, there’s that shared work 

that goes between the different levels of government. And the 

fact that the legislation overall is seated with the province is not 

terribly surprising, Mr. Speaker. But again there are different 

capacities involved and there are different stakeholders at that 

table, certainly. 

 

Now this is a defined pension plan, Mr. Speaker, or defined 

benefit pension plan as opposed to a defined contribution 

pension plan, but and again, Mr. Speaker, the subject of some 

debate these days in terms of the difference between the defined 

contributions, defined benefits, and certainly in the city of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Finance, in 

introducing this piece of legislation, talked about the 

importance of two key issues around pensions, those being 

solvency and the fairness of pension plans. 

 

Certainly we know that here in the city of Regina there’s some 

work that needs be done to ensure that those pensionable 

benefits and income levels are there as they have been 

bargained, Mr. Speaker, as they have been paid for by the 

dollars coming forward from the organizations and the workers, 

Mr. Speaker. We know that there’s a fair amount of concern 

and, you know, there’s some deft work need be done around the 

solving of the pension problem, primarily in the city of Regina, 

but something that has impact throughout some other sectors as 

well. But something which, I am sure, the amendment 

contained in Bill No. 46 is of great interest to those individuals 

that are slugging it out trying to get a solution to that problem. 

 

Now again, Mr. Speaker, the actual provisions of the Act itself, 

perhaps not terribly revolutionary certainly. There’s a five-year 

review entailed in the legislation, the current sort of iteration 

have being passed in 1992 for The Pension Benefits Act. And in 

that five-year review, Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly some good 

work that comes forward. Certainly if you want to work to 

improve things, you should ask the people that are tasked with 

working on it and being responsible for it day to day. The 

review was last undertaken in late 2010, extending into 2011. 

And there are some interesting measures in that legislation or in 

the way that this legislation is rolled forward, both from that 

review and I’m sure from observation and investigation of other 

pieces of pension legislation around the country and in other 

provincial jurisdictions. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, there’s the commission review that has 

influenced changes and the other sort of need to align The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Act along with The Pension 

Benefits Act. 

 

First off, Mr. Speaker, there’s a proposed amendment that the 

legislation “will allow the commission to extend the terms of 

the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson at times when 

leadership continuity is vital and their original terms are nearing 

an end,” to quote the Finance minister’s second reading speech, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again a one-year extension of those terms not exactly 

revolutionary. We’ll be interested to see what more immediate 

justification is brought forward for those amendments but, you 

know, on the face of it, it would seem to be fairly reasonable. In 

aid of clarity, there are measures in the Act that will modify the 

existing legislation, and I quote, “to note that a simple majority 

of commission members is required for all decisions made by 

the commission.” 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the impact that has on 

standing in legal actions, it’ll be very . . . There are some 

interesting remarks from our leader on this side, the member 

from Lakeview, and certainly an individual that has a long and 

interesting career as it relates to law, but also to matters such as 

this, Mr. Speaker. And perhaps that more fulsome discussion of 

this awaits the move to committee. But for now I guess we just 

sort of noticed that we’re interested in what was the impetus for 

that change to the, again, modifying the Act “to note that a 

simple majority of commission members is required for all 

decisions made by the commission” as opposed to unanimous, 

Mr. Speaker, decisions or otherwise. 

 

The legislation, again in the minister’s second reading speech, 

claims that “It will align the Act with provincial pension 

legislation, provide for a lifetime pension benefit to be paid to 

an eligible surviving spouse where the member dies prior to 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

retirement, and it will eliminate ambiguity.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, that would seem to be a fairly laudable 

goal. And further, “The Act will be modified to clearly state 

that a spousal waiver to a pension benefit is revocable.” Again, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure building on some more immediate case 

law in the not too distant past, and I’m sure there are actions 

presently undergoing, but we await a more precise discussion of 

the grounds for which these measures will be brought forward. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be interesting to see how this jives 

with the work of the commission of review. It will be 

interesting to see how municipal stakeholders perceive this 

legislation, either responding or not to different things that 

they’ve raised with this government. Certainly we know that in 

terms of talking to educators, talking to health care 

professionals, talking to people that work in our libraries, 

people that work as firefighters, Mr. Speaker, police officers, 

the different people that are subject to or will be either directly 

or indirectly impacted by this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

there are a number of groups that we will be looking to consult 

in the days and weeks ahead to make sure that we’ve got their 

concerns firmly in mind as we approach this legislation. 

 

And so in aid of that work of further consultation, Mr. Speaker, 

and because I know I’ve got other colleagues that are quite 

anxious to participate in this debate, I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 47 — The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise to 

speak about The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 

amendment Act. 

 

This is effectively legislation that doesn’t do very much in the 

legislation. It has a name change from changing the Watershed 

Authority to the Water Security Agency, but other than that, 

there’s not much that happens in this particular legislation. But 

it’s absolutely crucial to look at what the intention of the 

government seems to be with this legislation. 

 

Now practically, the information that’s been provided by the 

Minister of Environment and officially from the departmental 

officials who have prepared information goes right to the heart 

of the point when they talk about the role of this agency “. . . is 

to ensure protection of water quality, maintenance of aquatic 

habitats, and sustainable water supplies.” And so effectively 

what it does is it brings together many of the various aspects 

around the protection of water into one piece of legislation. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Now this sounds like a laudable activity, but one of the 

concerns that I have, and I know many people in the community 

have, is that the traditional way that we managed our water in 

Saskatchewan through the use of a watershed authority which 

had the protection aspects and the Water Corporation which had 

many of the commercial aspects and then the public health 

protection of water quality being done in the Department of 

Health and also some of the rules around the protection of water 

that were in the Ministry of Agriculture, having various 

perspectives look at different aspects of the protection of water 

sometimes I think has a better protection in a broad way 

because you don’t end up with a central control around the 

water. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges for us in Saskatchewan 

is to make sure that we have a sufficient quantity of water, 

especially in the southern part of the province, and sufficient 

quality of water. We all know that Saskatchewan is well-known 

worldwide for water quality improvement equipment, and that 

directly relates to the fact that much of the water in southern 

Saskatchewan was not usable without being properly treated. So 

we have that kind of knowledge and that technology that’s been 

developed here and used worldwide. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we do have some major issues around the 

long-term supply of water. And one of the things that this bill 

seems to do, even though it’s really talking just about changes 

in the name, is that it eliminates some of the counterbalance of 

the environmental protection over and against the commercial 

use of water. And so the question becomes, within this 

particular water security agency, if there is a conflict between 

the use of water for a community and for people and the use of 

water in a potash mine or in some other mining activity or in an 

agriculture venture, how will some of these particular issues be 

dealt with? Will there be a public discussion that everybody 

will be involved with? Or will it all happen within this 

particular agency without much — or any — scrutiny by the 

community? 

 

Now this is an interesting question which we know will be 

absolutely important for the province of Saskatchewan and 

actually for the whole prairie water basin which effectively 

includes the Saskatchewan Nelson River system, parts of the 

Missouri Mississippi system, and obviously parts of the 

Mackenzie River system that flows to the North. All of these 

water areas, watershed areas are crucial to the long-term 

viability of Saskatchewan and of the Prairie provinces. 

 

Now sometimes when you look at this kind of legislation, you 

end up having a fairly narrow perspective. But I was reminded 

of some of the longer term effects of this particular legislation 

being done in the year 2012-2013 that it’s also a reflection back 

to the discussion about Saskatchewan and prairie water in the 

1950s. And I say this because we’re now at a point where 

Canada is renegotiating the Columbia River Treaty with the 

United States, and one of the top issue on the negotiation list is 



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

dealing with the First Nations rights around the use of the 

water, around fishing, around many of those things which were 

not taken into account when the original treaty was drafted. But 

there are few people in Saskatchewan that know how important 

this particular issue was in Saskatchewan during the 1950s. And 

I’ll tell you a little bit that I know about this so far, but I’ve 

been doing some more research on this. 

 

What we know is that there was a strong push from Premier 

Tommy Douglas towards the prime minister around making 

sure there was a clause in the Columbia River Treaty which 

would allow for the diversion of water over the Rocky 

Mountains into the Saskatchewan River system, both in the 

North Saskatchewan and into the Bow River, which then would 

flow into the South Saskatchewan River. And this discussion 

took place. 

 

And there were a number of prominent individuals who were 

involved in this discussion. They include Mr. Jim MacNeill 

who subsequently was a major water policy person in the 

federal government, in the OECD [Organisation for Economic 

Co-operation and Development] in Paris. And he’s probably 

most well-known as the Secretary General of the Brundtland 

Commission working on worldwide environmental issues. He 

also was in part of the discussion. 

 

It had Barry Strayer who was a federal government lawyer or a 

federal lawyer here in Saskatchewan; Mr. Cass-Beggs who at 

one point was the CEO [chief executive officer] and president 

of SaskPower; and Mr. Tommy Shoyama who at that point, I 

think, was the deputy minister of Finance. All of these people 

were involved in this discussion because there was a long-term 

concern about the melting of the glaciers in the Rocky 

Mountains which provide for a major source of water for the 

South Saskatchewan and the North Saskatchewan River. Often 

these glaciers are called the water towers of the prairie water 

system. And, for that matter, the Mackenzie and the Columbia 

River system, because that’s where there’s water that’s stored. 

 

So what happened was that these people here in Saskatchewan 

wanted to make sure or tried to make sure, but they ultimately 

weren’t successful 60 years ago, to get a clause which would 

allow for Canadian water, which was located in the Columbia 

River system, to be available in case there was another 

long-term drought on the Prairies. And you think about it, the 

’50s were only 20 years after the long, dry years of the ’30s. So 

people were speaking from experience about what happened on 

the Prairies when there wasn’t water available. And so when 

you talk about water security and this particular bill, you are 

talking about the long-term history of the Prairies. 

 

Now what we know since the ’50s is that our water scientists, 

that our biologists, our geologists, people who study the prairies 

have been able to reconstruct our climate on the prairies back 

now almost a thousand years by taking cores of trees that are 

still alive. There are some trees that are, I think, six, 700 years 

old. There are also logs that were used in building houses that 

were able to be dated back quite a long time. But most 

importantly they’ve been able to take core samples in the mud 

of lakes across the prairies and across up into the boreal forest. 

And what they’ve been able to show is that even though it was 

very dry in Saskatchewan in the ’30s, that was a very short 

drought and that there were actually quite a bit longer droughts 

within the last thousand years, and that one of the issues that 

we, as legislators in this particular legislature, need to worry 

about when we look at water security issues such as is 

mentioned in this particular legislation is that we have to do the 

preparation. We have to do the adaptation for a possible 60-year 

drought. 

 

And what does that mean for the kinds of use of water that this 

new legislation maybe allows without having the ability to 

balance off that particular use? And I know that right now our 

Canadian government and the lawyers hired by the government 

are renegotiating the continuation of the Columbia River Treaty 

. And I think this particular issue about inter-basin transfer of 

water over the mountains probably should be back on the 

agenda for the long-term health of Saskatchewan. Now it has 

many issues around biological material that’s transferred 

between water basins, but ultimately if we are in a situation 

where we have a warmer climate on the prairies which we’ve 

been seeing, but no water, it’s going to make it very difficult to 

live here. 

 

So does this water security legislation address some of those 

kinds of issues? I’m not certain. I think that it has some very 

vulnerable spots in it when it seems to collapse the ability of 

some other parts of the system providing a counterbalance on 

the commercial use of water. And if in fact this legislation has 

been drafted in a way to facilitate the commercial use of water 

without taking into account some of these long-term activities 

and without taking into account the necessary use of water by 

the people of Saskatchewan, then it’s on the wrong track. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have an obligation to present generations, 

but more importantly to future generations, to get this right. So 

I, as you can tell, I have some concerns about this very short 

Act which effectively is just a name change because of some of 

the conceptual pieces that seem to be missing in the plans for 

the use of water. And they talk about a 25-year water security 

plan when the people who actually are talking about water are 

thinking in centuries, because that’s the kind of plan that we 

need in Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I have some concerns 

about what has been set out here. And I know that these things 

have to be dealt with and I’m not sure they’re dealt with in 

what’s been presented to us if they’re only talking about 25 

years. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate on this matter, 

but I think we have many more days and months of discussion 

as we move forward on this particular topic. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 48 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

evening to enter in on the discussion on Bill No. 48, An Act to 

amend The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we’re looking at this piece of legislation, 

this issue in general, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, I think to 

recognize that the concern about greenhouse gases is not 

something that’s looked at in isolation, but it’s tied to the larger 

issue, Mr. Speaker, of climate change and the response that we 

in this province and in other jurisdictions are doing to the . . . in 

light of and with the awareness of the reality of climate change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we just came through a Throne Speech not too 

long ago that was virtually silent on the issue with respect to 

climate change. There wasn’t a recognition that this is a concern 

for the province and something that our own jurisdiction and 

other jurisdictions are indeed having to face. And I think that’s 

because, Mr. Speaker, on the opposite side, there is still a fairly 

high level of disbelief about climate change and the reality that 

it is. And I think that’s reflected in the lack of attention that we 

saw to it in the Throne Speech. But more importantly it’s a 

concern, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the government’s 

response to legislation and the level to which they take this as a 

serious issue and the level to which it is a priority for the 

government. 

 

The vast majority, Mr. Speaker, of the scientific community and 

other jurisdictions recognize that climate change is an issue. It 

is real and it’s a concern. I think of my own experience, Mr. 

Speaker, of tree planting many years in northern British 

Columbia and the number of times that I sat on a mountainside, 

looked down a valley, and instead of seeing all green would see 

huge swaths of red, which were dead pine trees, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the advance of mountain pine beetles and the 

spreading of mountain pine beetles because of the changing 

climate with the winters not being as cold as they once were, 

allowing pine beetles to spread from BC [British Columbia] 

across into Alberta and spreading to other parts of the country 

as well, as one example of an anecdotal nature of the reality, the 

implications that this has on industries. 

 

[21:45] 

 

I think also, Mr. Speaker, with some of the . . . Here in the 

legislature, we’ve had different opportunities where we have 

interest groups or advocacy groups come into the Assembly and 

talk about the reality of climate change. One would be the 

insurance industry, Mr. Speaker, who is required to insure 

properties when it comes to storms. And what we hear clearly 

from them, Mr. Speaker, on different instances, is that with 

climate change there’s a higher degree of and frequency of 

storms to a greater extent. This has huge implications for 

jurisdictions across the country. I think of, in my own 

constituency in Saskatoon Massey Place, the neighbourhood of 

Dundonald who has had a number of, over the course of a few 

summers, some really heavy storms that the experts 

characterized as the 1 in 100 year storms but were happening at 

a higher frequency, and the huge effect that this has for 

municipal infrastructure and then the implications for 

homeowners as there’s flooding and different concerns. 

 

So this is something that other jurisdictions recognize. It’s 

something that the insurance industry recognizes, Mr. Speaker, 

but I don’t feel as though it’s something that the Sask Party 

government takes seriously. 

 

In looking at this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 48, 

the purpose of this bill is to amend The Management and 

Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act which was passed in May 

of 2010. I understand “The amendment mirrors the key 

requirement of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 

1999 which gives any citizen the right to request the Minister of 

Environment to undertake an investigation of an alleged offence 

under The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Act and to be kept informed of the progress of the 

investigation.” I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is good that 

citizens can raise concerns and be kept informed about the 

progress of the investigation into those concerns. So that 

process in itself, Mr. Speaker, I think is a positive one. 

 

Now I understand that this amendment is required in order to 

allow the provincial government to negotiate a 

Canada-Saskatchewan equivalency agreement on the federal 

coal-fired electricity regulations that were just released in 

September 2012. And much of this was alluded to, Mr. Speaker, 

in the minister’s second reading remarks. 

 

We know that the governments of Nova Scotia and Canada 

have already released details of such an equivalency agreement. 

That deal gives Nova Scotia credit for its greenhouse gas and 

renewable energy targets. This allows the province to use its 

own regulatory approach instead of forcing it to follow the new 

federal regulations. 

 

We know that there are many similarities between Nova Scotia 

and Saskatchewan when it comes to electricity generation. Both 

have had to deal with the challenge of providing electricity to 

relatively small and broadly dispersed populations, and both 

have a history of reliance on coal-fired generation based on 

local coal supplies. We know the experience here in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, with that. 

 

But there’s been a pretty big difference between Nova Scotia 

and Saskatchewan. You see, in Nova Scotia back in 2007, the 

Progressive Conservative government announced that Nova 

Scotia would move to 20 per cent renewable power by 2013, 

and it introduced the Environmental Goals and Sustainable 

Prosperity Act which was intended to ensure that Nova Scotia 

has “. . . one of the cleanest and most sustainable environments 

in the world by the year 2020.” Included among the 21 

commitments within that legislation was a requirement to 

reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 10 per cent below 

1990 levels by 2020. That legislation passed with unanimous 

support in the Legislative Assembly on April 12th, 2007 — not 

too long ago. 

 

In early 2009, the Progressive Conservative government further 

strengthened their climate change action plan by putting in 

place firm emission reduction targets for Nova Scotia Power. 

Nova Scotia Power produces 46 per cent of the province’s 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

greenhouse gas emissions. Mr. Speaker, it’s important to point 

out that all of those steps happened under Progressive 

Conservatives. 

 

And then in June 2009, the Nova Scotia New Democrats were 

elected and they accelerated the renewable energy targets 

established earlier that year by their predecessors. The NDP 

[New Democratic Party] government expected 25 per cent of 

electricity to come from renewable sources by 2015 — five 

years earlier than the initial target, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you see, good things are happening in Nova Scotia on the 

renewable electricity front, and it started happening under 

Progressive Conservatives and it’s been accelerated under New 

Democrats. In the equivalency agreement between the 

governments of Canada and Nova Scotia, it gives credit to that 

province for their stringent greenhouse gas and renewable 

energy targets. 

 

So back to the situation here in the province, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan. We’ve certainly seen the reverse of what has 

happened in Nova Scotia. We had some pretty good things 

happening on this front during the Calvert administration, but 

instead of accelerating those things, the Sask Party significantly 

weakened them. It’s good that we’re a leader in carbon capture 

and storage, but it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not 

focusing very much on increase in our renewable portfolio or in 

having appropriate greenhouse gas emission targets. 

 

In fact, the minister’s speech at second reading didn’t even talk 

about renewables in the context of this equivalency agreement. 

It only talked about carbon capture and storage, and that’s 

worth noting, Mr. Speaker. We need to be supporting 

innovation on all fronts: conservation, efficiency, renewables, 

and carbon capture and storage. As the government finalizes the 

details of its equivalency agreement with the feds, I would hope 

that they would begin to lay out a plan that doesn’t focus solely 

on carbon capture and storage but seeks to also support 

innovation in the areas of conservation, efficiency, and 

renewables as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that if members opposite had a greater 

appreciation for climate change and the issues that we as a 

province will be confronted with, that this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, would have a different approach. It would have a more 

comprehensive approach, and it would have an approach that 

would in fact put us as leaders within the country in addressing 

the reduction of greenhouse gases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve appreciated the opportunity to make a few 

remarks on Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The Management and 

Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. With that I would move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 48, The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 49 — The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to wade 

into the discussion on Bill No. 49, An Act to amend The 

Forestry Professions Act. In looking at the minister’s 

comments, Mr. Speaker, what he has said, generally what he 

has said this bill is setting out to do is establishing “a legislated 

right to practice for professional foresters and forest 

technologists in Saskatchewan, elevating the forestry profession 

to the same level as other provinces do in Canada with similar 

legislation.” 

 

So I know this bill . . . As it is our role in opposition is to take a 

look at bills and to look at them at first blush and take it out to 

organizations and individuals who are impacted by that 

legislation, so that’s something that we will do, Mr. Speaker, 

because we know often the minister’s comments provide us 

with lots of information but not always all the information we 

need about a bill. 

 

So the one thing with regard to our forests, obviously they’re 

part of our natural heritage and part of our long-term future here 

in Saskatchewan. And so it’s obviously important that 

professional standards for those who manage and work in the 

forestry sector are strong. I’m always interested myself, as a 

registered social worker, in designations and what makes 

professionalism, or what makes a profession more professional 

or those who work in that profession more professional. As a 

social worker, you don’t just need a Bachelor of Social Work or 

a Master’s of Social Work. You need to be registered by the 

provincial association of social workers. And under that body, 

we’re governed by a code of ethics where there’s the mandate, 

or the requirement, to participate in ongoing professional 

development. So those kinds of things are very important when 

you need to be taken seriously as a profession. 

 

So with respect to this particular bill, exactly what it does . . . 

One of the things in walking through the bill, in enhancing or 

strengthening professional forestry designation, it also takes 

some of those out of that designation. And in here, in section 

2(m) “professional practice of forestry,” what ends up being 

removed is subclauses including teaching and research and the 

definition of the professional practice of forestry. It is 

considered that forestry experts practising these activities are 

not offering professional forestry services in Saskatchewan, but 

are engaged in the broader science of forestry. 

 

So I would like to know, and this is a question that we’ll have, 

Mr. Speaker, how do those educators and researchers feel about 

being taken out of the designation as professional foresters? I 

know that in the minister’s second reading comments, he does 

say that these changes are “fully supported by the Association 

of Saskatchewan Forestry Professionals and its membership, 

which come from [he says] industry, consulting academia, and 

government.” 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

But we’ve heard things in ministers’ second reading speeches 

before that haven’t always reflected what exactly has been 

done. We can look back to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

where the minister actually did talk about the consultation that 

she did, and we later learned that some of those groups with 

whom she said she’d consulted had in fact not been consulted. 

So I know, as I said, the minister here in this case has said that 

all the necessary people have been consulted with. But I know 

that in our role as the opposition, we will be going to the 

educators and the researchers to find out how exactly, or what 

exactly, they feel about being removed from this designation. 

 

There was actually something else that jumped out, not 

specifically about the Act, but that the minister commented 

about in his second reading speech as he says here, “As is noted 

in The Saskatchewan Plan for Growth: Vision 2020 and 

Beyond, forestry was the hardest hit industry in Saskatchewan 

during the worldwide economic downturn.” That may be the 

case, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the numbers to confirm or 

negate that. 

 

But what I do know is the film industry, Mr. Speaker, in 2008, 

actually five years leading up to 2008-2009, had production 

over $60 million and had peaked actually in that ’08-09 year, 

including the economic meltdown, and that peaked at 64 

million. So five years in a row with production values over 60 

million spent directly on production here in Saskatchewan, but 

the first year following the meltdown, production values 

dropped by 74 per cent to 17 million, Mr. Speaker. So I would 

argue that forestry wasn’t the only one, was not the only 

industry hard hit by the economic meltdown in 2008. But 

unfortunately in the case of the film industry, we have not seen 

a government to step up to recognize and acknowledge the 

importance of that creative industry in our economy and what 

that can mean to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So again, I’m glad that the government is acknowledging 

forestry as being . . . verbally acknowledging the importance of 

forestry here in Saskatchewan, but there are many other 

industries that are important here. And actually one of our best 

renewable resources I would say, I would argue, would be our 

people and in this case, this renewable resource are our creative 

people, Mr. Speaker. So I think that this industry also would 

have required and could have benefited from some support from 

the government. So there’s still many questions to ask. 

 

I don’t have any direct experience in forestry but I do actually 

. . . my sister is an urban forester in Saskatoon and has been for 

about 25 years. And there’s many designations that are required 

municipally or if you are an urban forester, what you need to 

do. For example, you need to become a member of the 

international association of arboriculturists. I’m having trouble 

once again, Mr. Speaker, with speaking here. But so that this is 

something that I do know well, the urban forestry side of things. 

And I know the minister talks about the need for public safety. 

He talks about pesticides and herbicides. And I know, on the 

municipal side, that those are things that are very important to 

those . . . spraying licence, all the requirements that you need to 

be able to do your job well and do your job safely.  

 

With that, I know, that there’s many things, as I said, we will be 

going to the stakeholders or people who should definitely have 

been consulted on this bill and to ensure that they in fact did 

receive the dialogue or participated in the dialogue that was 

necessary to ensure that this legislation is where it should be 

and is solving the problems or concerns that this legislation sets 

out to do. 

 

[22:00] 

 

As I’ve said here, in the past this government hasn’t always . . . 

its strong suit has not been consultation, Mr. Speaker. So it’s 

incumbent on us to make sure that this government is doing 

what it needs to do to make sure that those who are impacted by 

policy are in fact included in the shaping of that policy through 

real and meaningful dialogue, Mr. Speaker. So in terms of Bill 

No. 49, an Act to amend the forestry Act, I had mentioned 

earlier that this bill will remove teachers and researchers from 

the definition of the professional practice of forestry. 

 

The other thing that I haven’t mentioned yet actually is there’s a 

new provision being added. So, much like social work, you 

can’t call yourself a social worker even if you’ve got a Bachelor 

of Social Work degree or Master of Social Work degree. You’re 

not allowed to call yourself a social worker unless you’re 

registered as a social worker. And this is much the same as 

you’re not . . . the previous bill or the bill that’s being amended, 

you couldn’t call yourself a forester but you could still practise 

professional forestry. 

 

And this bill is actually changing that so it recognizes 

individuals. They’re adding a new provision that will prohibit 

persons not registered as a member of the association from 

engaging in the professional practice of forestry. So not only 

can you not call yourself a forester but you can’t practise, which 

is not the case with social work. There’s many people who . . . 

social work is a vast field — everything from counselling to 

community development to policy, Mr. Speaker — and you can 

still participate in those things even if you don’t call yourself a 

social worker, but this bill is changing this around forestry. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that I do have colleagues 

who will be interested in discussing this bill further. And, as I 

said, as we go along here we will be talking to impacted 

organizations and individuals to see what they have to say to 

ensure that the government has in fact connected with academia 

and everyone else involved. Because academia here is the one 

who really is impacted. But with that I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure tonight to rise and enter into the discussion, the debate 

around Bill No. 50, An Act to amend The Medical Profession 

Act, 1981. It seems relatively straightforward, but again, you 

know, it just speaks to some of the surprises this government 

does. And I’ll get more into that after I talk a little bit about the 

minister’s remarks. 

 

You know, it seems relatively straightforward. The minister 

rose, and I think the day it was November 5th so it’s been a 

while ago, since he rose in the second reading debate and gave 

his speech on Bill No. 50, The Medical Profession Amendment 

Act, 2012. And he talked about how the Ministry of Health is 

committed to working with self-regulating health professionals 

to ensure patient safety, and I guess that’s a very laudable goal. 

And of course we would agree with that. And we acknowledge 

of course that health professionals have the right within 

legislation to be self-regulating, and they’ve been working, 

they’ve been working with these health stakeholders to update 

the medical professional Act, which has been in force for 

several decades now, since 1981. 

 

Now these amendments were requested by the physicians and 

surgeons of the province here in Saskatchewan to support safe 

patient care and update its bylaw-making authority — two very 

laudable goals. And I think that’s very important. But we have 

to think and we have to dig deeper into this, Mr. Speaker. He 

talks about the Ministry of Health, I understand, supports 

physician and registered nurse engagement in the full scope of 

practice of medicine and nursing respectively. That makes 

sense. They also permit the college to respond more quickly to 

the anticipated national changes of categories of licensure of 

health professionals. This all seems relatively straightforward. 

So how could this be anything in terms of a surprise? It’s in the 

details. But it’s also sort of how this government speaks out of 

both sides of its mouth. 

 

And I will talk about this in a minute, but I do want you to stay 

tuned about this because it’s important, all right? He talks about 

how the amendments will . . . “help keep patients’ personal 

health information more secure. The college will now have a 

greater ability to maintain current address and contact 

information for physicians.” Clearly, that’s a good idea. We 

want to know where our doctors are in our communities and 

where you can reach them if there are concerns. If there are 

complaints, how do you contact these doctors? That’s very, 

very important. I am surprised actually, Mr. Speaker, that they 

haven’t been kept up to date and this is actually coming now 

forward as a piece of legislation. 

 

It’s sometimes odd what is the difference between regulation 

and legislation and just good practice. You would think this 

would be just a best practice issue, not requiring legislation to 

know where the doctors are actually living and making sure that 

they have that ability. And you know, it’s interesting the choice 

of word, of ability versus requirement, because this still seems 

to imply that there’s no obligation. I hope that it is within the 

Act that there is the obligation. 

 

So the college will be able to better communicate with doctors 

and keep information up to date when they join or leave a 

practice. Clearly that makes sense, and that is only reasonable, 

that when we’re talking about concerns or complaints around 

doctors, that you have good contact information. You know, 

where the doctors are practising and when they’ve left a 

practice and they’ve joined a new one, how do you get a hold of 

them? It is interesting because doctors do move around. 

 

Actually, you know, it was interesting, Mr. Speaker. I had a 

reason to write my own doctor just a few months ago. I was 

concerned about the situation, having to wait in a waiting room. 

And so the current doctor says, well why don’t you write the 

doctor a letter? So how do I find out where the doctor is? 

Actually, you know what I did? Just a little search on the 

Internet. Found out that’s he’s actually living in Calgary. And I 

hope I wrote the right doctor a letter, but I think I did. There’s 

not that many doctors of that last name out there. But we do 

have reasons every once in a while to get a hold of doctors and 

where they are, particularly because many of these practices are 

owners of their practices, and how do you contact them? In 

some way, Mr. Speaker, I’m just reminded it almost sounds like 

a consumer advocate’s or a consumer issue as well. So I think 

this is important. 

 

And of course that “. . . will support proper and secure storage, 

disposal, and transfer of patient files and improve disaster 

planning processes.” And of course patient files, that just 

reminds me of that incident about a year ago that was a picture 

on the front of the Leader-Post of the dumpster and patient files 

there. And of course this is very . . . It was a horrible situation 

that arose because here is something that we all dread to see — 

personal information files spread out in a dumpster on the front 

page of the local paper. That is absolutely something that 

should not, should not be happening. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is something that we can say is 

straightforward. He says he talked to, he: 

 

. . . consulted extensively with professional health 

provider organizations about the changes. And I’d like to 

thank the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 

Association, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical Nurses, 

the Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists, the Registered 

Psychiatric Nurses Association . . . and all of our . . . 

health authorities. 

 

I wonder did the Ministry of Health consult with the Privacy 

Commissioner? If they didn’t consult with the Privacy 

Commissioner, then that’s a huge oversight, particularly when 

we talk about having proper and secure storage and disposal 

and transfer of patient files. And it appears, by the minister’s 

own words, he didn’t consult with the Privacy Commissioner. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a huge gap. This is a huge gap. And so 

clearly we need to hear . . . In fact actually I think this is 

something we’ll do tomorrow is call the Privacy Commissioner 

about this bill, about No. 50. 

 

It says, by the minister’s own comments, that he’s not consulted 

with the Privacy Commissioner. And here we have something 

that deals with that very thing, that he was in the picture in the 

front of the Leader-Post a year ago, and they have neglected to 

consult him. Here again just the, you know . . . I just shake my 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

head. I shake my head about their . . . They need a checklist of 

who they consult with. 

 

First of all, you should make sure you consult with the officers 

of the legislature. They might have something to say about this. 

They might not. But who knows? When you’re talking about 

supporting proper and secure storage, disposal, and transfer of 

patient files, you might think, you might think it’s common 

sense or in the public interest — in the public interest; they love 

that word — might be in the public interest to consult with the 

Privacy Commissioner but . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How about the public? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes. But here you have a glaring omission, a 

glaring omission. And they expect us to think, well this Act 

basically should just go straight forward. I have some severe, 

grave concerns about this because, as you read through the list 

of who they thank with their consultations, one big glaring 

omission, the Privacy Commissioner. 

 

So I’d be curious, I’d be very curious to know if they have 

anything to say about this because I think there is some real, 

real concerns here. And I’m actually quite amazed because 

usually there’s better work, better work done here. And I don’t 

know whether it was poor writing of the minister’s speech or 

poor work in terms of consultation or poor work in terms of the 

actual bill. 

 

But speaking of public consultations reminds me of what’s 

happening within our own area of the lack of consultation with 

people in this province in terms of their workplaces. And 

whether you’re a doctor or a nurse or a teacher or a firefighter 

or somebody who works at the co-op, we’re seeing now this 

government launching one of their biggest overhauls of labour 

legislation in Saskatchewan. They are putting together some 15 

pieces of legislation about the workplace. 

 

Now it’s interesting that the Health folks have gone ahead and 

done work around The Medical Profession Act. And you know, 

last May, in fact it was May 2nd when the Minister of Labour 

launched a public consultation, a so-called consultation . . . We 

in fact called it a sham of a consultation, but it had some 180 

questions. And there were some sections in the . . . Well it 

caught everybody off guard. Everybody wondered, where did 

this come from? What was this all about? But there were some 

professions in that document that were really surprised they 

were being included in the discussion paper. And I’m talking 

about the teachers under their legislation. Why were they 

included? The firefighters, why were they included? And then I 

look at this, and I see this bill coming forward about nurses and 

doctors. So here you have a government that’s all over the map 

when it comes to professionals. 

 

In this same session we’re going to be dealing with the 

employment code which may or may not have anything to do 

with teachers or firefighters. The minister threw out those 

questions, and he just says, hey I’m just asking. I don’t really 

mean all these questions. I’m just asking. But it definitely got a 

lot of people upset. I know when we met with the teachers, they 

were wondering, what did we do? Why are we part of this 

conversation? We have our own legislation. We are our own 

profession. And of course they, you know, they’re very 

supportive of fair, equitable, and safe workplaces. Like they 

don’t want to be mistaken here, but they’re saying, our system 

is working well enough. Our system’s working well enough. 

Why are you throwing us in with this whole idea of changing 

the labour laws in Saskatchewan? Firefighters were the same. 

They’re wondering, why are they being thrown in? Things are 

working well in terms of how their workplaces are operating. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Of course there are the day-to-day challenges and of course 

when it comes to bargaining for new contracts, and that happens 

the same whether you’re a doctor, a nurse, a teacher, a 

firefighter, a police officer, except for when you’re a police 

officer in Weyburn. I understand that police officers in 

Weyburn have severe concerns right now, and they’re looking 

at some job action. We don’t know what’s going to happen 

there. But clearly, Mr. Speaker, the inconsistency of this 

government about how they are approaching professionals in 

Saskatchewan is something to be amazed at. 

 

And I know here we have a piece of legislation in front of us 

that’s moving forward as if the status quo in the . . . And you 

know, I think the way that we’ve normally done things were to 

treat the professionals with respect that were due them and to 

consult with them and work to update their legislation. But not 

all professions are being treated equally or treated fairly. Some 

are being asked to really re-examine what they’re all about, the 

teachers and the firefighters. Now I don’t know why the 

Minister of Labour decided that it would be those two groups 

that need to be thrown into the mix, why they had to be put 

through a rationalization process where they’re being asked by 

the government to support or to give reasons why they should 

have their own unique legislation. Of course, that’s been well 

established for many years. And here we have a situation with 

doctors and nurses and a, you know . . . And as they talked 

about whether it’s the psychiatric nurses, the practical nurses, 

the registered nurses — because there’s many different types 

that you have to recognize the unique abilities, capabilities of 

each — why is it that there’s this inconsistency this fall with 

this government about how it’s dealing with professionals in 

their workplace? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a real question when it 

comes to what this government talks about when it talks about 

the public interest. How does this better serve the public interest 

when we have this inconsistent way of relating to professionals 

in Saskatchewan? You know, we just had the arborists, the 

discussion around professional foresters, and now we’re having 

this discussion around The Medical Profession Amendment Act. 

So there’s some real inconsistencies 

 

And you know, I think this comes from how this government 

approached labour law. You know, back in the election, they 

made no promises that they were going to do this massive 

overhaul of labour legislation here in Saskatchewan. And then 

all of a sudden on May 2nd, they say shazam, here we have 15 

pieces of labour legislation that’s going to be hammered 

together into this new employment code, which nobody knew 

the reason why and nobody knows where we’re going to see it. 

But you know, we have only nine more days — eight more 

days. We’re into the dying moments of the ninth last 

government business day before Christmas. Nobody knows 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2012 

when we’re actually going to see it, but we’re having bits of it 

sort of being leaked out and that’s really unfair. 

 

That’s very unfair, Mr. Speaker, that we see this way of 

approaching working people in this province. And whether 

they’re the professionals such as teachers or firefighters or 

nurses or doctors, those that would be covered under The 

Medical Profession Act, they all deserve to be treated with 

respect. And they all deserve to be treated with fairness and 

they all deserve to be treated with a relationship that’s based on 

some sound principles of open and fair dialogue. And I don’t 

see that in this Act and with this government as they move 

forward with how they relate to the working men and women 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about this amendment Act, as I 

said, on one hand it seems relatively straightforward but I do 

have some questions and we will have many, many questions. 

And I just want to review this because again, if the minister has 

not heard this and the folks in TV land or over in department 

land, I do think it’s a glaring omission that when, as the 

minister said — and I’ll read this again — he talks about these, 

and I will quote this: “Mr. Speaker, these amendments will also 

help keep patients’ personal health information more secure.” 

 

Then he goes on to say, “This, Mr. Speaker, will support proper 

and secure storage, disposal, and transfer of patient files and 

improve disaster planning processes.” So he talks about, “will 

support proper and secure storage, disposal, and transfer of 

patient files.” And we’ve got big questions about that, Mr. 

Speaker, because he’s neglected to really consult our officer of 

the legislature, the Privacy Commissioner, who has seen this 

first-hand. 

 

Now I don’t have the recommendations from him in front of 

me, but I’m sure he’s written about this extensively, and I think 

we need to get that. And I said, we’ll be calling tomorrow and 

saying, listen, do you know this Bill 50? What do you think 

about this? Because clearly this government is raising it high 

upon the flagpole and saying, let’s all salute it; it’s a good job 

done. But you know, I think some of it may be made out of 

whole cloth when it comes to not consulting with the folks that 

really, really matter. 

 

And of course, you know, not only not consulting with the 

Privacy Commissioner but just even having some public 

consultations about this. What does this matter? What do these 

things matter? Well we know, and I believe it to be true but I 

could be corrected, but on many professional boards there are 

members representing the public interest on them. There’s one 

or two members of the public who are placed on the board to 

keep an eye, to represent the public interest — not the 

provincial interest. 

 

I want to make sure we separate the two, because I have talked 

at length tonight about the provincial interest. But the public 

interest, has the public been aware of what these changes mean 

and have they gone out and done any kind of surveying, taking 

of some polls just to get some feedback about what are the 

priorities when it comes around the medical professions, when 

it comes to nurses and physicians? What are the public’s 

concerns when it comes to these professions? Are these 

addressing those concerns, I mean, or is this just an internal 

thing? 

 

Because, you know, clearly as we all can understand, the issues 

around health care is very much a public issue. And many of us 

have opinions about doctors and nurses, and how do we make 

sure that if we have any concerns, do we know how to access 

the college and do we know how to lodge complaints? Do we 

know how to send . . . When things are going well, many of us 

had very positive experiences, and how do we share that kind of 

information? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that I’d be curious to know, has there 

been any sort of external research done in terms of what are the 

public’s views about how we can improve the professional 

aspect here? So I think that I would be very interested in 

hearing those kinds of insights. I too think that they would be 

valuable insights, and we need to hear from them. And if we’re 

improving our health system . . . And this is what the minister 

says is what we want to do. He says: 

 

I believe these amendments are a positive step forward for 

our health system. They support our efforts to provide the 

safest possible health care environments for patients and 

health providers. 

 

So has he talked to the patients? What do patients think about 

these? What should we be doing to make sure patients feel like 

they’ve been listened to, that they’ve been the first group that 

we’ve been talking to? That’s critical. That’s very critical. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I know that time is getting late 

here, but I do want to just sum up a couple of concerns that I 

have. I want to say and reiterate the concerns I have about the 

inconsistency of how this government has been approaching the 

professional men and women here in Saskatchewan, and the 

whole impact of this new employment code and how we’re 

waiting to hear what that means. And we think it will be any 

day. Unfortunately I bet it will be in some time in early 

December when we really don’t get a chance to debate it. We’ll 

hear over the next week or two bits and pieces through the 

media as the government tries out some trial balloons. 

 

I was interested to hear that the minister said today that he 

would entertain some common sense House amendments to that 

bill, but, Mr. Speaker, that clearly that we have some real 

concerns about the inconsistencies with that. We have some real 

concerns about the fact that the ministry has not consulted with 

the Privacy Commissioner or the minister has not alluded to it 

in this speech. We think that’s a priority that we will be raising. 

 

We also have a concern about whether or not patients were 

consulted, the public being consulted. The minister did not 

make any reference to any kind of public consultation. Of 

course it would be amazing if they had a public meeting about 

it. They would not have a public meeting. I mean it’s like, it’s 

Dracula; it’s like Dracula and daylight — these guys and a 

public meeting, you know. So I’m not surprised that there’s 

been no public meetings, but that does not mean they still can 

. . . It’s still a reality that they can talk to the public. They can 

talk to the patient about, what do you think about the 

professions? What can we do to make sure public health is 

delivered even better? Do patients have an idea about that type 

of thing? 



November 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

So, Mr. Speaker, it seems like a relatively straightforward piece 

of legislation, but as I’ve said tonight that there are some 

concerns, and of course we will raise those concerns and we 

will continue to raise those concerns because clearly, as you 

have a provincial budget with so much of it going towards 

health care, we make sure this has got to be done right. 

 

We do not want to see, we absolutely don’t want to see what we 

saw and in front of the Leader-Post just last year with a 

dumpster full of public health records across the ground. That 

cannot happen again. That absolutely cannot happen again. And 

so if this bill goes to that to achieve that, then that’s the right 

thing. But excluding the Privacy Commissioner is just no way 

of starting to get that right. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think in many ways we’ve seen either a 

flawed minister’s speech or a flawed bill. I don’t know what it 

is, but we will determine over the next couple of weeks what 

really is at the root of this. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a pleasure to talk about Bill 

No. 50, An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981, but 

I think it’s important that we now adjourn the debate on Bill 

No. 50. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 50, the medical professions Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? I gather we’re carrying on.  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 

1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2013 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2014 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2016 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2019 

 Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2028 

 Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2028 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2030 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2032 

 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2036 

 Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2038 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


