




















































Hansard: October 31, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1693 

 October 31, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege on 

behalf of members on this side of the House, and perhaps all 

members, although I’m sure someone on the other side will 

want to stand and introduce a very special guest that’s seated in 

your gallery, someone who’s a guest, but no stranger to this 

Legislative Assembly Building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ray Carr has joined us. We had a chance to have a 

formal farewell on the occasion of his retirement today, earlier 

today, when all members were able to attend. We want to 

welcome him here to his Assembly to watch the proceedings, as 

well as Anne and members of the family that have joined us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a great privilege to be able to work in this 

building, and for me one of the best experiences is walking 

through that front door. That entryway should be enough but, 

Mr. Speaker, it was even better when Ray was at that desk with 

his always-friendly greeting and his knowledge of everybody 

that’s worked in the building for the last 16 years — I think, for 

as long as he’s been here — and his willingness to engage in a 

discussion to start the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will always appreciate the fact that not only were 

those greetings afforded all of us and that friendship accorded 

all of us, but it’s also true that on occasion in my office there 

would appear some magazine, some periodicals featuring the 

sale of classic cars. You get to do a lot of reading on the job, 

and that’s some of my favourite reading to do. And so I want to 

thank the supplier for some of those periodicals, as well as to 

acknowledge his service and thank him very much for his 

service to this Legislative Building and to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Premier on behalf of the official opposition, and I 

would say on behalf of all people who are somewhat 

intimidated coming into this building, to say thank you to Ray 

for the personality that you’ve been able to provide to this 

building. 

 

A couple of weeks ago when we were celebrating the 100th 

anniversary of the building of this building, one of the things 

that I referenced in my speech was the fact that we have a 

building with new rug, new lots of things, but it’s the people 

that make the difference here. And Ray, you and many others 

were ones that I was thinking about when I said that because it 

is the people that are part of that. So thank you very much, Ray, 

for everything that you’ve done. And Ray and Anne, have a 

great trip. And we look forward to seeing you coming to visit us 

regularly because we’ll want to get caught up on all the things 

that you’ve kept us informed about over 16 years. So thank you. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I also want to 

introduce my parents who are sitting here on the floor. And I 

specifically invited them to come today because over the years 

they visited regularly with Ray, and they wanted to be part of 

the celebration as well. But my parents, Tom and Randi Nilson, 

who now have moved from my riding into the member from 

Regina Douglas Park, and so I’m sure that he will take care of 

them. They have spent many hours in this building, my father 

especially over the years in the library because he did lots of 

research about Saskatchewan here in the library. So, welcome. I 

ask all the members to welcome my parents here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the 

west gallery, it gives me great pleasure to introduce two visiting 

scholars from Malawi. They are Mrs. Ella Cindy Ulaya. She is 

director of Management Development Centre at the University 

of Malawi Polytechnic. And Mr. Victor Lordwin Chikoti, he’s a 

lecturer in the department of language and communication 

studies at that same institution. 

 

They have been in Regina since October 22nd and will be 

returning home on November 11th. They’ve indicated that 

when they return home, they are going to take back the weather 

that we’re having here and leave some nice Malawi weather 

behind. They are here as a result of an agreement signed when 

Dr. Vianne Timmons, president and vice-chancellor of the 

University of Regina visited Malawi in May of 2011. Mr. 

Chikoti and Mrs. Ulaya have been learning about the marketing 

of higher education institutions, their courses and programs. 

Also they are learning strategies for the design, development, 

and implementation of a marketing plan for the Polytechnic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish these two visiting scholars from Malawi the 

very best in their future endeavours, and I hope their time in 

Saskatchewan is rewarding and enjoyable. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker, and I would ask that all members join me in 

welcoming them to the Legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

honourable Assembly, Mr. Roger Pederson, seated in the west 

gallery. Give us a little wave there, Roger. Thank you. Roger is 

president of the Saskatchewan Irrigation Projects Association, 

or SIPA for short. Irrigation has been a priority for our 

government and will continue to be so in the future, as outlined 

in our growth plan and the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I met with Roger earlier this morning, and we had a good 

discussion as always. And we appreciate all the work that Roger 

and his association do and the good working relationship that 

we have with them. I ask all members of this honourable 

Assembly to welcome Roger. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to take this opportunity to join 

with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2012 

welcoming Ray and Anne Carr into the legislature. This is the 

first time that Ray has actually sat in the Chamber to watch 

events happening in place here. So after 16 years, it’s about 

time. 

 

I really enjoyed visiting with Ray when I would come into the 

Assembly at the front door. He would talk to me all about 

Africa and even taught me a little saying. So, Ray, buy a 

donkey. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to present a petition calling for greater protection for late-night 

retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know that other 

provinces such as British Columbia and others have brought 

several safety precautions through law, including a requirement 

that workers cannot be alone during late-night, early morning 

hours. And if they are required to work, there must be protective 

barriers such as locked doors and protective glass. I’d like to 

read the prayer. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Jimmy’s law, to 

ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 

want to present a petition today in reference to the cell coverage 

in northwestern Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Undertake as soon as possible to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nations 

along with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and 

Jans Bay; Buffalo River First Nations, also known as 

Dillon; and the neighbouring communities of Michel 

village and St. George’s Hill; English River First Nations, 

also known as Patuanak and the hamlet of Patuanak; and 

Birch Narrows First Nations along with the community of 

Turnor Lake including all the neighbouring communities 

in each of those areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition, this 

petition today, are primarily from Canoe Lake, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates the finances of our 

province. And the prayers reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with a fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Pennant, Success, and Swift Current. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of the leadership and community of Wollaston Lake 

that the Government of Saskatchewan stop turning their backs 

on the people from northern Saskatchewan and start investing in 

public highways in the North. And the prayer reads as: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the construction on the 

road to Wollaston Lake, which was started under the 

previous NDP government, has shown little to no 

progress and must be completed quickly. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of Wollaston. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Congratulations to Saskatchewan Performer 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 

opportunity to celebrate the most recent success for 

Saskatchewan singer, songwriter, and pianist Jeffery Straker. 

Born and raised in Punnichy, Saskatchewan, he now divides his 

time between Toronto and Regina. Jeffery’s talents recently 

earned him two music award nominations recently for best pop 

song and video of the year. He will be going to Las Vegas in 

December to take part in the awards ceremony, and we wish 

him great success. 

 

Jeffery is an eclectic musician, having been compared to 

musicians such as Ben Folds, Harry Chapin, Sarah Slean, and 

early Elton John. He has produced a variety of albums 

beginning in 2003 and is constantly touring on the national and 

international stage, performing up to 100 shows a year. One of 

his music videos made it to no. 6 position on Canada’s 

MuchMoreMusic network’s Countdown.  

 

At the beginning of this month, Mr. Speaker, he released his 

new album Vagabond. Critics are raving about the album with 

the Toronto Star critic writing: 



October 31, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

Let’s cut to the chase, Vagabond is one of the most 

faultlessly conceived and meticulously executed albums 

in any genre to come out of Canada in a long time, 

shifting moods and lyrics framed by thrilling chord 

changes. There’s rarely a note, chord, or word too many 

or too few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the entire Legislative Assembly to please 

join me in extending hardy congratulations to Jeffery for his 

recent album release and two most recent award nominations. 

We wish him the best of luck. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Remembering Randell Morris 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month 

a great Saskatchewan educator, a leader in the First Nations 

community and a good friend of mine, and frankly, a friend of 

the province, passed away. Randell Morris was 47 and in the 

prime of his career as president and CEO [chief executive 

officer] of the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. 

Upon his passing, a journalist noted, “I can scour the 

community and I couldn’t think of anybody who didn’t like 

Randell Morris. He got along with everyone smashingly.”  

 

Mr. Speaker, I can attest to the fact that this is true. He was just 

simply a wonderful guy, a man of equanimity. He was 

good-hearted and he was funny. You didn’t want to be on the 

business side of his wit, and he was unfailingly positive, Mr. 

Speaker. What’s also true about Randell is that he was driven. 

He was driven by his passion for First Nations education and 

then, after the education was complete, for those First Nations 

and all of us to be fully engaged in the economy to our 

potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s no surprise that while he was CEO of SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies], enrolment was 

up 33 per cent. It’s no surprise that completion rates were up 

significantly. We ought not to be surprised by the number of 

innovative partnerships that he struck and carried through as the 

president of SIIT. 

 

We want to honour his contributions, and later the government 

will, with a scholarship named after Randell. Today though we 

want to offer our love and our prayers to his family: to Gail, his 

wife; and Alex, his daughter; to his mom, Louise; and his sister 

and his other family members in Swift Current and friends 

across this province. 

 

Saskatchewan is better today because Randell did what he did. 

We’re better for his passion and his energy, and the best way to 

honour it in his memory is to continue that passion. I close with 

the words of the Irish poet William Butler Yeats who said, 

“Think where man’s glory most begins and ends and say, my 

glory was that I had such friends.” 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

 

Ghosts of the Arts Walk 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night people 

across our country joined in solidarity and participated in 

Ghosts of the Arts walks. Artists and arts supporters from 

Regina and Saskatoon walked in white ghost sheets throughout 

their city streets. They walked in silence to protest the 

continuous decline of federal and provincial support for arts and 

culture across our country. They dressed in white as ghosts to 

show people what our communities would look like without the 

vibrancy of the arts — dull, plain, and lifeless. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems that this Ghosts of the Arts Walk is very 

well-timed. In this current 2012 budget, Arts Board funding has 

dropped to the lowest percentage of overall budget expenditures 

in over 25 years. And the release of the Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce’s report on the economic impact of film here in 

our province, it seems that this government’s math just doesn’t 

add up. It decimated a profitable and thriving industry, and the 

facts confirm their decision defied common sense. This is not 

support for arts and culture. 

 

One of the participants of the event summed up their experience 

of working as an artist here in Saskatchewan: 

 

If you’re working to build a truly vibrant scene, that’s 

exhilarating. But when you’re constantly working to 

defend what you’ve previously built up against politically 

motivated attacks as seems to be the case these days, it’s 

exhausting and demoralizing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank the organizers of the Ghosts of the Arts 

walk. We want respect and immediate action for the 

hard-working artists in this province. We want a government 

that will work with artists, not against them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saltcoats. 

 

Agriculture Month 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

October has once again been proclaimed Agriculture Month in 

Saskatchewan. Agriculture is a vital contributor to 

Saskatchewan’s economy. One third of the province’s exports 

come from agriculture. Mr. Speaker, in 2011 for the first time 

Saskatchewan was the top producer in agri-food products with 

$10.2 billion worth of exports. Ontario had previously held that 

record. Agriculture is important to the province’s future growth, 

and we have what the world needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw attention to Agriculture More 

Than Ever. Agriculture More Than Ever is an initiative focused 

on promoting the industry and improving the perceptions of 

agriculture in Canada. Saskatchewan is the first province to 

become an official partner. Agriculture More Than Ever was 

started by Farm Credit Canada. We will work together with 

other Agriculture More Than Ever partners to promote the 

contributions made by farmers, ranchers, and the industry to the 

economy and health of the people around the world. 

 

We hope to provide the public with information about 

agriculture, dispel myths, and tell the success stories. 

Agriculture has a great story to tell and we can’t be shy about 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2012 

telling it. 

 

I would like the Assembly to join with me in recognizing our 

Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers for the work that they do. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Opening of New Daycare 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, October 

27th, I had the pleasure of joining Rocanville and area residents 

at the official opening of their Dream Big Child Care centre. 

After months of planning, thousands of dollars in donations, 

and hours of volunteer labour, Rocanville’s Dream Big Child 

Care centre opened its doors in August and already this new 

daycare is making a difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dream Big Child Care started as nothing more 

than a dream in March 2010 when a group of parents decided to 

apply to the provincial government for child care spots in 

Rocanville. At that time, Mr. Speaker, child care was becoming 

increasingly hard to find due to the growth in the community 

and the lack of a daycare in the town. Once the approval was 

given for the 36 child care spaces, it was full steam ahead for 

this community. They began to contact builders and make 

necessary preparations. 

 

While the government grant and the parental fees are sufficient 

enough to cover the daycare’s operating budget, projects like 

this cannot really get off the ground without the time and 

money donated from businesses and individuals within the 

community. Mr. Speaker, amazing things can happen when a 

community comes together for a common cause. I would like 

all members in this Assembly to join me in recognizing the hard 

work of Rocanville for turning Dream Big Child Care into a 

reality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Opening of New Group Home 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This summer I had the 

opportunity to attend and bring greetings to a grand opening of 

the Prairie Community Endeavours group home in Spiritwood. 

This new three-space group home for people with intellectual 

disabilities was made possible through a partnership between 

the Ministry of Social Services and the Prairie Community 

Endeavours. 

 

The Ministry of Social Services provided $150,000 to the 

capital costs of the group home and will provide an additional 

$210,000 in annual funding for the operation of the Prairie 

Community Endeavours group home. The capital funding 

allocated to this project is part of our government’s four-year 

commitment to adjust the wait-list of 440 Saskatchewan people 

with intellectual disabilities who require programs and services. 

Our government is 95 per cent of the way towards our target of 

eliminating the 440-person wait-list, and projects like the new 

group home in Spiritwood are helping to ensure that we reach 

our goal. Community-based organizations such as Prairie 

Community Endeavours are playing an important role in 

supporting people with intellectual disabilities in their 

communities, and we would not be able to reach our goal if it 

was not for the partnerships we’ve formed with 

community-based organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

everyone associated with the Prairie Community Endeavours, 

and join me in thanking them for all the work they have done 

and continue to do in support of people with intellectual 

disabilities in all of our communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

2013 Juno Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased to rise in the House today to highlight an event that will 

be coming to our province next spring. Yesterday the Minister 

of Parks, Culture and Sport helped kick off the 2013 Juno 

Awards. The event held at The Artful Dodger also provided the 

host committee with the opportunity to unveil the event slogan, 

It’s Going to Get Loud. 

 

Hosting events such as the Juno Awards is an opportunity to 

show Saskatchewan, Canada, and the world the incredible talent 

our province has to offer. Supporting the Juno fits with the 

province’s event-hosting policy and within the cultural policy, 

Pride of Saskatchewan, by promoting artistic excellence, 

providing access to culture, and facilitating commercial 

opportunities for artists. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to bringing 

high-impact events to the province. That is why our government 

committed 1.5 million to help secure the Junos. Hosting the 

Juno Awards will have a positive impact on Saskatchewan’s 

performing artists who will also receive unprecedented 

exposure and publicity from the national media focus on the 

awards. 

 

The event also calls for volunteers, and I am confident that 

Saskatchewan’s strong spirit of volunteerism will once again 

shine. Extraordinary talent runs deep in this province and our 

government looks forward to showcasing Saskatchewan artists. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Potential Changes to Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today is Halloween. And on the minds of 

Saskatchewan working people is whether or not they’ll be 

receiving a trick or a treat from the Labour minister in his 

looming massive overhaul of 15 different pieces of the labour 

law. It’s happened before, Mr. Speaker, where working people 

hold out for the Sask Party to deliver a fair and balanced 

approach to labour laws, only to be tricked into the most 

extreme, unfair, and unconstitutional legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last time the Sask Party promised fairness and 



October 31, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

balance, they ended up with your essential services law tossed 

out of court. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party Throne Speech claims 

the minister’s legislation will be the most fair and balanced in 

Canada. How does the public know this isn’t another Sask Party 

trick? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for his question. I appreciate his sense of humour, 

being Halloween. It is not our goal or intention to trick anyone. 

Our goal is to modernize labour legislation. 

 

We want to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that our workplaces are safe 

and responsive to the needs of employees and employers. Some 

of the Acts and the pieces of legislation under review have not 

been substantively reviewed in almost 20 years. Others have not 

been reviewed in more than two generations. Some of the 

pieces of legislation have got fines that range from $10 to $25 

as a maximum. We think we want to go forward and look at 

consolidating the pieces of legislation and take steps to move 

things forward. I can advise, Mr. Speaker, that we went through 

extensive consultation over the summer months. We received 

over 3,800 responses during that period of time and, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to make it clear that it is our intention to use 

and develop as much as we can out of those responses. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we thank everybody that participated. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, sadly Saskatchewan people know 

this modernizing story way too well. The Sask Party imposes 

ideology over common sense and drafts labour legislation that’s 

both unconstitutional and unbalanced. And they don’t seem to 

get that working people, businesses, and unions want fairness in 

the workplaces for all sides. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in other jurisdictions where right wing 

governments say they’re going to modernize labour law, it 

usually throws the baby out with the bathwater. We saw it here 

in Saskatchewan where the Saskatchewan Party last term 

brought in the unconstitutional essential services legislation 

which still needs addressing. Did the minister forget the court 

has ordered him to solve this essential services snafu that his 

government created? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve made it clear 

throughout this process that one of the primary needs of the 

consultation and review process is to address the concerns that 

the court had with the essential services legislation. As a 

province we are committed to having essential services 

legislation. We feel that the needs of our citizens for their health 

care, for ensuring that snow removal takes place, those are 

things that absolutely must happen in this province, and we feel 

that we need a legislative framework to ensure that those things 

do happen. 

 

We’ve heard from the members opposite that we should rely on 

the goodwill of the workers that are there. We are not prepared 

to put those workers in a position of being pitted against their 

union. We feel the right thing to do is to have a legislative 

framework for that to take place in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard responses during the process as to how 

that should take place. And, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the 

things that we intend to address as we go forward in this. I 

would like to take this opportunity to try and thank everybody 

that made a submission to the process. And we appreciate the 

input and it will be taken into account. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know our 

history, our Saskatchewan history, is full of people fighting 

very hard for their rights when it comes to our labour law. And 

workers died to win the basic protections some on those 

benches over there seem to take for granted. It’s taken 100 years 

to build a balance for working people and employers alike. And 

an overwhelming majority of common sense people in our 

province believe that labour laws should be improved upon and 

not watered down. 

 

And one of the key things people in this province are telling me 

and telling that minister is, don’t water down safety regulations. 

We already have far too many serious injuries in our 

workplaces. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech 

alluded to safety regulations as if they somehow impose some 

sort of unspoken burden on business growth. Why does the 

Sask Party put such a low priority on making workplaces safer 

here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member 

opposite that we value the safety and security of the women and 

men that work in our province the same way we value their 

rights. Mr. Speaker, we have a good track record of trying to 

deal with that. We passed earlier this year Bill 23 which 

addresses those things. That bill will be proclaimed and brought 

into force in the near future. We are taking steps to deal with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a good, strong situation in our province 

where we deal with . . . [inaudible] . . . and I have a quote I’d 

like to read: “Our economy has been moving along quite well 

with relative labour peace for many, many years.” Mr. Speaker, 

that quote is from none other than the Opposition Leader during 

an October 23rd scrum on the upcoming session. 

 

And I want to further advise the members, Mr. Speaker, that 

over 97 per cent of the members that work in our public sector 

are working under contracts that were negotiated with no job 

action. When we brought in essential services legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, they said it would end collective bargaining as we 

know it. It didn’t happen. We’ve done it and we’ve continued to 

do those and we will continue to do those things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

[14:00] 

 

 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2012 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, without . . . And I want to talk 

about public consultation. Without proper public consultation, 

the Sask Party’s massive overhaul of labour legislation both 

lacks legitimacy and threatens to substantially change 100 years 

worth of progressive labour legislation. People asked the Sask 

Party to approach any change to labour legislation with caution 

and care. They asked to be heard and they asked for public 

meetings, but the Sask Party has refused to listen. They ignored 

those recommendations to consult with the public and are lining 

up what could be the most extreme labour legislation in the 

country. 

 

Well we released a consultation document for the minister to 

consider the real recommendations of the public. And the 

minister said at the time that he thought the document had 

merit, but he still wouldn’t commit to meet with the public prior 

to drafting his new labour legislation. 

 

To the minister: why has his government made such a concerted 

effort to avoid public consultation? And why is he introducing 

Canada’s most extreme labour legislation without a single 

public meeting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we received 3,800 

responses to our paper that was put out. We’ve held six or seven 

minister’s advisory committee meetings which have ran all day. 

These are done with both labour and with business leaders. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to thank everyone that made a submission. 

 

One of the submissions that was received in the dying hours 

was the one from the NDP [New Democratic Party] party. You 

would think that they, above all else, those people above all 

else, would have got theirs in early, but the unions got theirs in 

ahead of them. Everybody else got theirs. One of the last ones 

to be received was from the NDP party. And what does it do? 

Nothing more than complain about the process and complain 

they want more time. If they would spend more time doing their 

work and less time throwing the rhetoric, they would be better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about no consultation. 

Mr. Speaker, in 1999 the NDP passed The Special Payment 

(Dependent Spouses) Act, ex gratia payment Act, with no 

consultation whatever; 2001, amended The Labour Standards 

Act extempore, no consultation; 2004, The Trade Union Act, no 

consultation; 2006, The Labour Standards Act . . . [inaudible] 

. . . no consultation. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Debt Reduction 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It seemed that the government had 

finally come around to the idea of saving some of our resource 

revenues for the next generation. It’s a good idea, Mr. Speaker, 

something that we were pleased to see recognized. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s concerning to see the inconsistency and the glaring 

omission in the Premier’s Throne Speech last week. 

 

At his recent private event, and he wrote in his booklet that he’ll 

explore “. . . how best to utilize Saskatchewan’s non-renewable 

natural resource revenue after the province’s debt has been fully 

retired . . .” Only a few minutes later, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

told reporters that that plan may change. And last Thursday, Mr. 

Speaker, the Throne Speech didn’t even mention the heritage 

fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the heritage fund nothing more than a 

glaring omission from the Throne Speech? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this government is moving 

ahead with the Saskatchewan heritage initiative that was 

outlined in the growth plan. The Throne Speech indicates that 

we’re going to carry through with those elements of the growth 

plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the government has said is that when the 

debt is paid off, we do need to be ready prior to that date with 

some ideas, the best ideas that we can glean as we canvass them 

around the world, led by former University of Saskatchewan 

president, Peter MacKinnon, in this regard so that we’re 

prepared for the day when Saskatchewan is debt free. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we keep making progress like we have, 

this province most assuredly will be debt free. Today we 

already have 44 per cent less General Revenue Fund debt than 

just four years ago. We’re going to pay off some more this 

term. We’re going to complete that job, and then we’ll continue 

to put money away for future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier and the billboards say one thing; the balance sheet says 

something entirely different, Mr. Speaker. Even if we buy the 

Premier’s debt repayment schedule that may start next year, it 

would take us until 2060 to pay off the province’s debt. I think 

the Leader of the Opposition pointed out that he’d be 110 years 

old at that point. I’d be a little bit younger. But without a doubt, 

2060 is far too late to start saving for the next generation. 

 

Paying down debt is a good idea, Mr. Speaker; in fact, we 

should soon start. But it was a glaring omission from the 

Throne Speech — no plan of debt repayment and no talk of the 

heritage fund from his booklet. Folks are starting to wonder if 

he’s just making it up as he goes along, Mr. Speaker. To the 

minister: when will saving for our province’s future become a 

real priority from that government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if people in the province 

would have been asked in 2007 if they thought in just four short 

years 44 per cent of the General Revenue Fund debt of 

Saskatchewan would be paid off by a brand new Sask Party 

government, they probably wouldn’t have believed it then, but 

that is exactly what happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the best indicator of future behaviour is past 

behaviour. We will reduce the debt. And, Mr. Speaker, with all 

due respect, with all due respect, we hope that the hon. member 



October 31, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

who is running for the NDP leadership now won’t be offended 

. . . Well he’s got a bit of support over there . . . won’t be 

offended if we don’t take his fiscal advice since he’s — what? 

— a month into his leadership campaign and his leadership 

campaign is already showing a deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yes, yes, yes, Mr. Speaker. This from 

the Premier who pretended that the film tax credit cost $8 

million. Real facts, real math, and in fact the chamber of 

commerce disagreed with that point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the idea of a heritage fund under that Premier and 

that government seems to be nothing more than a fairy tale; the 

principle of saving for the next generation a foreign concept. 

It’s hard for Saskatchewan people to trust that government’s 

inconsistent words on this, particularly when you look at their 

record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget and the past three before it 

contained not one cent of debt reduction, and the budget 

documents show there won’t be one cent of debt reduced over 

the next three years. Simply that government can’t be taken 

seriously when it speaks about debt reduction needed for the 

Premier’s supposed heritage fund plan. Really, Mr. Speaker, 

how can the public trust that government on the important goal 

of saving for our future? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that member has a lot of 

support over on these benches for his leadership campaign as 

well, and that’s why those who are supporting him would 

probably advise him not to let his seatmate write his questions, 

who’s competing against him for the leadership. Because he’s 

asking people to reflect on the record of this government, Mr. 

Speaker: $3.8 billion of debt paid off in four years. That’s the 

record, Mr. Speaker. Record personal income tax relief: 

114,000 low-income people don’t pay taxes any more at all in 

this province. That’s part of the record. The small-business tax 

rate cut in half: that’s the record. Property tax relief, Mr. 

Speaker, for all people in the province, rural and urban: that’s 

part of the record. And the only balanced budget in the 

Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Community Pastures 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The federal 

government has walked away from Crown-owned community 

pastures. The province is now planning to sell the pastures of 

land with them, a vital part of Saskatchewan’s agricultural 

history. Generations of ranchers and beef producers have used 

these community pastures to grow Saskatchewan’s herd, and 

the managers of the pastures have provided professional herd 

management for decades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister says he’s consulted with patrons on 

the sale but his so-called consultation was one conference call 

where he dictated the terms of the sell-off rather than hearing 

feedback from the very patrons who steward these pastures. 

 

To the minister: why did he roll out such a hasty plan for sale of 

the community pastures when the patrons themselves felt the 

sale, sale, sale attitude was demeaning? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

hon. member for her question. The divestiture of the PFRA 

[Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration] pastures by the 

federal government is clearly a federal decision, and it’s just a 

matter that we have to deal with, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

we’ve been doing that in full consultation with the pasture 

patrons groups through the Chairs of those groups, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve had a parade of other entities through my office who 

have offers that they’re willing to put on the table to purchase 

these pastures, and those have all been rejected, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve consulted with those people. We’ve consulted with First 

Nations, Mr. Speaker. The consultations go on. And we’ve 

certainly consulted with the patrons of the pastures and 

announced 10 that we’re willing to proceed with first, largely 

on the basis of their willingness to enter into that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has already lost 

more than 80 per cent of native prairie to development. The 

community pastures represent some of the last remaining native 

prairie that we have. The federal government managed these 

community pastures with skilled and dedicated staff. They 

managed them from the day the patron dropped off their cattle 

in the spring until they picked them up in the fall. Patrons are 

worried about these managers, many with young families, who 

stand to lose their jobs and the many decades of expertise that 

they represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the patrons stand to lose these services. The 

Saskatchewan Party government has not said whether they plan 

on backfilling when the feds walk away from the pastures. To 

the minister: will this Sask Party government ensure that these 

services will be maintained for the patrons? Yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question as well. The patrons are the best 

suited to manage these lands and there’s a pretty solid 

consensus among the patrons groups that they’re ready, willing, 

and able to do just that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I said in answer to the previous question, the first 10 

pastures that will be turned over to patron operation for the 

2014 grazing season were chosen largely on the basis of the 

willingness and ableness of those patrons groups to get into this 

sort of arrangement early. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier and the 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2012 

minister have received over 5,000 emails in the last three days 

alone from Canadians who want to see these lands protected. 

They are a vital part of our biodiversity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can be positive about this. This is a wonderful 

opportunity for this government to maintain these lands for 

future generations. There’s even been a suggestion for a First 

Nations joint venture to manage all 62 community pastures, 

creating much needed jobs for First Nations people. I 

understand that the minister met with members of the First 

Nations community and didn’t even bother to inform them at 

the time that he had already made up his mind to sell. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given that the patrons want to continue these 

services and various proposals are now coming forward, why is 

the minister so intent on barging ahead with his hasty and 

narrow sale-or-lease-only plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan farmers 

and ranchers are the best environmental stewards of our 

agricultural lands. That assertion made by the member opposite 

is condescending beyond belief and offensive to farmers and 

ranchers across this province. 

 

Any land that is sold under this program, Mr. Speaker, and 

there will be an option to either purchase or lease, will be sold 

with no break, no drain conservation easements that will follow 

the land in perpetuity. Pastures will be kept and maintained as 

blocks, Mr. Speaker. Species at risk legislation, federal 

legislation will continue to be enforced by Saskatchewan and, 

regardless of the ownership of the land, in perpetuity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’ve consulted with environmental groups. We have their 

endorsement. And I challenge that member to go to rural 

Saskatchewan and make that condescending statement to our 

ranchers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce CEO said it clearly yesterday: 

 

We need to have people that are artists and musicians 

here. We need to have actors here. We need to have a 

vibrancy in our community. Otherwise, you know what? 

The accountants and the lawyers and the engineers, they 

don’t want to move here. They don’t want to stay here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a Sask Party government that likes to use 

every spin and PR [public relations] trick in their book even 

when the facts are obvious. When the evidence is piling up and 

the list of those who think you got it wrong continues to grow, 

you have to sit up and listen, Mr. Speaker. When will the Sask 

Party government finally admit they made a mistake and take 

urgent action to fix the mess they’ve made in the film industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the hon. member makes mention of the Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce and the report they released yesterday just outside 

these doors. Mr. McLellan, and I’m assuming endorsed by the 

board of directors of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, 

released a report that indicated that there was an economic 

benefit to the province with the film industry. We don’t dispute 

that. They also said the numbers — which we take exception to, 

Mr. Speaker — were verified by KPMG. 

 

We now know that’s not true. We now know KPMG, the 

managing partner of KPMG, Mr. Tom Robinson, has written a 

letter to the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce stated that 

KPMG verified results included in a report on the impact 

of the film employment tax credit on the film and video 

industry in Saskatchewan. This was stated on the 

chamber’s website resulting in media coverage with the 

same information. This statement is incorrect. KPMG had 

no involvement with this report nor did KPMG verify the 

results in the report. KPMG has requested that the 

chamber issue a retraction of this statement immediately 

and remove all references to KPMG on their website in 

future communications related to this report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, we take exception to the 

numbers in the report. We’re moving forward with a new 

consultation process with our creative industries in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of the 

Sask Party government are the only people in this province who 

believe Saskatchewan is somehow better off without the film 

industry. Even the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce has 

come out against the government on this one. Yesterday the 

Chamber’s CEO, Steve McLellan, had this to say: “The 

numbers they used to make the determination were incomplete 

and probably inaccurate.” 

 

Yet this know-it-all minister is challenging the chamber’s 

numbers, but couldn’t disprove them even though he claimed 

the ministry had done its own internal analysis, Mr. Speaker. 

Can the minister immediately table the numbers and the internal 

analysis this Sask Party government used to justify decimating 

the film industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my hon. friend across the aisle just again referenced the 

chamber report and indicating numbers in the chamber report to 

buttress her argument. Mr. Speaker, the chamber also said in 

their news release that that report was verified by KPMG. We 



October 31, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

now know that KPMG has never even seen the report, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is moving forward to work with 

all of the creative industries in this province. We’re working 

with the film industry, the musical industry, theatrical artists, 

visual artists. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the film industry 

themselves has said, and I quote, “It needs to meet sector 

requirements while not participating in what is seen as a 

bidding war. It cannot be a tax-related initiative.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are trying to find a support mechanism that 

supports all of our creative industries in this province. I wish 

the hon. member would show as much passion for the music 

industry, the theatrical artists, the visual artists, the craftspeople, 

the publishing industry as she does for the film industry. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This minister seems 

to think he knows best. I’m asking him once again, please table 

the analysis he’s used in cutting, decimating the film industry 

here in Saskatchewan. I’m asking him to table that today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, this last budget, this 

government made some difficult decisions. This government 

made some difficult decisions to invest in people with 

disabilities, Mr. Speaker. This government made difficult 

decisions to invest in low-income seniors in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, low-income seniors that you folks couldn’t find a 

dime’s worth of increase over 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has taken 114,000 low-income 

people off the tax rolls completely. We think that’s better public 

policy than a refundable employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 

What we’re doing is moving forward with all of our creative 

industries in this province to help all of them with respect to a 

support mechanism that they can benefit from. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, 

The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 now be 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 50, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the Government Whip on 

his feet, please? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — To ask leave for a motion of absence for 

members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has asked for leave to 

move a motion of absence from the legislature. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That a leave of absence be granted to the members for 

Meadow Lake and Regina Elphinstone-Centre for 

Monday, November 5th through to Thursday, November 

8th, 2012, inclusive, to attend the international federation 

of electoral systems election program in Washington, 

D.C. with the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It has been moved by the Government 

Whip: 

 

That a leave of absence be granted to the members for 

Meadow Lake and Regina Elphinstone-Centre on 

Monday, November the 5th to Thursday, November the 

8th, 2012, inclusive, to attend the international federation 

of electoral systems election program in Washington, 

D.C. with the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Cox, seconded by Mr. 

Docherty, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2012 

moved by Mr. Nilson.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 

able to enter into the debate today in the response to the Throne 

Speech, as this will be the final day that we debate the Throne 

Speech here in the Assembly and we’ll be voting on it later on 

today. 

 

Before I get into my remarks on the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to offer a word of thanks to the people of 

Saskatoon Massey Place. It’s been a little while since the last 

election and I’ve thoroughly enjoyed continuing to work with 

the people in the constituency and look forward to the years 

ahead working in Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the staff, as members do when 

we have the chance to make a few remarks about the Throne 

Speech. We do our jobs, but it’s only because we have so many 

people that are able to help us do our jobs. And too often, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t recognize the important work that staff 

members do in allowing us to complete our days. I think of staff 

in the constituency office, Mr. Speaker, as well as the 

hard-working caucus office staff and all the people that allow 

the Legislative Assembly to function well throughout the year. 

And we had the pleasure of honouring a long-serving individual 

today. 

 

I also want to thank friends, Mr. Speaker. This can be a job with 

ups and downs, and having strong relationships with friends 

who are there to support and encourage along the way are 

always appreciated. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say a special word of thanks to my 

grandma, Ferne Vincent, who lives at Outlook. She watches the 

legislative channel faithfully every day. I know it’s on loop 

when we’re sitting in the Assembly. I know she prays for me 

every single day and so I thank my grandma, Ferne, for her 

love. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to say thank you to my wife, Ruth, for 

her support. Politics has always been busy. As members can 

appreciate, the last few months and then the following few 

months will be especially busy, Mr. Speaker. And I thank Ruth 

for her understanding and all of her support, and of course our 

two girls, Ingrid and Clara — Ingrid who is a bit over two, and 

our daughter Clara who’s a bit over six months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Times can be busy with family and work, Mr. Speaker, but 

sometimes the best lessons that we learn are when we have a 

chance to have a bit of interaction with our children. And our 

daughter Ingrid right now is at the stage where whatever 

statement we give, whatever the topic, there’s always one 

predictable response. And I think parents and grandparents in 

the room will know what I’m talking about when it comes to 

toddlers. That response is always, why? It doesn’t matter what 

the statement is. If it’s finish your milk, the answer is, why? If 

it’s time to go home, the question, pardon me, is, why? And, 

Mr. Speaker, it never fails also when I leave the house when 

I’m off to a meeting or coming to Regina, I get asked that same 

question. Why? And it actually . . . it’s a routine part of the day, 

but it allows for a moment of reflection as to why we actually 

do what we do. And I assume all of us in this in this Assembly, 

whether we’re on the government or the opposition side, we 

have those moments when we’re able to pause for a second and 

ask ourselves why we are doing this, why we’ve chosen to run, 

and why we’re trying to improve the province as we see it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in many ways when we look at the Throne 

Speech, we’re also presented with a question. And the question 

is, why is it that we should or shouldn’t provide our support for 

the document, for the information that is in the Throne Speech? 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when asking ourselves that question, why, 

we have to ask ourselves what kind of future we want for our 

province, what kind of future we want for our children — the 

ones that ask us that “why” question so often. 

 

I think in Saskatchewan the type of future we want, Mr. 

Speaker, is one that recognizes and realizes that our destinies 

are interconnected here in the province. Too often when we 

have political discussions, Mr. Speaker, it’s an us-versus-them 

approach. And it’s a discussion that divides us between north 

and south; rural, urban; between businesses and working 

people. Sometimes it’s a discussion, Mr. Speaker, that can 

divide us between immigrants and non-immigrants, whether 

we’ve been a fourth generation Saskatchewan person or 

whether we’ve just recently arrived. And sometimes, Mr. 

Speaker, the discussions also have a tendency to be us versus 

them when it comes to our relationship with the environment 

and the planet. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the test that we face as legislators when 

confronting the Throne Speech is to ask ourselves that question 

of why. Why should we support this? How does this Throne 

Speech facilitate and deliver on that better future that we want 

for our children? 

 

In looking at the content of the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 

there are many components that speak to me and many 

components that I agree with. And I think people in the 

province when looking at this speech would see aspects, would 

see some language in the Throne Speech that does speak to 

them. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, about early on in the Throne Speech the 

comment about more people. We live in Saskatchewan because 

we know it’s a great place. We’ve chosen to live here. We’ve 

chosen to raise our families here, and it’s understandable, Mr. 

Speaker, why more people would want to come here and also 

build their lives. So I support the notion, Mr. Speaker, that we 

want more people in the province. 

 

The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, also talks about the 

relationship that we as a province, as all people, have with 

people who are First Nations or Métis . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think everyone in the province recognizes the need, the 

challenge before us in truly determining our success as a 

province over the long run in how well we as a province fully 

partner, fully work with First Nations and Métis people in 

achieving educational outcomes, and having them full partners 

in everything that occurs in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech also talks about a strong 

economy. And most certainly I and my colleagues, we support 



October 31, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

the notion of a strong economy where businesses can flourish, 

where businesses can do well, where businesses can make 

money. And, Mr. Speaker, we also support an economy where 

workers are treated well, are treated fairly, are able to have a 

good life, and are able to do their jobs with the highest levels of 

safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech talks about a strong 

agricultural sector. That’s a desire that members on both sides 

of the House have, that the agricultural sector in Saskatchewan 

can be strong. It’s where our roots are as a province, and will 

continue to be central to what happens in Saskatchewan. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, every family in the province wants 

better health for our loved ones, whether it’s for our babies, our 

children, our moms and dads or whether it’s for our seniors. We 

want everyone to have better health outcomes. So on that level, 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech addresses issues of health. 

 

And culture, Mr. Speaker. The member from Riversdale made 

some good comments today about how culture makes our lives 

richer, how culture allows us to have the quality of life that we 

want in the province beyond always just punching the time 

clock. It allows us to have rich relationships with one another 

and it allows us to appreciate the many aspects of life and the 

aspects of living here on the prairies. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, everyone in the province wants a 

stronger . . . or wants a healthier and a cleaner environment. 

 

So in broad strokes, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech touches on 

these matters in broad terms talking about the items generally. 

But this is the catch, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 

specifics of what’s put down in the Throne Speech, what’s 

actually in there, what is being mentioned and what’s being left 

out. And when we look at the actions, Mr. Speaker, when we 

layer the actions of the Sask Party over top of what they have 

written in the Throne Speech, I think then we see that the 

Throne Speech is seriously lacking in terms of providing that 

vision that we want for all of Saskatchewan people, that vision 

that we want for a better future for our children. 

 

In looking at many of the sections, Mr. Speaker, sections where 

I just mentioned that, in broad terms, it may sound as though 

things are on the right track in the Throne Speech. It may 

appear that way. But looking at, as I said, the actions and the 

detail or the lack of detail, I think there are some concerns. And 

I think we can see that the road map provided in this Throne 

Speech is not the one that will deliver us the future that we want 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:30] 

 

On the topic of more people, Mr. Speaker, as I said, 

Saskatchewan is a great place. We understand why people want 

to move here. But as recently as yesterday, when we discussed 

the change that the Sask Party has made to the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program, there was no mention within the 

Throne Speech of how the Sask Party government plans to 

repair the damage that they have done through the gutting of the 

family class of the SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 

program]. Saskatchewan needs to be known as a place of 

economic opportunity and where good things are occurring, Mr. 

Speaker. But Saskatchewan also needs to be known as a place 

that fulfills its commitments, that is true to its word when a 

commitment is made. I think of the thousands of families, Mr. 

Speaker, that came to Saskatchewan, held up their end of their 

arrangement and expected the government to fulfill its 

commitment to have the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 

program available to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talk about having more people coming to the 

province. Yes, it has to be about economic activity. But our 

view on immigration and our view on welcoming to the 

province also has to be about building strong social networks 

within our province so that there is actually a positive influence 

over the long run. And that’s how our families and my family 

immigrated to the country generations ago, in a group with 

family members, Mr. Speaker, and had the ability to be there 

for one another and to do well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another item that was addressed in the Throne 

Speech that I said at face value appears to be going in the right 

direction — at face value — was the reference to First Nations 

and Métis education and employment. We all recognize, we’ve 

covered in question periods fairly regularly, Mr. Speaker, the 

need to do better in this area. And we recognize good things 

that are occurring throughout the province, the progress and the 

optimism that is there, but also the huge challenge that is ahead 

of us. 

 

And if we look at the recent employment numbers, Mr. 

Speaker, we see in the last three months that the year-over-year 

numbers, the employment figures for First Nations and Métis 

people are going in the wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

losing ground. 

 

Now admittedly there are a number of factors that play here. 

But when we look at the Throne Speech, we also have to look at 

the track record. Actually the Premier mentioned that in one of 

his responses in question period, that the best indicator of future 

behaviour is past behaviour. And we saw a Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, when given the opportunity to 

provide a program that had been doing well, had been bringing 

benefits, that people support in the community — I’m talking 

about the Aboriginal employment development program — we 

saw them cut that program, Mr. Speaker. A cut that didn’t make 

sense to people in the business sector and certainly didn’t make 

sense to people who are First Nations or Métis and those of us 

that care about the issue and want to see improvement. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, we see with the task force . . . Well as 

I’ve said in media scrums, there’s merit to the task force, and 

the people working on it are of a high calibre and good 

individuals. We do see a report, Mr. Speaker, that is late. So 

what I see from the government is a lack of urgency on this 

issue, and I see a past pattern of behaviour that talks about cuts 

and eliminations of programs that played a constructive role in 

helping to close the gap. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech also talks about a strong 

economy, and on this we agree with the government that we 

need to have a strong economy. We want businesses to flourish 

and do well. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important 

that all families have the opportunity to do well and to do their 

jobs in safety and in an environment that allows them to enjoy 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2012 

their work. That’s also very important. 

 

Under the section of the economy in the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, there was mention — and we talked about this today 

in question period — that the government would be bringing 

forward the Saskatchewan employment Act. The quote from the 

Throne Speech says, Mr. Speaker, “With this legislation, 

Saskatchewan will have the most modern, competitive, fair and 

balanced labour and employment environment in Canada.” 

 

Face value, Mr. Speaker, some might say, well that sounds 

reasonable. The problem is, Mr. Speaker, the track record of 

members opposite tell a very different story. The track record, 

Mr. Speaker, speaks of a history of decisions that were not 

made in a fair and balanced manner, decisions around 

legislation that have had court challenges and have now placed 

the ball in the government’s court to respond in a way that is 

constitutional. And as recently as this summer, Mr. Speaker, we 

saw the minister bragging up the so-called consultation process 

that occurred throughout a few months in the summer on the 

review of labour legislation. But as has been uncovered, there 

were no actual public consultations, Mr. Speaker, and there was 

a short window of time and, in my opinion, most certainly not a 

sincere effort to listen and engage with Saskatchewan people 

and hear what is needed with labour legislation. 

 

So on this note, Mr. Speaker, while some of the broad ideas 

about a strong economy all people in Saskatchewan would 

support, when we look at the details and when we look at the 

track record of members opposite, a very different story is told. 

 

A discussion also in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, about 

rural Saskatchewan with a focus, yes, certainly on agriculture 

and some of the initiatives around research, Mr. Speaker, as 

well as increasing our exports in the agricultural sector. That’s 

very important, and I would support many of those initiatives. 

But, Mr. Speaker, there needs to be a broader discussion as well 

about how we support families and have strong rural 

communities, not focusing solely on agriculture but also seeing 

how family farms can indeed flourish and also how family 

farms can be successfully transitioned from one generation to 

the next. 

 

On the topic of natural resources, and this is something we talk 

about very often in the Assembly and something that the 

Throne Speech did touch on, Mr. Speaker, we all recognize the 

important, central role that natural resources play in this 

province — from potash to uranium to all sorts of activity in the 

mining sector. We know this is key to our past success, and we 

know it is key, Mr. Speaker, to our future success as well. 

 

There has been some talk, Mr. Speaker, in past months about, 

though, how do we think in terms of generations? How do we 

think in terms of the long game as opposed to short election 

cycles? The bright futures fund or the heritage fund are ideas 

that have been discussed, but when we look at the Throne 

Speech we see that the Throne Speech is silent on that matter. 

 

Post-secondary institutions we also know play a very important 

role. It’s where we as parents, we start putting away money in 

RESPs [registered education savings plan] and we start thinking 

about where our children might go to school. And we want to 

provide the best future for them, most people recognizing that 

education is the best approach for individuals to have a good 

life and a good future. And so we see in the Throne Speech the 

government talking about certain initiatives that will assist 

students, certain bursaries or scholarships. And let me be clear, 

money and resources for students are a good thing. But silent in 

the Throne Speech, what’s not mentioned in the Throne Speech, 

is the other side of the equation, the other information that is 

really needed in order to determine whether or not the plan 

provided in the Throne Speech is what we need for a strong 

post-secondary sector. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, of the situation in my home city of 

Saskatoon at the University of Saskatchewan, how we saw an 

election promise, a promise to fund the Health Sciences 

Building at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. We saw 

that promise broken by members opposite. And instead what we 

saw was the forcing of almost $100 million of debt onto the 

University of Saskatchewan, nearly maxing out their borrowing 

capacity. I think that kind of information matters and is relevant 

to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, because that is the other 

side of the equation. As the financial picture becomes tighter on 

campus, there are realities that the administration will face, 

realities about a decrease in programs and services for students, 

and realities about increasing tuition for students in order to 

make up for the shortfall and the financial pressures that they 

face. 

 

So while looking at the Throne Speech simply with the words 

that are provided, in the post-secondary sector, there is talk of 

programs for students. But it’s important to have the whole 

picture and realize and understand that while resources and 

dollars might be being put into one pocket of students, more is 

being asked of them from the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the environment, certainly a discussion about 

water is important and is needed in this province. I am 

reminded of water as I have a sip from my glass, Mr. Speaker. 

But the totality and the comprehensive discussion of the 

environmental section within the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 

to me does not see the clear leadership that we need in the 

province, the leadership that we need to exhibit as a province 

within the country and the type of leadership that we need to 

demonstrate to our children. Mr. Speaker, within the Throne 

Speech on the issue of the environment, there is no reference to 

climate change and our response to that. That should not be a 

surprise, Mr. Speaker, as I know there are a good number of 

climate change deniers within the Sask Party caucus. 

 

On the issue of healthier people, Mr. Speaker, as I said, every 

person in Saskatchewan wants a healthier outcome, a healthier 

life for themselves as well as for our children. There are 

components and aspects, Mr. Speaker, within the Throne 

Speech that address health. I think of some of the immunization 

initiatives that are indicated within the Throne Speech. I think 

of a larger locum pool provided for rural communities. There 

are major questions about the implementation of that and how 

well-planned it is and exactly how that will look. But these 

initiatives are positive steps, Mr. Speaker, for health care. But 

what’s missing in the Throne Speech, in my opinion when it 

comes to health care, is an examination and discussion about 

addressing the issues that make us sick — the social 

determinants of health, Mr. Speaker, the root causes of why we 

become ill, the root causes of how we have healthy families. 



October 31, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

I think of my own constituency and really my own 

neighbourhood and the streets that I drive going to and from my 

house, Mr. Speaker. It’s a wonderful neighbourhood with great 

optimism and a wonderful diversity of people, wonderful 

diversity of backgrounds. But it’s also a neighbourhood, Mr. 

Speaker, where I’m continually confronted and reminded about 

the social determinants of health and how in fact we truly can’t 

have a healthy society. And regularly seeing activity like the 

sex trade close to home, Mr. Speaker, on the streets near my 

house, regularly seeing and having to live with and listen to 

constituents and neighbours about some of the negative aspects 

of addictions, Mr. Speaker, and how that affects our 

communities, it’s one of the best examples of how our futures 

and our lives in Saskatchewan truly are interconnected. What 

happens to the most vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, has a real 

influence and a real connection to the most privileged. 

 

And I don’t see, Mr. Speaker, within the Throne Speech, 

enough language, enough of a clear plan to address those social 

determinants. I don’t see enough being done in response to the 

HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] crisis that our province 

faces and any sort of indication that we would depart from what 

I have characterized before as a drop-in-the-bucket approach. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we think of the social determinants of 

health, we also think of housing. And my thoughts are taken 

back to a door knocking experience, as I’m sure many 

members, when we think of the things that motivate us and 

guide us as individuals and as legislators, we think of our 

families certainly, but we also think of the contact that we have 

with constituents and the people that we deal with. 

 

And I may have shared this story before in the Assembly. I 

can’t quite recall, Mr. Speaker. But I remember door knocking 

on a house not far from my . . . just in an adjacent 

neighbourhood to where I live. And the gentleman welcomed 

me to the door, was happy to see me. And he invited me into his 

house which, as MLAs know, sometimes that happens when 

you’re door knocking. And it’s always an adventure because 

you don’t know if it’s a short visit or if you might be losing 

your canvassing partner for some period of time. This 

gentleman invited me into the house and I stepped in. And right 

away I was hit by a smell of must and perhaps a smell of mould. 

And we stepped into his living room, and in his living room 

there was only one place to sit because every other couch, every 

other chair and table had buckets under it. And some were 

almost full and some were about halfway full. And there were 

some papers that had gotten wet and were wet. And he wanted 

to know how I could help and what I could do. But most of all 

he just wanted me to see the condition that he’s living in and the 

challenges that he faces. And I remember he took me over to 

the corner and pulled back a ceiling tile and we could actually 

see daylight coming through the roof. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know the situation of that house and that 

individual is complicated. And I know that there are many 

factors that contribute to why that house is that way and why 

that individual finds himself in that situation. But it all comes 

back to what are those social determinants? What steps are we 

taking early on in the stage so that man doesn’t face the health 

consequences that come because of living in that sort of 

environment? 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, also on the health front, some of the 

conversations that I’ve had with individuals who have called the 

office who are asking for some common sense supports and 

assistance in order to improve the long-term health outcomes of 

their loved ones, in order to bring a higher quality and standard 

of life for their loved ones, and to give the kind of respect that, 

in this situation, the seniors of our province deserve. 

 

I’m thinking of a conversation I had with a woman who is 

caring for her partner who has Alzheimer’s and dementia and 

the challenges that she was facing. Still at a stage where they 

could stay in their home, but was needing some more assistance 

for respite and perhaps some other changes to the house in order 

to allow for that to occur. And it’s those kinds of steps, Mr. 

Speaker, that can save health dollars in the long run, but more 

importantly it’s those kinds of steps that can bring the quality of 

life and the type of respect that the people in our province — 

the patients, the residents, the seniors of our province — most 

certainly deserve. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the topic of culture, which we just concluded 

question period on, as the member from Riversdale mentioned, 

culture is what makes our lives richer. And you know, some of 

us who have family members directly engaged in the cultural 

community and active in making art, whatever form, as the 

minister was promoting in his response to the questions from 

the member from Riversdale, we know that culture matters. So 

the broad comments that the government has made on the topic 

of culture within the Throne Speech, good comments, Mr. 

Speaker. But again this is one of the instances where we need to 

fact check. We need to examine the words on the page with the 

reality that has occurred just recently, as well as ongoing in the 

immediate and in the future. 

 

And on this one, Mr. Speaker, the glaring example is the film 

employment tax credit and the steps that the members opposite 

have made. Mr. Speaker, members opposite, they have no allies 

left on this issue, in my opinion. There are the seats on the 

opposite side that are filled and yes, if forced and whipped to a 

vote, most members would have and did support killing the tax. 

I think in a private conversation, it would actually be a different 

breakdown. But, Mr. Speaker, with the chamber coming out 

opposed to this cut, with the arts community most certainly, 

connected to the chamber but the small businesses that 

benefited and did well because of a good film industry here in 

the province, it’s hard to take members opposite seriously on 

any sort of topic related to culture when their recent track 

record is so horrible on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I have a serious problem with anything that’s written on 

culture in this Throne Speech. While some of the broad 

messages sound fine and are good, if we look at the actual 

actions, if we look at the recent track record and what they’re 

doing right now, Mr. Speaker, it simply doesn’t make sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve gone through the speech, I’ve highlighted 

that this speech does hit and touch on many of the right things 

in broad terms. It says some of the right words. But when you 

take a closer look, when you look at the detail, and in some 

cases the lack of detail, when you look at the recent actions that 

members opposite have performed and done, I think, Mr. 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2012 

Speaker, we see that this Throne Speech falls short. 

 

So I’m confronted again, Mr. Speaker, with that why question, 

that question that our children present to us on a regular basis or 

our grandchildren present to us on a regular basis. And I’m 

asked why should I support this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

Well after reviewing the evidence, after reviewing the actions of 

members opposite, for me there is simply not enough evidence 

for me to provide my endorsement and my support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the type of future that we need in Saskatchewan is 

one that extends opportunity to all, whether we’re born to the 

poorest of families or the richest. The type of vision that we 

need in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is one that does not pit 

working people against businesses but truly understands the 

interconnectedness of the two and has a plan and has the 

determination to make that a reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the type of vision that we need in our province is 

one that truly addresses the root causes of our illness, addresses 

the social determinates of our health, allowing our families to 

be healthier. And the type of vision, Mr. Speaker, that we need 

in this province is one that places us as environmental leaders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, this Throne Speech does not match 

that future vision that we need for the province. And for that 

reason, I’ll be supporting the amendment and not the original 

motion from the government. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Thanks, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to my colleagues for that. I 

just want to begin with a thank you again to the constituents in 

Swift Current. I’ve had the chance to do that already since the 

election, but I think it’s always important that we recognize 

why we’re here and how we got here. So I’m grateful to them 

for their ongoing confidence and support in working to serve 

their needs first and foremost as their MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly]. I also want to acknowledge the support 

of my family again, Mr. Speaker, of Tami and Megan, who’s 

now been in Saskatoon for a bit but never that far away, and as 

well as Colter and Faith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome the chance to enter this debate on the 

Speech from the Throne immediately after the member that’s 

just spoken, the member from Massey Place who is not only a 

senior critic, I would say, in the opposition, but also now a 

leadership candidate for his party. Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting 

that he would get this nod from the leader to be able to deliver 

what is a fairly important place in the Throne Speech debate, for 

him to be able to basically close the deal for the amendment 

that they put forward. 

 

I’m not sure if the member for Regina Rosemont, the other 

leadership candidate that’s currently in the caucus, should be 

worried about what we’ve seen in the first few days. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a decided balance of questions in 

favour of the member for Massey Place. And the questions they 

have given to the member for Rosemont have maybe not been 

the best questions for him. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, perhaps it’s the old NDP way. Because 

the NDP believe in that notion of equalizing from the centre. 

And maybe they note, Mr. Speaker, that on the websites, and 

the buzz around the New Democratic Party, that it’s the 

member for Regina Rosemont that appears to be in the lead, 

although it might be the economist, Mr. Weir, who’s certainly 

garnering a lot of attention. But it might be the member for 

Rosemont based on endorsements. 

 

Certainly if you check the websites, and I know the member for 

Kindersley has, and you take a look at those who’ve endorsed 

the member for Rosemont, there’s many, many more of those 

than those who have endorsed the member for Massey Place, 

which is interesting because I think going into the contest many 

observers of politics thought, well you know, maybe the 

favoured son, the next leader is the member for Massey Place. 

And yet it seems that in terms of immediate past colleagues in 

this legislature, candidates and organizers of the NDP, there is a 

huge balance in favour of the member for Rosemont than in 

favour of the member for Massey Place. So maybe that’s why 

he got to speak now as a bit of a way to equalize things out a 

little bit. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that he did canvass some of 

the issues in the Throne Speech, and he made some 

observations that I think bear some clarification, Mr. Speaker. 

For example, he talked a little bit about the issue of First 

Nations engagement in the economy. It’s very true that this is 

central to the growth plan the province has released, that we’ve 

released as a government, central to the Speech from the Throne 

then by definition, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen some progress, 

some very exciting best practices that are being deployed at the 

school board level, being deployed by institutions like SIIT that 

are bearing results for First Nations and Métis as we seek to see 

them more engaged in the economy. 

 

This must be our first priority in dealing with what is the second 

component of our growth plan and that’s the plan around the 

labour shortage. Yes, we need more immigrants. Yes, we need 

more expatriates to come home; we need more other Canadians 

to come back. But first and foremost we must deal with the fact 

that Aboriginal unemployment is much higher than 

non-Aboriginal unemployment and here is a great opportunity 

for us to deal with the labour shortage and fully engage fellow 

citizens in this province to a greater extent. 

 

We’ve heard from the NDP, if not from the member that just 

spoke though, Mr. Speaker. I think the NDP said in a press 

release that First Nations unemployment — this was just the 

other day — that First Nations unemployment is at an all 

time-high, the highest it’s ever been. Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

true. The highest that the First Nations unemployment has ever 

been was March 2006 — 29 per cent — and those members 

were in office. Mr. Speaker, those members were in office and 

they presided over an economy that to say the least 

underperformed. The surest way, the surest way to see First 

Nations not fully engaged in this economy is to not have an 

economy that’s creating jobs in the first place, and this is the 

record of that government. When they were in government, this 

is the record of that party. 

 

The member who just spoke also talked a little bit about 

immigration. We’ve also seen him ask some questions of the 

minister here. Well immigration also features prominently in 



October 31, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

the growth plan. Mr. Speaker, we’ve identified the need for the 

cap on immigrant nominees to improve from 4,000 to 6,000. 

We need the federal government to help in this regard. We’ve 

identified the need for us to continue on the job fairs, Mr. 

Speaker, to keep going into markets where there are skilled 

labourers who can build their future here in the province, who 

can help deal with the labour shortage. 

 

But it’s interesting, you see, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP have 

this new-found interest in immigration. It’s new-found because 

the record would say something completely different. When 

that member stands up and that member from Massey Place 

wants to talk about immigration numbers in this province and 

changes the federal government has made and what we are 

doing to react to them, he ought to remember that between 2001 

and 2006 they were in office. His party was in office. There was 

a total of 8,000 newcomers to the province under immigration 

initiatives. Since 2007 under this government, with focused and 

decidedly more ambitious goals, with a better relationship with 

the federal government, the number has increased from 8,000 

under his party to 39,000 under the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to hear the member from 

Massey Place now espouse on behalf of his party this great 

interest in seeing Saskatchewan welcome more immigrants and 

improve settlement services. Never in the history of this 

province — well save perhaps for our first 10 or 15 years — 

have there been greater numbers of new citizens to this country 

choosing Saskatchewan. And never in the history of the 

province has there been the record investment in settlement 

services to welcome these new Canadians to our province and 

to, Mr. Speaker, ensure that they are fully benefiting from life 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. These are the facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the member that just spoke, his fellow 

candidates, including Mr. Weir who’s an economist says, and 

perhaps a front-runner, has looked at the member’s just 

proposed . . . some of his proposals in his leadership campaign. 

The member for Massey Place has made a number of proposals, 

policy proposals. For example, he has called for the 

modernization of Hansard, Mr. Speaker, and more camera 

angles in the legislature, I understand. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that he’s on to something, because if there’s one thing that 

I hear in the coffee shops in Swift Current and around this 

province is people saying, if there was only a modernized 

Hansard in this province. If only there were more camera 

angles, so we could look at the MLAs while they speak to us 

like we’re doing right now today. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to be fair to the member from Massey Place, 

there’s been broader policy proposals on other issues. Mr. Weir, 

his counterpart, the front-runner, says that his proposals are fine 

but added, “The fundamental problem is not the party’s 

policy-making process.” Because that’s what he’s focused on, 

process. He says, Mr. Weir says, “The problem is that our 

elected leadership has not paid attention to party policy.” Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know if that’s true or not true. That’s for New 

Democrats to decide. But it’s interesting that these are some of 

the comments we see with respect to the member who just 

spoke and engaged, as he should, in the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the member engaged in his Throne Speech and 

others have in this Assembly, some have talked in different 

shades of enthusiasm about growth in the province. I think you 

would note, Mr. Speaker, to be fair, and I’ve tried to follow as 

many as I could, I think you would note that when members on 

this side of the House talk about growth — not taking credit for 

the growth; the government didn’t cause those things to happen 

— hopefully we’re getting out of the way of that growth. 

Hopefully we’re dealing with its challenges. That’s what the 

Speech from the Throne’s all about. 

 

But when members on this side of the House talk about growth, 

there is a marked, there is a greater degree of enthusiasm about 

it, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not sure why that is except to conclude 

that the New Democratic Party have really never been 

comfortable, never really been comfortable with a growing 

Saskatchewan. In fact I remember a day not long ago when 

pundits and others would posit for political discourse in this 

province the theory, the notion that those members opposite 

were actually more comfortable when people left this province, 

when our population was either shrinking or stagnating, because 

they thought their political interests would be served by the 

status quo. They had been in office for so long, they had an 

economic development minister who, when confronted with — 

Mr. Lautermilch — when confronted with out-migration said, 

don’t worry, when people leave there’s more left for the rest of 

us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is what underlies, I think, some of the 

discomfort that we see from members opposite about growth. 

They’re sort of paying this notional homage to growth now and 

the member that just spoke and others across the way that had 

just spoke on the Speech from the Throne, including the 

member from Athabasca, if he’s spoken in the debate — he has 

— when they have dealt with the Speech from the Throne and 

the plan for growth, Mr. Speaker, they seem to be 

uncomfortable just stating that growth is a good thing upfront, 

that this is what we ought to be doing in this legislature, 

facilitating that growth, meeting its challenges so that it can 

continue. 

 

And if we needed more proof of that particular view, and that is 

my view, we only need to look to the words of the Leader of the 

Opposition. When the growth plan was announced in 

Saskatoon, a number of media went to the Leader of the 

Opposition, the leader of the New Democratic Party, to ask him 

what he thought about the plan for growth. And in the 

provincial media what I’m about to read, I don’t think I saw it 

covered, but it was covered in The Globe and Mail, so he must 

have also done an interview with The Globe and Mail, Canada’s 

national newspaper. Here’s what he said. Here’s what he said 

about the plan for growth. This is the leader of the NDP. He 

said, “A document like this distracts everybody, (and) I think 

his (Wall’s) popularity will stay up there as long as there’s sort 

of a myth of a booming economy.” 

 

The leader of the New Democratic Party characterized what’s 

going in this province, in terms of the growth that we see, as a 

myth. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Eighty thousand new people coming to this province in five 

years is a myth, Mr. Speaker, according to the NDP. This 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2012 

province leading the country in economic statistic after statistic, 

retail sales, Mr. Speaker, building permits, new housing starts 

— we lead in all those — but for the NDP, this has just been a 

myth. For those in this province in small business and those 

who are now working in better paying jobs, all of this that 

we’ve seen in Saskatchewan over the last five or six years is 

just a myth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see average weekly earnings moving up in this 

province. They have consistently moved up in the last four or 

five years, Mr. Speaker, at a percentage that we haven’t seen in 

Saskatchewan, especially — not just including, but especially 

— under members opposite when they were in government. 

They know that because we just heard them at least pay sort of 

notional or . . . [inaudible] . . . homage to this growth that’s 

going on in the province. That’s what they’re saying in the 

speeches because I think they believe, well we kind of have to 

say that now because people in Saskatchewan kind of think that 

things are pretty good. So I guess we’re going to have to sort of 

go along with that. But we’ll switch quickly to redistribution. 

We’ll switch quickly to our old ways, Mr. Speaker, which 

weren’t about growth but about, Mr. Speaker, the status quo and 

a stagnant economy. And the proof is in the fact that the leader 

of their party calls what’s going on in Saskatchewan today a 

myth. 

 

So we have a choice, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to New 

Democrat politicians and New Democrat parties at various 

levels. You can choose the federal NDP leader. He doesn’t 

describe our economy as a myth. He describes it as a disease, 

Mr. Speaker. You can have him, or you can have the current 

NDP that sit in this legislature in the midst of the growth that 

we’ve seen in this province. They call it a myth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to them that notwithstanding what 

they were trying to admit, I think, in some of their speeches in 

the Throne Speech debate, until they understand the fact that 

this place has changed for the better not because of this 

particular government but because of growth that’s happening 

— that we’re more diverse because 39,000 newcomers have 

come to this province in four years; that more people are 

working in Saskatchewan than ever before — until they realize 

that this is a different place, rural and urban, north and south, 

they’re going to be a small group sitting to your left hand, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting the debate has been about the 

economy, and it should because the Speech from the Throne is 

about that as well. And you know, lately there’s been some 

discourse even amongst those NDP leadership candidates about 

economic policies here and what they may be doing to the 

national currency, Mr. Speaker. We have had the federal leader 

of the New Democratic Party. He has depicted our economy, 

our resource-based economy as a disease. 

 

And so we have wondered quite rightly, we have wondered as a 

party and as a government and as colleagues in the legislature 

when one of them, when one of them sitting over there — 

certainly the two that are running to be the leader and maybe 

one day premier — when one of them would stand up for 

Saskatchewan and say, you know what? Our federal leader has 

it wrong. We sort of think Mark Carney might have it right. We 

sort of might think the facts might have it right even as we’ve 

seen manufacturing numbers move up in this province and 

across the country with resource development. 

 

Because remember what Dutch disease says. Dutch disease is 

the economic principle founded in the experience of Holland, 

where resource development spiked the currency and currency 

hurt exports and that hurt manufacturing. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve certainly seen resource development in this province. 

We’ve seen it in potash, in uranium, and in oil. We’ve seen it in 

any number of other minerals. Frankly, more interest in all of 

that, we’ve seen it in the rest of Western Canada. 

 

But this has been good for Canada. This has not just helped the 

West. This has actually fuelled manufacturing jobs to replace 

the ones that were lost in the recession, Mr. Speaker, not just a 

few years ago in that province. That’s what this province is 

doing for the rest of Canada. And so you would think that one 

of them that’s running for the leadership of their party, that 

aspires to be the Premier of this province, would stand up and 

say, our leader is wrong on this. Not one of them has. 

 

In fact, in fact one of the leadership candidates has gone on to 

say, no, no, the federal NDP are right. There is Dutch disease 

here and what we need to do is increase the taxes on the 

resource sector. Close loopholes, he said. Close loopholes, he 

says. Increase the taxes on the resource sector and that will dry 

up the overheated investment, I think is his notion, his theory. 

And that happening in Saskatchewan will change the Canadian 

dollar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So not only have we had neither of these two leadership 

candidates, who sit in this Assembly on a regular basis, say that 

Mr. Mulcair is wrong and stand up for the province, we have 

actually their NDP leadership candidate saying that they agree 

with him. Mr. Speaker, this is a very important point. They 

might not think it is. But people in this province, regardless of 

party stripe, especially when it comes to natural resources — 

we saw it with potash not too long ago — they want their 

elected representatives, their government, anybody in this 

Assembly who is elected, they want them to stand up for 

Saskatchewan’s interests. And these leadership candidates have 

failed the very first and important test in this regard. 

 

We take a different view on the government side. We take a 

different view, and it’s represented in the plan for growth that 

underpins the Speech from the Throne. We take a view that 

growth is good, that the resource sector is good, that exports 

increasing by triple in the last 10 years is good. We set a goal 

that now that they would double. We see agriculture as the 

strength that it is, Mr. Speaker, in this growth plan. 

 

I’ve been very interested to see some of the commentary from 

those who observe politics in our economy about the amount of 

time this growth plan, which underpins the Speech from the 

Throne, dedicates to agriculture. For a long, long season in this 

province, governments, New Democratic governments, didn’t 

want to talk about agriculture. More than that, there seemed to 

be a willingness to sort of let that rural component of this 

province, the crucially important rural component, sort of just 

survive on its own. We’ll close 50 hospitals. We’ll rip up farm 

support programs. We’ll get by because there’s more seats in 

the city than there is in the country. 

 



October 31, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

And it wasn’t just a political calculation that was unfortunate 

and tragic for this province, Mr. Speaker, it was an economic 

miscalculation. Because anyone could have seen then, although 

agriculture wasn’t as strong as it is now, anyone could see then 

that the world’s population was growing. The UN’s [United 

Nations] been reporting for some time about what’s going to 

happen in terms of worldwide hunger. Economists around the 

world have been reporting, Mr. Speaker, that as there’s greater 

and greater members of the middle class in India and in China 

and in places like Indonesia — 240 million people growing at 7 

per cent — the middle class wants greater and greater amounts 

of protein in their diet. 

 

Guess what? That’s good news for this province. It’s good news 

for a province that has 44 per cent of all arable acres in the 

country. It’s good news for a province that’s responsible for 58 

per cent of the world’s exports of lentils and 55 per cent of the 

world’s exports of peas. It’s good news for a province that now 

is 47 per cent of China’s canola seed imports and 37 per cent of 

China’s canola oil imports. It’s good news for a province that 

now constitutes 50 per cent of the imports from Indonesia. So 

this plan for growth recognizes that growth is good, that we 

need to sustain it, that export development is good and yes, that 

we have to deal with the challenges that come with growth. 

 

By the way, let me state for the record again, we believe on this 

side that the challenges of growth are much preferred — much, 

much, much preferred — by people in this province than the 

challenges of decline that we saw. Mr. Speaker, as more and 

more people leave this people, as more investment flees this 

province in the years previous, our economy, our economic 

base, our tax base just atrophied and got smaller and smaller. 

And so the governments of the day had less money. Less money 

to invest in arts and culture. Less money to invest in health care. 

Less money to invest in education. Why? Because, Mr. 

Speaker, theirs was not a growth imperative. We’ve already ran 

over their history. 

 

We had a minister of Finance, I think Mr. Melenchuk, and 

maybe it was when he was Minister of Education, who quite 

proudly tabled in this legislature a plan for decline in the 

enrolment system. Just going to happen in Saskatoon, never 

mind in the rural areas. Mr. Speaker, this is the mindset that 

informed the members opposite then and I dare say now, based 

on what we’ve heard in their speeches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this plan for growth recognizes that there are 

challenges that we will meet, and we will meet them together. It 

recognizes that in the last four years there’s been a 63 per cent 

increase in investment in public infrastructure when you 

consider federal, municipal, and provincial infrastructure 

investments. But that’s not enough. So we have to do more. 

And it highlights $2.5 billion worth of infrastructure we have to 

do. It highlights 30 million to partner with Cameco’s 30 million 

to rebuild Highway 914 in the North. It recognizes the need for 

a municipal infrastructure program for a new vehicle to deliver 

infrastructure called SaskBuilds. It recognizes the need to 

pursue P3s [public-private partnership]. 

 

It recognizes the need to provide capital to SaskBuilds, so 

we’ve taken $150 million from the growth and security fund to 

do that, leaving a half billion dollars in the fund, Mr. Speaker, 

in the rainy day fund. It recognizes that we have to deal with the 

labour shortage. It lays out ways and plans to do that because 

we’ve been listening to stakeholders and people in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, make no mistake: we understand on this side of 

the House that there’s a lot of work to be done, that while the 

government ought not to take credit for any growth, and 

doesn’t, but the government needs to be prepared and proactive 

in facilitating that growth and providing the right business 

climate, a competitive climate with competitive corporate 

business tax rates, but that we also need to facilitate that growth 

by being prepared for the infrastructure challenge that lies 

ahead. That’s what’s at the heart of this document. That’s 

what’s at the heart of the plan. 

 

What this plan also recognized, Mr. Speaker, is that the point of 

all of this, the point of a plan to continue the growth, at least for 

government to facilitate that kind of growth and then to deal 

with the infrastructure challenges, the point of all of that isn’t 

growth in and of itself. It’s the dividends that we find from 

growth. It’s the investments we can make to reduce surgical 

wait times. It’s investments we can make in our classrooms. 

Fifty per cent of the schools in this province have been 

renovated since this party took office, and there is more work to 

be done. There is new schools being built. 

 

We understand that the dividends of growth allow us to 

eliminate that wait-list of those who have disabilities, who are 

waiting for the dignity of a home, of a group home space. That 

was spoken to earlier in members’ statements. Mr. Speaker, we 

were surprised to hear ministers report to cabinet just a few 

years ago that under this government, the social democratic 

government who do a lot of talking about those who are most 

vulnerable, that under their government, the wait-list for people 

who had disabilities for a place to live and for respite 

programming was over 450 people. And so because the 

economy was growing, we had about $40 million that we could 

take as a government and say here’s a four-year plan to 

eliminate that particular wait-list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I got elected to this side of the House in ’07, 

the wait list in the Swift Current area through Southwest Homes 

for these, our most vulnerable, was 25. Mr. Speaker, not very 

long ago that wait list was zero. We’ve had a lot of families 

move to Swift Current, which is great, so I think we might have 

one or two on the wait-list. And we’ll deal with those, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But we won’t be able to eliminate that wait-list across the 

province if we follow the dogma and the ideology of that party, 

which is to pay lip service to growth but to pursue policies like 

a $200 million tax hike on small business, the engine of the 

economy. We will not be able to achieve those goals if we 

follow their plan. We have seen it in this province. We’ve been 

through it in this province. 

 

Now we understand what growth can provide. It can provide for 

a better quality of life in this province. It will perpetuate what 

we’re calling the Saskatchewan advantage. There’ll be cycles 

that we’ll have to deal with. That’s why we’re going to have an 

ongoing rainy day fund. But, Mr. Speaker, we know that in a 

world that wants energy security and food security, our chances 

are great so long as we pursue these policies represented in the 

Speech from the Throne, and so long as we remember why we 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2012 

want growth in the first place, Mr. Speaker. And for these 

reasons, I will be opposing the amendment and I’ll support the 

main motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question on the 

amendment? It has been moved an amendment to the main 

motion by the Leader of the Opposition and the Member for 

Athabasca that the motion be amended by adding the following: 

 

And, That this government no longer enjoys the 

confidence of the Assembly because it has allowed its 

ideology to trump common sense when governing, has 

introduced an agenda of privatization which puts 

politicians ahead of people, and ignores the middle class 

and small businesses of Saskatchewan. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — The nos have it. I declare the amendment lost. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Standing vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — You need another member. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:15 until 15:45.] 

 

The Speaker: — Will those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 9] 

 

Nilson Forbes Belanger 

Wotherspoon Broten Chartier 

Sproule McCall Vermette 

 

The Speaker: — Will those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 43] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Harpauer Toth 

Huyghebaert Doherty Marchuk 

Reiter McMillan Heppner 

Harrison Elhard Hart 

Bradshaw Bjornerud Brkich 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Campeau 

Wilson Ross Kirsch 

Michelson Doke Cox 

Merriman Jurgens Steinley 

Hickie Lawrence Tochor 

Moe Parent Phillips 

Docherty   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 9; 

those opposed, 43. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the amendment lost. Debate will 

continue on the main motion. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 

Battlefords, seconded by the member for Regina Coronation 

Park: 

 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:48 until 15:49.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 43] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Duncan Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Harpauer Toth 

Huyghebaert Doherty Marchuk 

Reiter McMillan Heppner 

Harrison Elhard Hart 

Bradshaw Bjornerud Brkich 

Makowsky Ottenbreit Campeau 



October 31, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

Wilson Ross Kirsch 

Michelson Doke Cox 

Merriman Jurgens Steinley 

Hickie Lawrence Tochor 

Moe Parent Phillips 

Docherty   

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 9] 

 

Nilson Forbes Belanger 

Wotherspoon Broten Chartier 

Sproule McCall Vermette 

 

Clerk: — The numbers are, Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the 

motion, 43; those opposed, 9. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 

a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:52.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1693 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1693 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1693 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1693 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1693 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1694 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1694 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1694 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1694 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Congratulations to Saskatchewan Performer 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1694 

 Remembering Randell Morris 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1695 

 Ghosts of the Arts Walk 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1695 

 Agriculture Month 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1695 

 Opening of New Daycare 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1696 

 Opening of New Group Home 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1696 

 2013 Juno Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1696 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Potential Changes to Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1696 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1697 

 Debt Reduction 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1698 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1698 

 Community Pastures 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1699 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1699 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1700 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1700 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1701 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1701 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1702 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1706 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 1710 

 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 1710 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


