




















































Hansard: April 24, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 34A  TUESDAY, APRIL 24, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1227 

 April 24, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Premier . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve only been gone one day. I’d ask for leave to make 

an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to make an 

extended introduction. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

agree? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Working Abroad Expo took place in Dublin, Ireland on March 

3rd to 4th and then later on that week in Cork on the 7th of 

March. 

 

We are joined by a large delegation of entrepreneurs of 

Saskatchewan companies and some government officials who 

participated in that very, very successful mission, Mr. Speaker. 

You’ll know the government supported that mission, led that 

mission, but there would have been no credibility to it at all had 

we not come to offer jobs to people in Ireland. And that can 

only happen when you have the private sector engaged and 

businesses alongside, and they just did an excellent job 

representing Saskatchewan. 

 

Fifteen thousand people attended the expo, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan had the largest pavilion at the expo. There was 

some competition though from, I think, Australia, New 

Zealand, and Alberta and BC [British Columbia] had a small 

presence there, but certainly I think the Saskatchewan 

delegation was the largest. 

 

There was immediate interest in the opportunities that were on 

offer from our employers, some of whom were wearing Rider 

green at the expo, which obviously stood out and had a salutary 

effect, given the fact that we were in Ireland, Mr. Speaker. One 

of the companies, K&R Dahl Contracting of White Fox — I 

believe they’re here with us today — made their first offer 

within 20 minutes of the expo’s opening. Another, Sandpiper 

Truck Services, hired a mechanic who was considering an offer 

in Perth, Australia.  

 

Here’s a great story that was told to me earlier today, Mr. 

Speaker. The man now to work for Sandpiper Truck Services 

made his decision after he and his wife consulted with their 

10-year-old daughter. They asked her about the choice of Perth 

versus Saskatchewan, and she said, she asked, are there any 

snakes in Perth? And I think her dad said, yes there are snakes 

in Perth. And then she asked, can you snowmobile in 

Saskatchewan? And the answer to that was yes, and they’re 

coming to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To date there have been more than 280 offers made. Actually 

we think the number today is 282; that exceeds the target of 

275. Employers are still interviewing and screening. Our own 

immigration officials have been working hard with those who 

have received the job offers. The first four employees arrived, 

we understand, yesterday. They’re already on the job. They’re 

working for Monad Industrial Constructors at the expansion of 

Agrium potash mine in Vanscoy, Mr. Speaker. And this will 

take just a bit of time, but I think it’s important to read the 

names at least of the companies that are with us today. And if I 

miss any, I apologize through you, Mr. Speaker, to the group 

that’s joined us. 

 

K&R Dahl Contracting is here. Morris Industries is here as 

well. Young’s farm equipment had a display there. So did 

JayDee AgTech, located all over the province including in my 

hometown of Swift Current. Redhead Equipment was there and 

have joined us today, I believe; JNE Welding in Saskatoon; 

Industrial Machine and Manufacturing in Saskatoon; Sandpiper 

Truck Services in Lloyd. SaskPower was there looking for 

engineers, Mr. Speaker; Ardel Steel; Monad Industrial 

Constructors in Vanscoy; MidWest Truck Centre in Lloyd; 

Allnorth Consultants in Saskatoon; First Canada ULC, who are 

in North Battleford, Regina, and Radville. ISM [Information 

Systems Management Corporation] was there, Mr. Speaker, and 

we also had the physician recruiting agency of Saskatchewan 

there on the spot. 

 

I need to thank the Regina Chamber of Commerce and 

specifically the leadership of the executive director, John 

Hopkins. I believe he’s joined us as well today. John was able 

to help us ensure that the most important asset of the delegation 

could come to Ireland, and they are no stranger now to this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker: Howard Morrisey and his wife, Sinead 

Tierney, recently expatriates of Ireland and now contributing 

mightily to the province of Saskatchewan. And maybe they 

could give us a wave. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, there would be breakout sessions at the 

expo, on the first day, the Minister of Advanced Education and 

myself thought we’d tell a packed room all about 

Saskatchewan. Too late in that session we turned things over to 

Sinead and Howard, and they were able to answer the questions 

much better than we were, Mr. Speaker, because they had made 

this move not too long ago. And so they could speak to all of 

the quality-of-life questions that came, you know, on health 

care, on the price of milk, on how long does it take to get a 

driver’s licence, and what’s it like to drive on the wrong side of 

the road. 

 

The next day we, the minister and I, we figured it out that we 

should just shut up and let them lead that session. And I just 

want to thank them very much. They’re great. They’re new 

residents to the province, but they are fantastic ambassadors for 

Saskatchewan. And I want to say through you, again, Mr. 

Speaker, to all the employers, thank you very much for building 

the Saskatchewan advantage on a daily basis. And thank you 

for lending credibility to our mission and bringing jobs to the 

people of Ireland and also to people right across this province 

on a daily basis. Mr. Speaker, we should welcome them to their 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

opposition, and I think on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, I want to say thank you very much to all of 

those people who have participated in this latest discussion with 

Irish people. I think we should all remind ourselves, and we can 

see from one of our statues over here, that a lot of roots for 

Saskatchewan come from Ireland over quite a number of 

centuries. And that’s one of the reasons why, when we go to 

visit Ireland as a delegation, there’s lots of connections in 

families over many, many years. I think that’s a real strength 

for us; it’s a real strength for Ireland. And I want to thank all of 

you who participated in that particular work and specially 

welcome you here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I have the honour of introducing some very 

special mothers of children with disabilities that we had an 

opportunity to have breakfast with this morning. Along with 

them we have some members of SACL [Saskatchewan 

Association for Community Living]. Joining us today are 

Bluesette Campbell, Andrea Lavallee, Adrienne Zakreski, 

Tracy Patterson, Lynn Shann; and from SACL, we have Kevin 

McTavish, Judy Hannah, Bonnie Cherewyk, and Tony Bassett. 

 

I’d like to thank the mothers for their information that they 

shared with us this morning, for their goals, and their dreams 

for their children. We know the children are our most 

vulnerable and our most valuable asset. And as we go forward, 

I assure you that our promise to make sure that Saskatchewan is 

the best place to live in Canada with a disability, we’ll be 

having your words with us. Thank you very much, and 

welcome to your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming everyone from SACL and the 

mothers who are here today to share a little bit of their story and 

their experience so all of us in the Assembly have an 

opportunity to understand just a small little snapshot of what 

your life is like living with a child with disabilities, both the 

challenges and all the wonderful things that come from it too. 

 

But I know, having had the privilege back in 2004, I actually 

was the practicum student who coordinated the first Adopt an 

MLA breakfast here, so SACL and all the folks involved have a 

pretty special place in my heart. But keep up your good work 

and make sure that you keep sharing with us all your own 

experiences so we know the good work that’s happening, but 

also where the challenges are and where the policy gaps are. 

Your efforts are well worth it, so thank you so much for being 

here today. And I’d ask all members to join us in welcoming 

the mothers and the staff from SACL to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

Mr. Stewart: — With leave for a slightly extended 

introduction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 

extended member’s statement. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to agree? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Recognize the member for Thunder 

Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

honourable Assembly, three very special guests from the 

Pacific NorthWest Economic Region’s executive council: Mr. 

Cliff Larsen, Montana state senator — and I’ll ask them to 

wave as I introduce them — Mr. Matt Morrison, PNWER’s 

[Pacific NorthWest Economic Region] chief executive officer; 

Mr. Colin Smith, past president of British Columbia’s 

Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists and 

PNWER private sector lead. They are accompanied, Mr. 

Speaker, by Matt Smith and Kareen Holtby of Executive 

Council, international relations. 

 

PNWER is a public-private partnership comprised of 

government representatives, businesses, and non-government 

organizations in the US [United States] states and Canadian 

provinces and territories of Saskatchewan, Alberta, British 

Columbia, Yukon, Northwest Territories, Alaska, Washington, 

Oregon, Idaho, and Montana. Its mission is to promote greater 

regional collaboration, improve competitiveness, achieve 

continued economic growth, and reduce trade and regulatory 

barriers. Saskatchewan has been a member of PNWER since 

July of 2008, and for the first time will host PNWER’s annual 

summit in Saskatoon this July 15th to 19th. 

 

PNWER is in the city for its biannual capital visit. This 

morning the committee met with the Lieutenant Governor and 

representatives of a number of Saskatchewan ministries and 

agencies in order to discuss how PNWER can best assist them 

in advancing their interests. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 

members of this honourable Assembly to join me in welcoming 

our guests from PNWER’s executive committee. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do want to join in, in 

welcoming the representatives from PNWER to the legislature. 

I had the privilege of taking the PNWER leadership course a 

number of years ago, and I’ve also attended a number of their 

meetings and recognized the strong leadership that they have 

provided for legislators and business, and I think especially 

college or university presidents in the Pacific Northwest and in 

Western Canada as a place where good ideas can be discussed 

and shared and hopefully implemented in many of those places. 

So special welcome to the PNWER guests. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you, I’d like to introduce a constituent of mine that 

is seated in your gallery. And this constituent just happens to be 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

my sister, Edna Irwin, and I always look forward to Edna 

coming up and spending a little bit of time with me. She does it 

in the fall session as well as the spring session, so it’s really 

great to have her at this time. She’s joined by Bonnie Donison. 

Bonnie works for the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. 

So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming Edna and 

Bonnie to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, sitting in the west gallery, I would like to introduce a 

group of present and future leaders; some call them teachers 

and students. Earlier I had the distinct pleasure of sharing 

questions and answers with the Prince Albert Rotary model 

United Nations group, organized through St. Mary High 

School. 

 

These students are from five Prince Albert schools. There’s 

Carlton Comprehensive High School, there’s St. Mary High 

School with teachers Dennis Ogrodnick, Padraic Watt, Loretta 

Morhart. There’s Rivier Academy with teacher Lee-Anne 

Trumier, Wesmor Community High School with Dhipak 

Dookhun, Prince Albert Collegiate Institute with teacher Greg 

Walker. And also accompanying the group, from the Rotary 

Club of Prince Albert, is Mr. Morley Harrison who was 

instrumental in bringing this dynamic group of 34 grade 11 and 

12 students here today. Please join me in welcoming them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 

join with the member opposite and welcome this impressive 

group of students that are here with us today, the Prince Albert 

Rotary Club’s model United Nations security council team. I 

did have the privilege of stopping in and having a short visit 

with these bright leaders in our province. What an impressive 

bunch. They spoke about some of their future plans in our 

province in education and some of the work that they’ve been 

debating and discussing as part of a security council team. 

 

I want to commend this group of students. But I also want to 

commend the teachers, and specifically Mr. Morley Harrison, 

who I understand was instrumental not only this year, but in 

establishing this program, and certainly good friend Mr. Dennis 

Ogrodnick. Such a pleasure to see you here today along with 

the other teachers that I met. 

 

What I am so impressed with is a program like this that really 

challenges students to be critical thinkers about the world 

around them. I understand that they were engaged in discussion 

and debate around Iran’s nuclear program and also around 

expansion of the UN [United Nations] Security Council — 

challenging issues and challenging discussions, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m sure. I thank these students for the discussion that they have 

and for what they’ll offer our province now and moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them here today. 

 

[13:45] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pardon me. I 

have a bad cold so I’ll do this as fast as I can. I would join the 

member from Rosemont and the member from Northcote in 

welcoming the students and teachers from Prince Albert. 

 

Two of the high schools that are in the gallery this afternoon, 

Mr. Speaker, are from my riding of P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton 

— that’s PACI [Prince Albert Collegiate Institute] and Carlton. 

My two daughters go to Carlton High School, and I see some 

friends of theirs up in the gallery right now. I want to thank the 

teachers, Mr. Ogrodnick and Mr. Dookhun. We go back a long 

way. We have many stories to tell and share, but not today. 

And, Mr. Morley Harrison, thank you, sir, for your commitment 

to this group. 

 

Thirty years ago I graduated from St. Mary’s High School, and 

31 years ago I took part in the model UN in grade 11 and grade 

12. I had a great experience at that time. It got me interested in 

politics. And I didn’t know I’d be here in my life, in my future. 

But who knows? Maybe one day you too will be in this House 

and representing your constituents. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce somebody in the House to you and through you to the 

members and colleagues here. Toby Greschner is from my 

constituency, La Ronge. He’s here in the gallery and I just want 

to acknowledge him and just say welcome to your legislature, 

Toby. And I know you’re moving in to a new position within 

northern Saskatchewan, and we wish you well. And we know 

you’ll do your best to try to work with First Nations, Métis, and 

our municipal leaders, also representing all the students trying 

to make sure there is opportunities for them. And we thank you 

for that and the work you continue to do on behalf of northern 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. I’d like all members to 

please join him to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature, I’d like to introduce 34 grade 10’s from the Melville 

Comprehensive School. The 34 students today are accompanied 

by their teachers, Stuart Wilson and John Svenson. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think members will remember that the teachers in 

Melville have been very faithful in bringing classes to the 

legislature over the past many and many years, and we certainly 

appreciate that. So I’d ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming this group here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to join with the member 

opposite in recognizing Toby Greschner. Toby was with the 

First Nations and Métis Relations ministry in the Northern 

Affairs Secretariat and was a source of great counsel. Toby is 

very passionate about northern Saskatchewan and he has many, 

many ideas on how to improve the livelihood of northerners. 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

Certainly his work on the northern action plan, his vision for 

that plan was very much appreciated. He’s made a career 

decision to move on, Mr. Speaker, but through you I’d like to 

ask all members to join me in welcoming Toby Greschner and 

thank him for the work that he has done for the ministry and the 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. Nobody’s 

filibustering the introduction of guests, but I’d be remiss if I 

also didn’t welcome, with the delegation of businesses who 

were in Ireland, the officials from the ministry who did an 

outstanding job of leading the mission. And so if I can, the 

assistant deputy minister, Rupen Pandya, is with us; Kirk 

Westgard is the executive director for immigration; Anna 

Ditablan is the manager of labour attraction and mission 

planning; Mr. Speaker, I think I see Richelle, who was going 

there as well, and a fellow Swift Current resident although I 

think she moved away some time ago. 

 

And I just want to say to all of them, thank you. They did an 

outstanding job. I think all the business leaders, business men 

and women who are here would agree. And we were well 

served on the trade mission by these fine officials, and I just 

want to welcome them to their Assembly as well here today. 

Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to recognize as well some of the individuals that came 

down from Meadow Lake. It’s not often that we have folks 

from Meadow Lake down here to Regina. It’s a long drive. 

 

I want to introduce Bluesette Campbell and Andrea Lavallee. 

Great to see you. Thank you very much for coming down. And 

I know that you’re very involved with SACL, and thank you for 

doing that as well. And Kareen Holtby as well, who’s a good 

friend of mine from Meadow Lake and currently working for 

the Government of Saskatchewan. It’s good to see you, Kareen. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce a 

legislative delegation from the state of North Dakota visiting us 

today. Seated behind the bar is Speaker David Drovdal. David 

is the representative from the river south of Williston to the 

South Dakota border, and so represents a significant chunk of 

North Dakota. And you might be interested to know that 

Speakers in North Dakota only get to serve one term. 

 

With us today as well is Representative Bob Skarphol from the 

Tioga area, which is part of the Bakken oil field development 

and so they understand all of the issues and pressures that we’re 

facing here in Saskatchewan as well. And last but certainly not 

least is Representative Patrick Hatlestad from the city of 

Williston just south of Saskatchewan here. They’re here for the 

next two days to do legislative meetings and to meet members 

of the Assembly and discuss issues with the various ministries. 

So I would ask everyone in the Assembly to welcome them to 

the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

welcome our delegation from North Dakota. And I want to 

welcome them in a way that I know that they will understand: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.] 

 

So welcome to Saskatchewan, and we’ll look forward to 

visiting with you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the management and accounting of 

our provincial finances. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It’s signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

Saskatchewan Hockey Hall of Fame Inductees 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise in the 

House today to highlight what is proving to be an exceptional 

year for the Semans Wheat Kings. The 1955 to 1964 hockey 

team is being inducted into the Saskatchewan hall of fame this 

summer for what is known to local Semans residents as the 

decade of champions. 

 

During this decade of champions, Mr. Speaker, the Wheat 

Kings won five Last Mountain Hockey League championships 

in addition to five Intermediate C provincial titles. 

 

I’d also like to note, Mr. Speaker, that much of the team’s 

phenomenal success was achieved under the coaching expertise 

of a man well known to the people of Saskatchewan for his 

contribution not just in sporting life but in public affairs as well, 

one Gordon MacMurchy. After having served as a great 

motivational leader in the hockey arena, the late Gordon 

MacMurchy shifted to the political arena where he served as 

NDP [New Democratic Party] MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and cabinet minister through the 1970s 

and into the early 1980s. 

 

I’d ask my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, to join with me in thanking 

Claude Finch, who played on the winning teams in 1955 and 

1958, as well as Wayne Marshall, equipment manager of the 

Wheat Kings during the decade of champions, for taking the 

initiative to put forth the submission to the Hockey Hall of 

Fame. This is a wonderful tribute to a fantastic team. 

Congratulations to the teammates and to the town of Semans 

for this very special honour. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 

National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week. Almost 

200 people in Saskatchewan are waiting for a transplant. These 

individuals are waiting for much-needed corneas, kidneys, 

hearts, livers, and lungs. My nephew, whose mother is here 

today, has benefited from two life-saving liver transplants, and 

our family is incredibly grateful for organ and tissue donations. 

 

This is why our government supports greater public awareness 

about organ and tissue donation, so that fewer patients are 

forced to put their lives on hold waiting for a transplant. We 

encourage all Saskatchewan residents to consider organ and 

tissue donation. Most importantly, we need to let our families 

know our wishes. By placing organ donation stickers on your 

health card, Mr. Speaker, there is an easy way to share your 

wishes with others, and you can visit isanorgandonor.com. This 

website helps anyone customize their Facebook profile photos 

with an organ donor badge, or send an email so that friends and 

families know that they support organ donation. High-profile 

Saskatchewan people have already done the same. Taking one 

small step could make a world of difference to someone in the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the provincial government, I thank 

the Saskatchewan transplant program and our community 

partners for their good work in encouraging and facilitating 

organ and tissue donation. Don’t take your organs to heaven; 

heaven knows we need them here. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Coffee House Serves Regina Residents 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to recognize a fantastic new business within my 

constituency that’s been serving Regina residents. Kave Haz 

opened its doors for the first time last summer after extensive 

renovations. This European-style coffee house not only offers a 

variety of coffee and teas but great desserts and lunch items as 

well. The shop is locally owned by Ken Ramage and is 

conveniently located on Dewdney Avenue across from Luther 

College. Ken strives to offer the highest quality of products and 

service to his customers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must admit that I’ve become a regular. The 

inviting atmosphere inside the café serves as a meeting place, a 

hub for the community. The fireplace is warm; the décor, 

modern; the chairs, comfortable; and the conversation always 

good. The coffee house features fresh pastries, specialty 

coffees, and over 75 varieties of teas. 

 

This summer Ken will again be offering his homemade gelato. I 

highly recommend it. Ken and his staff have been doing a great 

job developing their business. However I have been lobbying 

Ken to add some perogies and cabbage rolls to the menu, thus 

far to no avail. I guess I’ll leave the menu options up to Ken 

and his team. They are doing a fine job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join with me to 

congratulate Ken and his staff at Kave Haz for their 

contributions to our community, our economy, and my 

waistline. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Entrepreneur Creates Innovative Solutions 

 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

in the House today to applaud the efforts of a University of 

Saskatchewan Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] grad and highlight 

yet another Saskatchewan success story. Monique Haakensen 

completed a Ph.D. in microbiology, genomics, and 

bioinformatics at the University of Saskatchewan in 2009. And 

just over a year later, the 29-year-old opened Contango 

Strategies in the Innovation Place research park located on the 

University of Saskatchewan campus. 

 

Contango Strategies Ltd. is currently working on a way for 

mining companies to become greener by using wetlands. In 

partnership with native plant solutions, the environmental 

branch of Ducks Unlimited Canada, Contango is seeing how 

wetlands can clean up processed water and mining effluents. 

Their research aim is to use microbes such as fungi, yeast, 

bacteria, and algae found within the local environment to 

naturally remove toxins like arsenic and selenium from the dirty 

water mining operations produce. This alternative way of water 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

treatment is a cost-effective option for many companies. Instead 

of building expensive water treatment plants in remote 

locations, mining companies will be able to build a wetland 

environment to treat their effluents. 

 

Beyond her research, Monique was also recently named one of 

Canada’s best young entrepreneurs by the Rogers FuEL [Future 

Entrepreneurial Leaders] Awards, the only entrepreneur in 

Saskatchewan to receive this prestigious honour. Mr. Speaker, 

beyond her current accolades, Monique is one of many young 

Saskatchewan residents creating innovative solutions to 

problems that exist within this province and around the world, 

and for this we thank her. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

World Meningitis Day 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today is World Meningitis Day. Meningitis is a serious 

infection caused by the inflammation of the lining around the 

brain and spinal cord. The disease has no boundaries based on 

wealth, colour, creed, or country, and is often mistaken for the 

flu. Approximately 10 per cent of the individuals who contact 

the disease will die. Of those who survive, up to one in five 

suffer permanent disabilities such as hearing loss, neurological 

damage, and limb amputation. Meningitis spreads through close 

contact, with the bacteria being transmitted through coughing, 

sneezing, sharing personal items such as eating utensils, 

kissing, and close physical contact. 

 

The Meningitis Research Foundation of Canada, MRFC, was 

established in 1998 to prevent death and disability from 

meningitis and other infections of the central nervous system. 

Through education, the MRFC provides support to patients and 

their families affected by meningitis, increases public 

awareness of meningitis, and promotes better understanding of 

the disease among health care professionals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, World Meningitis Day allows us to raise 

awareness to support the too many Canadians who are affected 

by meningitis and to work towards sparing the heartache of 

losing one more loved one to this devastating disease. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Saskatchewan Waste Minimization Awards 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am pleased 

to highlight an environmental achievement. On April 19th, the 

Saskatchewan Waste Reduction Council and SaskPower hosted 

Saskatchewan’s 16th Waste Minimization Awards ceremony 

here in Regina. These awards recognize waste minimization 

leadership in the province and promote and encourage all 

sectors of the province to undertake activities to reduce waste. 

 

During the evening’s event, the Ministry of Government 

Services was awarded the Saskatchewan Waste Minimization 

Award in the corporate leadership category for its L.F. 

McIntosh building in Prince Albert. Overall, the Mac mall as it 

is nicknamed, reduced its waste by 53 per cent and diverts the 

equivalent of 35 garbage trucks from the landfill each year 

through its recycling efforts. They’ve also adopted a series of 

energy conservation measures that have reduced their natural 

gas use by 25 per cent and their electricity use by 15 per cent. 

All the tenants have embraced a vermicomposting initiative, 

which uses worms to recycle food waste and diverts 225 

pounds of organic materials every week. These extraordinary 

results remind us that we can all have a positive impact on our 

environment. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the other Saskatchewan Waste 

Minimization Award winners. They demonstrate a strong 

commitment to waste minimization and to helping make our 

province a better place to live. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 

 

Comparing Provincial Budgets 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the 

introduction of another deficit provincial budget, this time in 

Newfoundland and Labrador, Saskatchewan remains the only 

province in Canada with a balanced budget. Mr. Speaker, 

Newfoundland, like most other provinces, has been forced to 

focus their budget on reduced spending and cutting of 

government services, even hinting at a reduction in spending on 

provincial infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, that is not the case in 

Saskatchewan where we have increased municipal revenue 

sharing by 86 per cent since 2007, and we have committed $2.2 

billion toward our provincial highways. 

 

Ontario is also in the news today, Mr. Speaker. Their deficit 

budget passed. It now includes even more spending, thanks to a 

deal with the opposition NDP. This support was bought with a 

tax-the-rich scheme which many economists say will fall far 

short of the millions that the NDP and the Liberals hope to 

raise. Tax increases and deficit budgets are the reality for 

provinces across the country. 

 

This is not the reality in Saskatchewan where our consecutive 

balanced budgets have removed over 114,000 low-income 

earners from the provincial tax rolls. It has implemented the 

largest single-year tax reduction in Saskatchewan history which 

will save taxpayers about $300 million per year. Mr. Speaker, 

balanced budgets, keeping the economy growing, and keeping 

our election promises — that is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Lean Process 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 

has talked about attempting to be more efficient, but apparently 

finding ways to spend less money means spending more 

money. 

 

A committee meeting was told recently that to do lean reviews 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

of certain government operations, the Sask Party government 

spent more than $1.4 million on consultants. To justify this 

spending, the minister said there’s a 6 to 1 return on 

investments. The film employment tax credit this government is 

killing just also happens to give this economy a return of $6 to 

every 1 spent. To the minister: why is a 6 to 1 return not 

acceptable for the film industry, but perfectly fine when it 

comes to the lean process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have 

this opportunity to speak about lean because it’s made a big 

difference to the people of this province. We have efficiencies 

right through the entire government. Every ministry has taken 

the opportunity to involve themselves in at least three lean 

projects. Six to one savings is a great savings for the people of 

the province. 

 

In fact when I was in committee meeting the other day, the 

member who’s asking the question said, “I think I’ve got 

another idea for you for the number of forms.” Mr. Speaker, 

there’s always more work to do when it comes to being 

efficient and effective, and that’s why we have a balanced 

budget today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 

has already spent two years and $1.4 million on the lean 

program. They are now many people in the government who 

understand how this system works. To the minister: why do we 

need to spend millions more on consultants going forward 

when it would be more lean to use the expertise our own staff 

have developed in the past couple of years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

opposite doesn’t understand the lean process because that’s 

exactly what we do within our ministries, is talk to the people 

on the front line and ask them how they can be more efficient, 

how they can be more effective. That’s why the AgriStability 

fund has the processing claims down from one year to less than 

one month. That’s why campsite reservations have gone down 

from one month to one week. And that’s why blood services 

have saved $3.2 million in savings in a better management of 

inventory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why the member opposite 

would have any problem with government being efficient and 

effective when we’re spending taxpayers’ money wisely. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the minister hasn’t 

heard the last two questions because she hasn’t answered either 

of them. 

 

There also seems to be a real disconnect within this 

government’s lean plans when it comes to staffing. In a report 

on lean initiatives in health, the Institute for Healthcare 

Improvement made it clear that: 

 

The no-layoff policy is critical to the success of 

implementing lean management. People will more fully 

commit to engage in improvement work if they are not 

worried about improving themselves out of a job. 

 

And yet this government is using lean as a way to cut 16 per 

cent of its workforce. To the minister: how can lean work 

anywhere in the public service if people are worried they will 

lean themselves out of a job? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, again the member opposite 

should be looking at what we’re actually doing where we are 

using our dollars efficiently and effectively. Saskatchewan 

people actually understood in the last election that we were 

going to have the 15 per cent workforce adjustment in our 

budget and we also knew that the majority of the FTE [full-time 

equivalent] reductions was going through vacancy 

management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have saved over $129 million in workforce 

adjustments and we have people on the lean program, you 

know, saying, you know, we used to think that the lean process 

was going to mean that we’d be out of a job. What it really 

means is we can bring our voice to the workplace and 

understand how our history and our experience within the 

workforce is making our workflow better and being more 

efficient for the people in the province. 

 

That’s what we’re doing as a government. That’s what we’re 

proud of. And that’s what the people who are working with us 

in the public service are asking us to do — let their voice be 

heard. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 

said how these lean consultants at a cost of $1.4 million over 

the past two years have helped the government be more 

efficient in certain areas. To the minister: if she asked the 

consultants about MLAs, does she think they would say it is 

lean to have three more politicians in Saskatchewan at a cost of 

millions more dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what we asked the people 

of the province is, are we doing a good job with balanced 

budgets? The answer was yes. That’s why there’s 49 of us on 

this side of the House compared to nine on that side of the 

House. We also asked the people of the province whether they 

thought it was a good idea to spend $72 million on Navigata . 

What was their answer? No. We asked the people of the 

province if it was good to spend $35 million on SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company]. The 

answer was no. Was it good to spend money on a Calgary 

company in 2005 and waste $3.5 million? No. 

 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

What we’re doing in this province is making sure the people of 

the province are heard and their money is spent wisely. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Dealing With Growth in the School System 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

encouraging that we’re currently seeing new Canadians come 

from all over the world and choosing to build their lives here in 

Saskatchewan. But in education, this provides both great 

opportunities but also challenges. Neither are being properly 

addressed. This was raised repeatedly at the school boards’ 

spring assembly on Friday, and shared by educators across the 

province. Why isn’t the minister supporting new Canadians and 

the impact on Saskatchewan classrooms properly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 

two . . . We recognize the excitement of having new immigrants 

to our province. We also know that that does come with 

challenges and indeed our school divisions have identified 

those challenges. To address those challengers, Mr. Speaker, 

that is why this government has increased funding to the school 

divisions by over 21 per cent, including this budget. Mr. 

Speaker, the school divisions have the jurisdiction to decide 

how that money will flow, but that is great support that is in 

excess of inflation and in excess of increases in enrolment. 

 

The other areas that school divisions are seeing pressure is in 

their facilities, Mr. Speaker. That is why this government has 

invested a half a billion dollars in school capital projects, Mr. 

Speaker. That far surpasses what was being spent by the 

previous government. Mr. Speaker, this government is 

supporting both infrastructure and operating. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister is entitled to say that, Mr. 

Speaker, but the education sector’s saying something certainly 

very different. It is positive that new Canadians are building 

their lives in Saskatchewan, but there are needs. Certainly 

adequate supports and resources need to be provided in 

classrooms by government, and that’s simply not happening. 

School boards, educators, and staff are fully prepared and 

excited to meet the challenges and opportunities. Instead 

they’re being met with budget constraint and cuts, Mr. Speaker, 

across this province. This impacts all students. Why is the 

minister not properly resourcing education, specifically English 

as a second language education, in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

interesting that the member opposite is talking about talking to 

the school board trustees and yet he wants to see their 

jurisdiction or their authority taken away from them. Because 

he full well knows they have total authority within their budgets 

to decide on their staffing complements, Mr. Speaker. So he 

knows that the government does not dictate what the staffing 

complement looks like within all of the different school 

divisions. However, obviously he wants their authority taken 

away from them. So I wonder how these school division 

trustees feel about that opinion of the NDP. We now have, Mr. 

Speaker, 38 more EAL, English as an additional language 

teachers working across our province. Since 2008, Mr. Speaker, 

that is a 51 per cent increase. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, while we should be proud 

that we’re growing as a province, we need to be addressing the 

challenges and opportunities that this growth represents in a 

responsible manner. 

 

As a specific issue, education funding is based on student 

populations from the end of September of the previous year, 

Mr. Speaker. The impact is, as the population grows, students 

are in desks in classrooms without funding, leaving education 

budgets even tighter. In Saskatoon alone, over 1,000 students 

were in classrooms without funding last year. This is an 

important issue and it was raised at the spring assembly of the 

school boards last week, and it can be fixed, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

about being responsive as a government. Will the minister be 

responsive to the population growth and commit to working 

with the education sector to fix this aspect of education funding 

so that we can meet the needs of students in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we are 

well aware . . . We’re speaking with the school divisions that 

are seeing this growth of the number of students when 

September begins. This is the first year of the new funding 

formula. The reason why we have a new funding formula, Mr. 

Speaker, is because we took the pressure off of the property tax 

to fund education in our province, Mr. Speaker. That was 

something that the NDP allowed to go on year over year until 

we had tax revolts. Their solution, well they didn’t have to 

worry about growth, Mr. Speaker, because the province wasn’t 

growing when the NDP were government. So it is a unique and 

new pressure that’s on school divisions. We are in 

conversations how to address that pressure, Mr. Speaker, and 

we will have those discussions in September when we review 

how the new funding formula works. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s about being a 

responsive government at a dynamic time, Mr. Speaker, to 

respond to important needs. Instead we hear nothing more than 

spin, Mr. Speaker, here today, and we hear a minister rise in 

this Assembly trying to justify that somehow the money that 

her government’s brought to bear is somehow sufficient and 

enabling the kinds of progress that we need to make here in 

education. That’s not the case. What we see is budgets that are 

status quo, budgets that are constraint, and in many cases that 

provide cuts all across education here in Saskatchewan in this 

very fiscal year. 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

But the question was a specific one, and we didn’t get an 

answer; we didn’t get a commitment. We don’t need to wait for 

another year. At a time where we’re having many students 

added to our population, which is a great opportunity but also 

poses some challenges, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that 

we’re providing funding for those students to school boards. 

It’s simply not acceptable to leave Saskatoon in the position 

that they were last year, where they had over 1,000 students in 

their desks that weren’t funded. Will the minister commit today 

not to wait till September to review this, but to fix this problem 

with her funding formula, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, what this minister and 

what this government will commit to today, quite frankly, is 

funding education by over 5 per cent within this province for 

operating, not taking into account the additional money that we 

put into infrastructure again this year. So, Mr. Speaker, that 

does surpass the increase in enrolment within the classrooms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting, you know, when the member 

opposite talks about spin. Education used to be heavily reliant 

on property tax. Now it isn’t. Maybe he thinks that’s just spin, 

Mr. Speaker, but we have significantly taken the pressure off of 

property owners. Property taxes used to be increasing by an 

average of 5 per cent per year, Mr. Speaker. We took a tax 

burden off of property owners in this province by $165 million, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s not just spin. We don’t have tax revolts 

around our province any more, Mr. Speaker. That’s not just 

spin. We used to have crumbling schools around our province. 

We’ve dedicated over a half a billion dollars. That’s not just 

spin. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Saskatchewan EnerGuide Program 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today we 

saw the release of the 2011 SaskEnergy annual report. One of 

the items considered in that report was the Sask EnerGuide for 

homes program. There wasn’t a clear indication as to the future 

of that program in the report that we were able to discern, Mr. 

Speaker. Could the minister tell the House what is the future of 

the Sask EnerGuide program for homes? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

SaskEnergy and the Government of Saskatchewan is continuing 

on with the EnerGuide program. We did extend the timelines 

for people to be able to apply to that program, so people are 

able to submit their applications for it. Once we get closer to the 

date of when those applications will close, we’ll evaluate the 

program at that time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. The 

members opposite did extend the guidelines for it last year and 

to obviously good effect. In 2011 SaskEnergy assisted 6,446 

customers through this program and the energy-efficient rebate 

for new homes. And the company brags about continuing to 

lead the nation in participation rates for the Sask EnerGuide for 

homes program, with 14.6 per cent of the housing stock having 

an initial retrofit evaluation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that this program depends upon 

is reliable timelines. It was extended last year. It was referenced 

in their platform of course, Mr. Speaker. And I guess, can the 

minister assure people that this is a valuable program and that 

reaching 14.6 per cent of homeowners is only just the start of 

the program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly for the people that have accessed this 

program over the last number of years it has been a valuable 

program, whether that be upgrading their furnaces or their 

windows or a variety of other things that are eligible under the 

program. I believe last year in 2011, approximately $12 million 

was paid out in grants as reimbursement for different projects 

that homeowners undertake. Certainly it has in the past been a 

good program. And as I said in my first answer, as we get 

closer to the date of the deadlines that we’ve given people to 

get their applications in, not just for their first initial assessment 

but for the actual work to be done, we’ll evaluate the program 

and whether or not we will continue to go forward with it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I guess we have some concern on this side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker, because of course there was a federal 

program that accompanied this and was again very popular with 

people across the country and that program came to an end as 

of March 31st of this year. In the past when their federal 

cousins have dropped the ball and stood down from the retrofit 

program federally, Saskatchewan in some cases has stood up 

and picked up the slack. That’s one thing that gives us cause for 

concern about where this program goes from here. 

 

I guess the other thing, Mr. Speaker, is that in the 2011 platform 

it was mentioned alongside the 20 per cent rebate for smart 

vehicles that of course was, you know, touched on glowingly in 

the platform and then axed as we discussed here in this House 

yesterday. So is the minister able to provide some kind of 

assurance to people other than, we’ll see when the time comes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again I will just say that 

the program has had good response over the last couple of 

years. Currently the average homeowner that takes part in the 

program averages in terms of a rebate between I believe 800 

and $1,200, Mr. Speaker. We have extended our timelines for 

the program beyond what the federal government had indicated. 

Certainly we had made that public earlier. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would just say to the member, when we get closer, as I said in 

my first two answers, we’ll re-evaluate the program at that 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we look at this in the context of 

programs that were brought forward under the going green 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

slogan by members opposite, and then when it came to the . . . 

You know, that was the campaigning mode for the government. 

But when it came to governing, the going green programs were 

gone. We saw that with the SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] rebates and we’re concerned again about this today, 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the EnerGuide for homes which has 

helped people save money on their power bills, but it’s also 

helped them to fight for mother nature in terms of greenhouse 

gas emissions and energy conservation. 

 

So again with the release of the annual report, it’s a perfect time 

to give some people the ability to plan and give them some 

assurance on the future of this program. Again that’s alongside 

a program that was killed by their federal cousins, Mr. Speaker. 

Why isn’t that minister standing up for that valuable federal 

program, but why isn’t the minister providing better assurance 

to the people of Saskatchewan today when they need it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we have clearly outlined to 

the people of Saskatchewan when they need to, if they want to 

take part in this program, when they need to not only do their 

first consult with the company that they choose that are 

approved under the program to have a first assessment of their 

home, but also when the work needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s clearly been outlined in the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we encourage people to look at the program. I 

think it’s a helpful program for those that want to upgrade their 

homes and save on their power and their heating costs, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, again we extended the program 

beyond what the federal government decided to do. That was a 

decision that this government made. And we’ll do so again 

when we get closer to the deadline for the program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Possible Second Bridge for Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government loves to talk about building bridges. The only 

problem, they’re not real bridges, Mr. Speaker, and that’s too 

bad for the people and the businesses of Prince Albert. No one 

in the Saskatchewan Party is talking about building a real 

bridge in the city because that is exactly what is needed now. 

The mayor of Prince Albert, recently he kicked off a build a 

second bridge campaign because the city and the region 

desperately need a new bridge over the North Saskatchewan 

River. But the Saskatchewan Party released the plan for 

highways and yesterday, very clearly, there’s no bridge to help 

the people and industry of Prince Albert and the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is this government ignoring the common 

sense wishes of the people of Prince Albert and the North by 

refusing to build a new bridge for that city and that region? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

city of Prince Albert and that area is growing. The economy is 

growing just like across the entire province, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re certainly pleased about that. We recognize the 

importance of the North and Prince Albert to the future 

economy of this province. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, when there 

was difficulties with the Diefenbaker bridge this past summer, 

the province committed to spending 100 per cent of the cost of 

repairing that bridge, Mr. Speaker. Those repairs are basically 

complete and we’re back to primary weights on that bridge, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As far as to a second bridge, I’ve had a number of meetings 

with the mayor on this issue. We’ve agreed that a study needs 

to be done, and we’re working on it to assess the needs and 

possible timing and location of a second bridge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we won’t apologize to the members opposite. 

When we make an announcement, we follow through with it, 

unlike the members opposite, for instance, Mr. Speaker, on the 

number of times they announced the Humboldt hospital. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not speaking about the 

Humboldt hospital. We’re talking about a bridge in Prince 

Albert here. I need the minister to focus, Mr. Speaker. The 

people of Prince Albert want to know why this government is 

refusing to build a bridge. This is what they want to hear. Why 

aren’t you building that bridge? 

 

Mr. Speaker, a second bridge is not just needed due to increased 

traffic. Because the existing Diefenbaker bridge, as the minister 

has acknowledged today, is in serious need of having a second 

bridge for that region. After cracks in the Diefenbaker bridge 

girders were found last summer, it was several months before it 

could be used again by all vehicles. It is a very dangerous 

situation. For people and businesses that badly need to cross 

that river, being forced to take a different route well out of their 

way is unacceptable. If the Diefenbaker develops another 

problem, drivers will face major delays because there’s no 

second bridge in place. 

 

With the current bridge’s history, does this minister not see that 

a second bridge is necessary right now? 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to ask the members of the gallery 

not to participate in the debate on the floor, and that includes 

applause. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

I said in my first answer if the member would have listened, we 

recognize the importance of the Diefenbaker bridge to Prince 

Albert and area. That’s why we’ve committed to 100 per cent 

of the funding to repair that bridge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, it’s interesting. The member talks about the 

Diefenbaker bridge, but I recall during an election campaign a 

few years ago that for some reason those members opposite, 

when they were in government, they would commit to doing 

work on the bridge but they wouldn’t commit to paving it. 

Apparently, Mr. Speaker, those are two different things in the 

NDP dictionary. 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

Mr. Speaker, as for a proposed second bridge, here’s another 

thing people might find interesting. Those members opposite, 

during the recent election campaign, they committed to it by 

spending federal dollars that didn’t even exist. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister, you are now on 

your second term, so now it’s time to take the training wheels 

off this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many people are talking about the need for a second Prince 

Albert bridge, not just the mayor and the city’s chamber of 

commerce, but some of your own members within your caucus 

have called for a new bridge, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s 

no question in our minds that Prince Albert needs a second 

bridge. There’s a history of danger on the Diefenbaker bridge 

and the economy is moving forward, which we will all support, 

and a second bridge is very necessary and warranted. 

 

Why does the minister think he knows better about what’s best 

for Prince Albert than the people who were elected to represent 

the city by asking for that second bridge? Will he listen to his 

own caucus members, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

position on highways and infrastructure spending over the first 

term of our government and indeed carrying forward is meant 

to make them a significant priority. We have an export-based 

economy. We recognize the importance of highways; bridges 

obviously are an extension of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken a two-pronged approach. First of all 

what we’ve looked at is we need to repair a number of roads 

that have been left to be deteriorating over the years, over 16 

years of NDP government. 

 

The second component to this, Mr. Speaker, is that we have 

new demands on highway infrastructure that never occurred 

under the members opposite. That’s because we have a growing 

economy. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at things 

like, for instance, a passing lane strategy to help combat heavy 

traffic that never existed under the members opposite. Mr. 

Speaker, that also includes demands for things like new bridges. 

 

It’s very simple why that happened, Mr. Speaker, because this 

government is planning for growth. When they were in 

government, they planned for decline. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Graduate Retention Program 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Graduate Retention 

Program Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Graduate Retention Program Amendment 

Act, 2012 is converting the graduate retention program into a 

non-refundable income tax credit and a separate refundable 

income tax credit beginning in the 2012 tax year in order to 

more accurately reflect the manner in which the graduate 

retention program benefit is currently being utilized. 

 

Four years ago, Mr. Speaker, we introduced the most 

aggressive youth retention program in the country. That is the 

graduate retention program, which provides graduates with a 

refund of up to $20,000 in tuition fees over seven years. Mr. 

Speaker, under the current system, the entire graduate retention 

program benefit is a refundable income tax credit and therefore 

the full amount is recorded as an expense within the Ministry of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

This means that the tuition rebate is refundable to the individual 

irrespective of any taxes payable. At present, graduates receive 

the graduate retention program, or GRP. They receive this 

benefit because they’re earning sufficient income resulting in 

Saskatchewan taxes payable. As a result two-thirds of the 

rebates are being applied against taxes payable and one-third is 

paid out as a tax refund. Therefore conversion is a 

non-refundable, and a refundable tax credit is appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than 30,000 post-secondary graduates have 

benefited from the graduate retention program since this 

initiative was introduced. That translates into approximately 

$46 million in graduate retention program rebates, Mr. Speaker, 

and we know how significant those are to our graduates that are 

now staying and working here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

this also translates into thousands of graduates staying in the 

province, getting jobs, earning income, and helping to ensure 

that we’re sustaining the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

To be specific, Mr. Speaker, with the amendments to the 

graduate retention program, graduates with sufficient income 

and Saskatchewan provincial tax payable will receive the GRP 

benefit as a reduction in Saskatchewan provincial income tax 

owing. For those graduates, Mr. Speaker, who may not be 

earning sufficient income or are claiming other deductions and 

tax credits, we will provide a new refundable tax credit equal to 

the unused portion of the non-refundable graduate retention 

program tax credit. This refundable tax credit will be paid to 

graduates as an income tax refund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, graduates and post-secondary institutions will see 

no change in the amount of benefit or in the process for 

applying to receive the benefit. There will be minor changes to 

income tax forms which will be communicated in the 2012 

income tax package. The Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration will continue to accept GRP 

applications, determine eligibility, and issue GRP certificates to 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

eligible graduates. Graduates will continue to use the eligibility 

certificates to claim GRP benefits on the Saskatchewan income 

tax return, and program benefits will continue to be applied 

either to reduce income taxes otherwise payable or to generate 

an income tax refund payment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments will also remove the requirement 

for the individual, for the individual’s social insurance number 

to appear on the graduate retention program papers, certificate. 

The ministry electronically communicates information about 

individuals approved under the graduate retention program, 

which includes social insurance numbers, to the Canada 

Revenue Agency. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, there is no need to 

display this personal information on paper certificates. Mr. 

Speaker, this is an example of how government is committed to 

ensuring that the personal information of its clients is better 

protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration, through our officials, have 

consulted with the ministries of Justice and the Attorney 

General, as well as the ministries of Finance, the Provincial 

Comptroller’s Office and Executive Council on the proposed 

amendments. Mr. Speaker, Ministry of Finance officials have 

also consulted with the Canada Revenue Agency to confirm 

that the amendments can be implemented for the 2012 tax year. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate that this 

amendment will more accurately reflect the manner in which 

the graduate retention program benefit is provided, and I am 

happy to speak to this amendment today, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of The Graduate Retention 

Program Amendment Act, 2012. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 42, The Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to stand today to do a bit of the reaching out 

to the public in terms of their, encouraging their participation 

on looking at this Bill and making sure that the Bill certainly 

fills the intent of what the government has been certainly 

speaking about, and trying to retain some of the graduates that 

complete their grade 12 or complete other post-secondary 

programs. And of course the objective is to have the students 

stay in Saskatchewan, and that’s obviously something that the 

opposition would like to certainly support when you see that it 

would keep more of our children here, then a greater economy 

and a greater province shall be the net effect. 

 

I think what’s important, Mr. Speaker, as you look at the 

program itself at the outset when this was announced by the 

Saskatchewan Party, a lot of the folks really took a lot of 

interest in terms of what the total package was, what the costs 

were, and the list goes on in terms of some of their, some of the 

information that they wanted. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

important that you obviously want to focus on the actual project 

itself. 

 

In terms of the Act itself, there’s a few amendments that the 

minister spoke about. And what I would encourage people out 

there is, amendments are certainly minor in detail in terms of 

trying to fix some of the issues that they may have ran into 

when they announced this program because that’s typical of the 

Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. They announce the program, and they 

try and figure out how they do it later. And that creates a lot of 

confusion for a lot of people. And that’s one of the reasons why 

we have to take the time to look at the Bill and to understand 

what the Bill itself is actually saying. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think The Graduate Retention Program Act 

that the minister has spoken about and some of the issues that 

he has raised, it’s going to take a bit of time for us to look 

through the actual Bill itself to see what the amendments 

actually entail, and what the impact may be, and certainly 

which group of people it will have the more dramatic effect on, 

if there’s that cause. And we’re going to certainly take the time 

that we need to assess this Bill. 

 

Now what I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is that from our 

perspective as a New Democratic caucus, we want to encourage 

young people to not only go to school, but complete their grade 

12 and go on to other post-secondary education and trade skills 

as well, and to try and get as much of the opportunity attached 

to education as possible so they’re able to maximize their 

earnings in later years, Mr. Speaker, thus becoming more 

independent, thus becoming more focused, thus becoming more 

productive. And that’s all part and parcel of the vision that 

everyone shares for their children and grandchildren, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So in stating that motherhood statement, it’s not really 

something that we would not encourage as an opposition. We 

obviously want to have our graduates stay in school. We’d like 

to retain them, and efforts of this sort may or may not achieve 

that. And while the Saskatchewan Party is touting that this is 

going to be a great opportunity for people, we need to make 

sure that this is properly done, it’s properly administered, and 

that it not be left up to the Saskatchewan Party to determine 

whether it’s best for the province, that really the opposition has 

to have their crack at it to make sure this is right in terms of 

what it’s trying to achieve. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that it’s important. When 

this was mentioned, I think it was $1,000 per graduate. That 

was the price tag that was originally announced under the 

program. And people out there should know, I don’t believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that it’s an actual cheque that some of the grade 

12 people would get. I think it’s actually a tax credit, and that’s 

something that’s really important. It’s really important that 

people need to find that out. And some of the questions that we 

have in terms of The Income Tax Act and how that reflects in 

terms of the credit itself: is it really the full value that the tax 

credit is getting? How does it impact a person’s overall benefit 

in terms of trying to stay here in Saskatchewan? Is there any 

impediments to the program that would really hurt the effort 

overall? These are some of the things we need to understand, 

Mr. Speaker.  

 

And that’s one of the reasons why I want to make sure that we 

encourage people out there that may be involved with students 

— whether you’re a member of the students’ union or whether 

you’re part of a parent-teacher association or whether you’re 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

just a concerned grade 11 or 12 person that wants to look at this 

particular Act — to see how we can keep more and more of the 

graduates here in Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s a very important Act, Mr. Speaker. And you obviously have 

to take the time to read it, to go through it, and to farm it out to 

a number of different groups that may have some positions on it 

or some concerns. And those that have a lot of interest in this 

may have a different perspective for the opposition that they 

might want to share with us. And that’s why it’s important that 

we look at these Bills and all the other Bills that are coming 

forward to make sure that we give it it’s due diligence and we 

look at the Bill overall for any kind of weaknesses or 

misgivings that it might try and present to the people it’s 

supposed to have helped. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister went into detail of some of the 

things that he pointed out, the fact that some of the information 

may not have to be so public, that we’re not going to argue with 

that, with identity theft out there. It is always the opportunity 

for people out there to take advantage of some of the 

information that may be online, and anything to retain and to 

protect people’s personal, private information is very, very key. 

And that’s one of the reasons why we make such a big deal 

about computers that are being found with their hard drives still 

intact and a lot of people’s information being out there in 

garbage bins for other, the public to see. That’s why it’s 

important that we protect the information. 

 

So sometimes what it is being touted in some of these Bills is 

actually not what’s being, what’s being practised by the 

Saskatchewan Party. And that’s why it’s important that any 

effort to keep information, as much of people’s personal 

information out of the public’s domain is something that should 

be exercised on a continual and consistent basis by this 

government, Mr. Speaker, because there has been breaches. 

And I’m adding serious breaches, to this particular issue. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again and looking under Bill 42, I sometimes 

look at the overall process. When you look at the opportunity 

that they have to fix the education system, the opportunity they 

have to work with properly funding our teachers, and the issue 

that they have increased debt to the universities, these are some 

of the issues that this minister and of course this government 

has certainly brought about in the last several months, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s not something that they spoke about before 

the election. 

 

So when they make an announcement and they bring something 

of this nature forth, and it sounds good and the spin is great, 

this is the reason why the opposition has to take the time to 

look at the Bill and to assess it against some of the other 

actions, as I spoke about earlier, some of the other actions. If it 

doesn’t really complement the other actions, Mr. Speaker, then 

obviously we want to be able to tell people that that is the case. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, based on the evidence that we have seen so 

far that the Saskatchewan Party is not committed to education, 

and this particular Bill will certainly . . . We want to pay close 

attention to see if there’s some hope for some of the people out 

there to be able to benefit from some of their nice-sounding 

media bites, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what I think that the 

people out there are starting to expect from this government, 

and that’s why they want to take the time to look at the Bill to 

make sure it’s proper and that it is going to fill the intent as the 

government announced. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of information that we want to 

check in terms of The Income Tax Act in terms of which 

particular group benefits. Is it a huge benefit for certain people, 

or is it not a great benefit for others? It’s something that we 

have to pay very close attention to. 

 

And as the Saskatchewan Party likes to speak about all the 

low-income people that they’ve taken off the tax roll, I can tell 

people right now in the province that most of those low-income 

people, the tax savings that they have overall is probably about 

20 bucks a year. But it sounds good for them to say this, Mr. 

Speaker, but the actual savings are not that significant. In the 

meantime, many of those same people are faced with 

skyrocketing rent costs. And so $20 a year saved on income tax 

does not make a huge difference in their overall budget. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And that’s much similar to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

it’s important for us to make sure, if they’re touting it and 

bragging about it and talking about it, that it’s the proper thing 

that they’re putting forward in this particular Bill. And so far all 

the evidence suggests, Mr. Speaker, that it’s something that we 

cannot and will not trust in the Saskatchewan Party. Anything 

that they spin and then present in the Bill, we want to make sure 

we take the time to look through it and look through it properly 

and really, really assess it with the different groups that would 

be impacted such as students, unions. Some of the teachers may 

want to participate. Some of the parents, councils might want to 

look at this, and that’s one of the reasons why we want to take 

our time. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I want to quickly close my 

comments that on Bill 42, we’re going to farm out this 

information to different groups. We’re going to read through it 

very thoroughly. We’re going to assess the minister’s 

comments. And again, as I mentioned at the outset, we are 

going to make sure that what they announced is what the net 

effect is, that there’s not some way that they’re going to try and 

scurry away from this particular promise or water it down so 

there’s not the net effect to really retain and to encourage our 

young people looking at careers and raising families in the 

province, which we think is part of a proper plan to look at the 

sustainable development of Saskatchewan and the ongoing 

development of our great province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will take the time on Bill 42. We will 

research it. We will be coming back with more information, 

more questions. And at this point, I’d like to adjourn debate on 

Bill 42. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 42. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

Bill No. 43 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise and move second reading of 

Bill No. 43 to amend The Income Act, 2000, which will 

implement the income tax initiatives announced March 21st, 

2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget announced two new initiatives to 

improve access and affordability for housing in Saskatchewan. 

First, as promised in our election platform, we have introduced 

a first-time homebuyers tax credit effective January 1st, 2012. 

Mr. Speaker, this new non-refundable income tax credit is 

based on the first $10,000 of a qualifying home purchase and 

will provide about $6.6 million in annual tax saving for new 

homeowners. The new tax credit corresponds to a similar 

federal tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second housing-related initiative introduced in 

the budget was an incentive to encourage the development of 

new multi-unit residential rental projects. This initiative became 

effective March 21st, 2012. This new incentive will provide a 

tax rebate equal to a 10 percentage point reduction in the 

Saskatchewan general corporate income tax rate on rental 

income earned on new projects. This addresses the disincentive 

of high income tax rates on investment income earned from the 

development and rental of multi-unit residential projects. 

 

A corporation’s eligibility for the tax rebate will begin once the 

corporation is in a taxable position, which could be after several 

years, and will continue for a period of up to 10 consecutive 

years. Mr. Speaker, the rebate will be available for projects 

completed within a specific time frame in order to encourage 

the rapid development of new housing projects. When 

combined with other housing incentives initiated by our 

government, in particular the rental construction incentive 

introduced last year, it is expected that up to 10,000 new rental 

units will be created over the life of this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to these two housing initiatives, the 

budget also announced, effective April 1st, 2012, that the 

research and development tax credit is being altered to provide 

a refundable tax credit only for the first $3 million in eligible 

expenditures incurred by small business corporations. All other 

eligible expenditures will now be provided a non-refundable tax 

credit to be deducted against taxes otherwise payable. The tax 

credit rate remains at 15 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget also announced changes to the tax 

credit under the graduate retention program, GRP, effective 

January 1st, 2012. The tuition rebate is being replaced by a 

non-refundable tax credit deductable against taxes otherwise 

payable. The non-refundable tax credit is being supplemented 

by a new refundable tax credit for individuals who do not have 

sufficient taxes payable to fully use the non-refundable tax 

credit. This change will permit the GRP to more closely reflect 

the fact that the majority of tax credits claimed are used to 

reduce income taxes otherwise payable. However when taken 

together, these new tax credits ensure that graduates continue to 

receive their full GRP entitlement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the remaining income tax amendment is a 

technical clarification that has been requested by the Canada 

Revenue Agency to allow the Saskatchewan low-income tax 

credit to be claimed by both parents for children in a shared 

custody arrangement. This will match a federal change made 

last year to the federal goods and services tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 43, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to stand up and offer our initial comments on 

the proposed amendments to The Income Tax Act, 2000. No 

question, Mr. Speaker, Bill 43 certainly speaks about the 

housing opportunity that a lot of corporations may have in 

trying to meet some of the growing demands for affordable 

housing. Certainly this has a focus on the rental issues, and I 

want to speak a bit about that. 

 

But before we go on any further, some of the amendments on 

the low-income rolls for some of the parents that may have 

shared custody of children that might be involved, Mr. Speaker, 

these are some that, at first blush, that we want to make sure 

that we understand the Bill clearly and that we’re able to assess 

it properly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to the minister, they talk about really 

the affordability of homes. It’s something that has been front 

and centre to the people of Saskatchewan for a long, long time. 

When you see people out there paying an incredible amount for 

rent, an incredible amount, an incredible increase for rent, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a huge cry of people out there that are 

beginning to realize that the rental increases in our cities in 

particular are not affordable and that there has to be something, 

something has to give, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know for a fact that many of the seniors that live in 

some of the apartments or rent off different corporations, that 

they are really beginning to have a choice that they make 

between making sure that they will find the money for the 

increase in their rents or either looking at food, or even making 

sure that they have their medicines, Mr. Speaker, or other things 

that, you know, that they need, or telephone. 

 

So you look at some of the cost. When we as New Democrats 

speak about affordability of housing, we’re not talking about 

giving huge tax breaks to large corporations, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s where I think there’s a lot of disjointed thinking on the 

Saskatchewan Party side because people out there have been 

asking for a specific program to help deal with the rising cost of 

rent. That was what the big issue is. 

 

So what happens now with this particular Bill is the minister’s 

saying that we’re going to give the corporations a tax break if 

they build housing units. And, Mr. Speaker, in theory you 

would assume that some of those tax breaks that they’re giving 

to these corporations would translate in lesser cost, rental cost, 

for some of the people that are going through the huge drain 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

and the strain of trying to make sure they have a roof over their 

heads. And many times, Mr. Speaker, those cost savings are not 

added, or not passed down to the consumer, in this case the 

renter. 

 

And you start seeing that no matter how many millions of 

dollars that the minister talks about — I think the figure he used 

was 6.6 million — at the end of the day is that just a giveaway 

to the corporations building units? Does it actually translate into 

real savings for people who are having a tough time making 

ends meet, in particular trying to make sure that they have 

enough money for rent? And that’s the huge question, Mr. 

Speaker, is the net impact. When I spoke earlier about the net 

benefit or net impact of some of the announcements, who gets 

the cash? Who gets the money? And who gets all the incentive? 

It’s the builders, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something that we 

need to clearly address and to assess properly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s all kinds of ways that one could look at how you 

develop affordable housing, and is this the best way? Once 

again, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing that the Saskatchewan Party 

has aligned themselves with their friends and those that are big 

corporations that can afford to spend millions on building rental 

units that people then in turn pay huge dollars on a monthly 

basis to make sure they’re covering some of the mortgages of 

some of these large corporations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is actually an incredible misplaced priority, 

from our perspective, when you talk about addressing the 

homelessness situation, about addressing the affordability issue. 

And here we have what I think is $6.6 million that’s primarily 

given to a corporation to build some of these units, and it’s a 

income tax credit. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re not going to make 

the corporation pay any of this money back unless and until 

they’re in a position to do so, and who knows how long that 

would take, Mr. Speaker. That, coupled with other incentives, 

as the minister alluded to, along with some federal incentives, 

and then you begin to wonder, well who needs the housing 

support the most. It is the renters, Mr. Speaker, not the 

corporations building these units. It is the renters that live in 

these units that have to make a choice between their medicines, 

their foods, or their shelter. 

 

And many times, especially the seniors and the elders, they 

simply do not have the means to make all the demands for those 

three categories. So sometimes they won’t even buy their own 

medicine. They’ll simply pay for the rent, pay for their power, 

and pray for some money left over for food. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s how many of our senior citizens are living. They’re 

barely able to afford, they’re barely able to afford what they 

have now. 

 

And now with the increased rents, Mr. Speaker, you’re pushing 

a lot of the seniors over the brink, the brink of financial 

collapse. And this is happening all throughout Saskatchewan on 

many fronts. Low income families, students, seniors, those that 

are moving their first time to Saskatchewan go through all these 

problems, Mr. Speaker. And there’s no question in my mind 

that this is a priority that may be misplaced, and we have to 

look at it and assess it properly. And there’s so many things that 

we want to talk about on this particular Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s reference about low-income credit 

applying for parents that may have lived . . . or may have had 

children together but are not married yet or not in any kind of a 

. . . not as a couple. So that process is certainly, I think, 

self-explanatory if that’s going to support people in general to 

make sure that there’s shared custody of children involved and 

that they both get those credits and benefits. We don’t at the 

outset see any problem with that. And that’s one of the minor 

points raised in this particular Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we want to be able to look at how the Bill 

impacts low-income people. We want to look at how the Bill 

impacts the graduate program that was announced earlier, but 

mostly I think the attention will be on the whole issue of 

affordability. And I think, Mr. Speaker, the minister and the 

Saskatchewan Party, once again, the Sask Party missed the 

mark in terms of their priorities. And it’s the same old, same 

old, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen this movie before — once again a 

right wing government giving their corporate buddies a huge 

tax break, and under the guise of trying to make housing 

affordable. This is how they do it. 

 

I think the message should be quite clear, that you give the 

people directly that are renting the opportunity to really reduce 

those costs. And 6.6 million alone, Mr. Speaker, could be a 

significant advantage for many people in these larger centres 

that have had 30, 50, 70 per cent increases in their rents. 

Because that’s the real story of a lot of people out there, in 

particular as I mentioned, the elders, Mr. Speaker, have the 

greatest risk and the greatest challenge of all. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as an opposition we want to again encourage 

different groups out there, whether they’re an anti-poverty 

mission or whether they’re there for seniors, whether they’re 

there for the families that are moving to Saskatchewan or for 

low-income people, we need to get those organizations and 

groups to really assess whether this Bill meets what is required 

to talk about or to address the affordability issues. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, from the first blush of the Bill and the 

explanation by the minister, it in no way, shape, or form helps 

out low-income people. In no way, shape, or form helps those 

that are struggling with high rents, Mr. Speaker, because once 

again on construction of those units this government is giving 

the tax breaks and the money to the large corporations that 

build them and not to the people that rent these units. And that 

once again, Mr. Speaker, is a huge misplaced opportunity and 

priority that this government has mixed up and has flubbed 

once again. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of things that we need to talk 

about on this particular Bill — I know my colleagues will 

assess it, and they’ll assess it thoroughly — and to point out to 

the people and organizations that I invited earlier to participate 

in examining this particular Bill and to always remember that 

when it came to this particular Bill, on the notion of 

affordability of homes, just the affordability of having our own 

house, of being able to live with a roof over our children’s head 

and our seniors’ head and able to meet all those needs, what this 

government has done to this particular Bill has given all the tax 

benefits and all the incentives to large corporations that can 

afford to build these houses, these units, which in turn are 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

rented to you at extremely high cost. 

 

So the obvious question is, what benefit is this to the average 

person renting these units? Because the incentives for taxes are 

never ever passed on to the renters, Mr. Speaker. They’re the 

last people to see any benefit. And that’s what we’ve been 

talking about here in the Assembly is we need a program, we 

need a program to recognize the renters, the people that can’t 

afford to rent these units. And this government brought this Bill 

forward to give tax breaks to large corporations. And for crying 

out loud, what does that do for the average renter? It doesn’t do 

anything, Mr. Speaker. So once again their friends get the cash, 

and the people that are renting the units get absolutely nothing. 

 

And that’s the purpose of trying to assess these Bills properly, 

to see what exactly who the target audience is, who the 

benefactors are. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you once again, 

low-income renters, people that are just starting to make their 

own way into becoming independent people, the Aboriginal 

community, Mr. Speaker, the elderly — all these low-income 

groups out there that are trying to find some support from the 

government, once again the door has been slammed in their 

face. And large corporations that get all the benefits of rent are 

now getting all the benefits of the incentives announced in this 

Bill. And in this day and age, 2012, it’s a crying shame. 

 

Something has to change; something has to wake up this 

particular government because there’s many, many seniors and 

families that are suffering a huge, a huge burden out there, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ve got to start hearing them and responding in 

a most compassionate, intelligent, and caring way. And so far, 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not fit that description in any way, 

shape, or form. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, we have other folks that are going 

to participate on this Bill as the time proceeds. We are quite 

pleased to be able to stand here and give our initial comments. 

And again I encourage those that are listening to participate. 

Look at the Bill online. Give us your comments. We’re only a 

phone call away. And let’s fight together, let’s fight together to 

tell the Saskatchewan Party, the Sask Party, that once again 

their priorities are wrong, and all the great opportunity they had 

they have flubbed. And they have not certainly provided any 

extra support or kind support to those people that need it the 

most, and that’s our elderly people, the low-income people, and 

of course the immigrant community that tries to make 

Saskatchewan their home. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand on behalf of the 

opposition and give the initial first few comments and move 

that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 43. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 43. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 37 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 37 — The 

Tourism Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

weigh into a debate, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to Bill No. 37, 

Mr. Speaker, a Bill that takes over Tourism Saskatchewan from 

the industry here in Saskatchewan, from the stakeholders here 

in Saskatchewan. And that’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So while I’m pleased to enter the debate, I’m disappointed that 

we’re here discussing these matters. When we think of Tourism 

Saskatchewan, I think of an organization, an arm’s-length 

organization to government that’s been a great success in telling 

the Saskatchewan story and highlighting the incredible tourism 

assets we have in this beautiful province, and has played a 

significant role in supporting that industry, supporting 

employment in this province, and supported a very positive 

image of our proud province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly this Bill is representative of what we’ve seen on many 

other fronts, Mr. Speaker, is a government not being straight 

with Saskatchewan people. This government went before the 

people of Saskatchewan in an election in the fall, Mr. Speaker, 

and we didn’t see a mention, Mr. Speaker, not a mention of the 

fact that they wanted to take over and control Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, to take it away from the entrepreneurs and the 

industry, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that it was an incredibly 

successful organization, Mr. Speaker. We never heard that at 

all. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, sadly we never heard as well from a 

government that hasn’t been straight with Saskatchewan people 

the fact that it wanted to spend millions of dollars on increasing 

the number of politicians in our province or the fact that it 

wanted to eliminate the film economy here in Saskatchewan 

and drive creative young workers outside of this province, Mr. 

Speaker; to have a harmful impact to our economy by way of 

employment, by way of the workers, by way of investment, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly a major cultural loss to this province, a 

loss of cultural vibrancy and community vibrancy that was 

established, Mr. Speaker, by mechanisms such as the film 

industry and also certainly by way of Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

So on these fronts, we see a government that hasn’t been 

straight. We see a government that hasn’t been straight, Mr. 

Speaker, when they went before Saskatchewan people with the 

fact that they wanted to increase the cost of prescription drugs 

for seniors and children, young families all across this province, 

Mr. Speaker. That wasn’t mentioned in the election in the fall, 

Mr. Speaker. That wasn’t mentioned in the Throne Speech. 

Certainly the impact is being felt by Saskatchewan families and 

certainly highlights the circumstance of not being straight with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The list goes on, Mr. Speaker, but the fact is straightforward. 

The question is one of integrity, Mr. Speaker. We saw a 

government go before the people in the fall, offer up a pretty 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

cheery message, pretty sleek brochures, pretty glossy 

brochures, Mr. Speaker, but not to have any mention of what 

their actual game plan was, which was to eliminate a film 

economy, to take away some of the cultural vibrancy we have 

here in this province, to drive away workers, to increase the 

cost of living for seniors and young families, Mr. Speaker, to 

have impacts and constraints in health care, Mr. Speaker, across 

this province and in classrooms across this province. And quite 

simply this is why we’re hearing from Saskatchewan people all 

across the province that this isn’t what they voted for. 

 

Oh at the same time I would remind you, Mr. Speaker, that 

astonishingly this government continues to push forward this 

foolhardy concept of spending millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, 

to increase the number of politicians in Saskatchewan, all only 

to pursue the political best interests, Mr. Speaker, of members 

opposite. Nothing to do with the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

So certainly that’s the same sort of circumstance we see here 

with Tourism Saskatchewan, an incredibly successful 

organization, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatchewan, something that’s 

been fundamental in the economy of Saskatchewan, that’s 

driven all sorts of meaningful employment for Saskatchewan 

people, and that has highlighted and showcased our proud and 

impressive province in so many ways, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

sad chapter as it relates to that impressive organization, and 

we’re not willing to let it go without a good push, Mr. Speaker, 

and we’re going to continue to do that. We’ve got good allies in 

doing so. Certainly Saskatchewan people are disappointed with 

this change, a change that they see, Mr. Speaker, has nothing to 

do with common sense. 

 

You know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 

Northeast heckles me, Mr. Speaker, speaking about this while 

sitting on his chair in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. We don’t 

hear that member say much from his feet. We don’t see him 

stand up and put things on the record very often, Mr. Speaker, 

but when there are serious matters to be discussed and debated, 

Mr. Speaker, it seems that he’s more interested in heckling 

from his seat, Mr. Speaker. And that’s disappointing because I 

know, Mr. Speaker, that there’s certainly some tourism industry 

businesses in his own riding, Mr. Speaker, and certainly in this 

province. 

 

And I find it rather astonishing, Mr. Speaker, that a Regina 

member would be somehow supporting the elimination of the 

film economy, the driving away of workers from our province, 

the driving away of investment, Mr. Speaker. You know, I find 

that incredibly sad to put that incredible asset that also ties into 

our tourism story, Mr. Speaker, being our film stage that used 

to have producers lining up from around the world to utilize 

that space, Mr. Speaker, and certainly was an impressive asset 

for all Saskatchewan people and people from abroad and from 

afar, Mr. Speaker, to come and to tour and to view and to 

understand that we had this community vitality going on by 

way of our film industry. 

 

And so I find it pretty sad, Mr. Speaker, that the member 

opposite would heckle from his seat, Mr. Speaker, on an issue 

of eliminating and taking control of Tourism Saskatchewan, a 

wildly successful organization here in Saskatchewan, at the 

same time as supporting the other things that member has 

supported, Mr. Speaker — the big hit and impact to our film 

economy, Mr. Speaker, the increases he’s offering his 

constituents, Mr. Speaker, by way of the prescription drug 

increases which for many, Mr. Speaker, will be hundreds of 

dollars a year for households, seniors, and young families, Mr. 

Speaker — all of which, Mr. Speaker, wasn’t mentioned in any 

of his literature, Mr. Speaker, or any of the literature of any of 

those members opposite, Mr. Speaker. And that’s where it gets 

to a matter of integrity, Mr. Speaker, and being straight with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now Saskatchewan people expect that you’re straight with 

them, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve highlighted. And that’s why they’re 

disappointed from all parts of the province and of all different 

political persuasions, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . You know, I find it pretty interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member from Arm River-Watrous is heckling from his seat, 

Mr. Speaker, instead of being out working hard with the 

Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker, and working hard in his 

constituency, to be working to make sure that Nokomis School 

stays viable, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll be quiet for a moment, Mr. 

Speaker, so that the member from Arm River-Watrous . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So I wanted to give an opportunity for 

the member from Arm River-Watrous to actually put a position 

on the record there, Mr. Speaker, because we don’t hear him 

offer many positions or many voices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I know, Mr. Speaker, is that when I opened up this 

morning an email from the Nokomis School review committee 

with a song this morning, Mr. Speaker, that was put together 

with the school this morning, I’d urge the member to listen to it. 

It was put together by an incredible band in this province as 

well, Little Miss Higgins, Mr. Speaker, and I believe they live 

as well in Nokomis, Mr. Speaker. And it was the voice of grade 

1’s and of grade 2’s and of grade 3’s singing a song to talk 

about the importance of education in Saskatchewan and 

certainly singing a song to speak about the value and 

importance of their school, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I find it pretty interesting and awfully sad, Mr. Speaker, that 

that member who sits on his chair without offering a message 

through his microphone, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the member to direct his 

comments through the Chair . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

You too. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

and through the Chair, certainly I’m disappointed that we have 

members opposite that would rather — such as the member 

from Arm River-Watrous — that would rather heckle from their 

chair instead of doing something meaningful to keep their 

school open to a community in recognizing how important that 

school is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s about common sense on these fronts too, Mr. Speaker. 

We have an exciting proposal put forward by BHP, Mr. 

Speaker, in his own riding, Mr. Speaker, and it’s Jansen Lake 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

mine, Mr. Speaker. And this is going to provide all sorts of 

employment, Mr. Speaker, if it can come to be. But what we 

need to do, Mr. Speaker, is as this economy grows and as we 

have things such as operations, such as mines that are being 

developed, we need to make sure we have the communities in 

place to support them and that sort of infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why I urge that member, who I understand 

maybe around election time talked about that somehow he was 

a supporter of that school, Mr. Speaker, to stay open. Now of 

course we see something entirely different, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What’s your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’re speaking to 

or on Bill No. 37, The Tourism Saskatchewan Act, and I know 

the member’s been talking about schools and all that sort of 

thing. I haven’t heard him address Bill 37 though, Mr. Speaker, 

and I would ask that he do so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t heard the entirety of the 

member’s remarks from Rosemont, but certainly he’s making a 

very passionate and very incisive debate as regards the changes 

to Tourism Saskatchewan. I think his remarks were entirely on 

point and certainly within the traditions of this House. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind all members to direct 

their comments both through the Chair and to the subject 

matter. I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 

I’m pleased to be speaking directly to Bill 37, Mr. Speaker, the 

takeover of Tourism Saskatchewan by this government, Mr. 

Speaker, an organization that’s been wildly successful in this 

province in serving Saskatchewan people, our economy, our 

incredible tourism assets. 

 

And what I was highlighting, Mr. Speaker, while I was being 

heckled by members opposite, Mr. Speaker, was that this comes 

down to common sense, Mr. Speaker. It comes down to 

ideology trumping common sense, Mr. Speaker, in a case such 

as Bill 37 and the takeover of, government takeover of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And as I was being 

heckled by members opposite, Mr. Speaker, certainly there’s 

other examples of common sense, Mr. Speaker, that we should 

be speaking to, and whether that be the cuts and elimination of 

the film economy in Saskatchewan, driving away that important 

investment, those creative young workers, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

certainly a very fine example of a failure to be making 

decisions by way of common sense. 

 

Just like, Mr. Speaker, where we have a school, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s up for review and closure in Arm River-Watrous, Mr. 

Speaker, a school for which . . . needs to serve that growing 

economy, Mr. Speaker, for which has many tourism assets 

within that constituency specifically, Mr. Speaker, and a school 

that is very important to that community. And I urge members 

to understand that importance and certainly I urge the 

constituency MLA to have that understanding. Because it was 

my understanding that there was support for that school 

beforehand. 

 

And this isn’t just about supporting the economic activity by 

way of the mine up in that constituency, Mr. Speaker. It’s also 

about the tourism activity within that region, Mr. Speaker. Of 

course, Nokomis, Mr. Speaker, is just northeast of Last 

Mountain Lake, a very special migratory game preserve, I 

believe the first in Canada, Mr. Speaker, which is an 

impressive, impressive reserve to visit. It’s a region that 

absolutely thrives with hunting and fishing, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly that community plays an important role within that. In 

fact many of the farm operators, many of the producers in that 

area also have significant interplay into the tourism industry as 

well up in that region, serving the hunters and the fishers and 

being a part of it. 

 

And as well, I know for many of those individuals, Mr. 

Speaker, that school that I spoke of, Mr. Speaker, Nokomis 

School is important for the viability of certainly that economy 

but also the expansion of the mind and certainly the expansion 

of tourism up through that very blessed region — incredible, 

beautiful area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we speak to the matter of the lack of common sense being 

utilized by this government, the ideological pursuit by that 

government. Instead of sort of serving the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people, we see a government that’s all too 

willing to serve its own political best interest, to spend $3 

million, Mr. Speaker, or spend millions of dollars I should say 

— I’ll correct myself — to increase the number of MLAs here 

in Saskatchewan and to do so, Mr. Speaker, at a time where 

there’s important priorities. 

 

Now many people have speculated; why would this government 

come out with the mandate they had, Mr. Speaker? And instead 

of just humbly going to do the work that they were authorized 

to do so with the mandate that they earned, Mr. Speaker, why 

would they do all of these things, Mr. Speaker, that certainly 

aren’t in the best interests of Saskatchewan people? And those 

are good questions, Mr. Speaker, and certainly I share those 

concerns. 

 

When we look at Tourism Saskatchewan and the takeover of 

Tourism Saskatchewan, the control of Tourism Saskatchewan, 

grabbing this from the industry who was directing and driving 

this successful organization, Mr. Speaker, this is nothing, Mr. 

Speaker, other than some sort of serving the best interests, I 

guess, Mr. Speaker, of that party and that government, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s a sad day. 

 

I know many people have speculated what’s the driver of this. 

Is it political vengeance, Mr. Speaker? You know, just what is 

it, Mr. Speaker? I guess at the end of the day, it’s my great 

concern, Mr. Speaker, and I know the concern of many across 

this province, that of course this Tourism Saskatchewan spends 

dollars to communicate to Saskatchewan people and to our 

neighbours and to the world about what we have here in 

Saskatchewan. And they have a significant budget to do that, 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

and they spend about $8 million a year in communications, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

These decisions were arm’s-length from government. They 

were made in the best interests of tourism here in Saskatchewan 

and highlighting the incredible, proud province that we have, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know the speculation and concern is that this is message 

management to the extreme, where government needs to take 

over that budget so that they can get their hands on those 

millions of dollars of communications spending, Mr. Speaker, 

to somehow build out a communications narrative that supports 

the political best interests of this government. That’s 

disappointing, Mr. Speaker — not focused on the best interests 

of our economy, of our tourism sector, of those businesses that 

have thrived, Mr. Speaker, and having to get their hands all 

over those dollars, Mr. Speaker, to somehow tell their story. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, when I look at tourism in this 

province and I think of the incredible assets we have — over 

100,000 lakes, Mr. Speaker, and the beautiful landscapes from 

the grasslands in south Saskatchewan to the boreal forests to the 

Canadian Shield, Mr. Speaker, the lakes and rivers, everywhere 

in between, Mr. Speaker — we have incredible assets, Mr. 

Speaker. And those are what should be standing on their own 

two legs as the face of tourism in this province, not some sort of 

message that’s cheerleading of government or there to 

somehow support the political ambitions of government, Mr. 

Speaker, but being able to highlight in a proud way, in a 

strategic way the proud story we have to tell of tourism here in 

Saskatchewan. Incredibly disappointed that somehow this 

government thinks that they should have control of those 

dollars and should somehow put the face of their government 

on tourism here in Saskatchewan. 

 

When I look here, Mr. Speaker, I think of, you know, what 

should be the face of tourism in Saskatchewan. I think of things 

such as the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa in Moose Jaw, Mr. 

Speaker. I think of the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa. I think of 

things such as what we have in Moose Mountain Park, the 

incredible assets, natural assets but also all the businesses that 

exist there, Mr. Speaker. I think of Prince Albert National Park 

with golf courses that are absolutely gorgeous, Mr. Speaker, 

with hotels and bed and breakfasts that are first-rate, Mr. 

Speaker, and provide just an incredible opportunity, for those 

that come, from a tourism perspective. I think of places like 

Sturgeon River Ranch, Mr. Speaker, on the sides of Prince 

Albert National Park, Mr. Speaker, that is an incredibly special 

company and the special kind offerings that we offer here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is what I would argue, Mr. Speaker, is it should be 

those sorts of tourism businesses, those sorts of natural assets 

that should be the face of tourism to this province not the face 

of government, Mr. Speaker. Not a government grabbing 

control of this from those entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker, who have 

skin in the game, who have made investments, who have built 

out successful companies, offered employment, Mr. Speaker, 

but have also showcased our province to the world, Mr. 

Speaker, and created a real sense of pride within this province 

as well. So whether it’s Cypress Hills and all the great 

businesses that flourish in and around Cypress Hills, Mr. 

Speaker, that great, rich history that goes with that region or 

whether it’s the winery down at Eastend, Mr. Speaker, these are 

the special assets that should be standing on their own two feet, 

not the face of government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re blessed, Mr. Speaker, with the natural assets that I 

highlighted: the lakes, the rivers, the fishing, the hunting. 

 

From a natural perspective, the grasslands all across southern 

Saskatchewan — let’s just think of that region, Mr. Speaker. 

When we think of southern Saskatchewan, why are we wanting 

government to take control of telling the story of tourism 

instead of those that are operating in these incredible regions, 

such as Grasslands National Park, Mr. Speaker, with the natural 

bison herd that exists, Mr. Speaker, or going further west into 

the Cypress Hills as I highlighted, Mr. Speaker, or as we move 

more centrally, Mr. Speaker, and we think of the Big Muddy, 

and that incredible history that it played in this province, Mr. 

Speaker? And the fact that this is something that’s of great 

significance to the people of this province that drives local 

tourism, Mr. Speaker, but also something that can be 

showcased in such a proud way to the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are assets that many in this province may not even be 

aware of, Mr. Speaker. And certainly we have business 

operators, entrepreneurs that have been making investments to 

showcase some of those aspects. And of course we have a role 

for government on these fronts with our provincial parks and 

our park systems across this province. And then we have a role, 

Mr. Speaker, for making sure that we’re protecting all of these 

special natural environments. That’s a whole other discussion, 

Mr. Speaker, but one that’s certainly warranted here at this 

table. 

 

So I guess what I have to say is it’s so disappointing to see a 

government pushing forward, choosing ideology over common 

sense, taking control of a communications budget, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s only about serving their best interests, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, I highlighted some of the south Saskatchewan assets. I 

spoke about Moose Mountain down into the Southeast as well 

and just special operations, whether you’re through Kenosee 

Park and looking at the businesses that exist there, the hotel 

options, Mr. Speaker, in through White Bear and in through 

Kenosee. The waterslides there, Mr. Speaker, that are such a hit 

for families in the region and for the entire province, Mr. 

Speaker, these are special places. 

 

But not only are those businesses special; the region’s special. 

And that’s where they work together. And you get up into the 

hills of the Moose Mountains, Mr. Speaker, well they’re not 

unlike the hills near your home there, Mr. Speaker, in the Last 

Mountains, which are also incredibly beautiful. But when 

you’re up in the Moose Mountains, this is a majestic land, Mr. 

Speaker, and we have incredibly special businesses that have 

built viability and served Saskatchewan people and people from 

all over the world in showcasing these natural assets. 

 

Just over from Moose Mountain, I think of Forget and a very 

special, unique restaurant and operation there, bed and 

breakfast, Mr. Speaker. And I think of the Happy Nun, Mr. 

Speaker, which is renowned, Mr. Speaker, over the past few 

years for its exceptional food, Mr. Speaker, and the live acts 

and musicians that come through it, Mr. Speaker. This is the 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

face of tourism, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan. Tourism 

shouldn’t be the face of government, Mr. Speaker, not serving 

the political best interests of government. And that’s why we’re 

opposing this in such a significant way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I think of our own beautiful city here in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, and you know, this incredible asset that we have out 

beside this beautiful building, historical building, being the 

Saskatchewan legislature. I think of Wascana Park, Mr. 

Speaker, and the lake that exists and the vitality that brings to 

our community. You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a beautiful day in 

Regina here today, and I know that park is alive with activity, 

many of them tourists, Mr. Speaker, who are here in the 

province and here in the city, Mr. Speaker, who might be taking 

a moment from a conference that they’re at or might be visiting 

the city as part of their travels, Mr. Speaker, and staying in one 

of our fine hotels, Mr. Speaker, but will be taking in certainly 

that incredible, beautiful asset, being Wascana Lake, Mr. 

Speaker, and Wascana Park. 

 

I always see this as sort of the jewel and gem of this city, Mr. 

Speaker. You’ll have individuals sitting under a tree reading 

books in the shade, staying cool. You’ll have individuals in the 

hot sun playing football, probably on the front lawn of this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. You’ll have individuals rollerblading 

around the lake and biking, Mr. Speaker. It’s a vibrant place 

and a special place, incredibly special as we move forward and 

those flowers are planted and those yards are taken care of, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s something that we should be proud to 

showcase to the rest of Saskatchewan and to the world, Mr. 

Speaker. And instead, we see the government choosing to put 

its face, the face of government, Mr. Speaker, as the face of 

tourism. It’s not the way it should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of, as I say, the rich history in this city as well that is 

important to tourism in this province. I think of the very 

building that we’re standing in. I think of RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] depot and the history of it to our city 

and our province, Mr. Speaker, and to our country, I should say, 

Mr. Speaker. I think of Government House and what its role 

was in bringing us together as a province and that history, Mr. 

Speaker. These are part of our history. They’re part of our 

assets, Mr. Speaker, and those should all be part of the face of 

tourism in this province. It shouldn’t be government taking over 

the tourism industry to put its face as the face of tourism, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s quite simply disappointing. 

 

I can go on and on and on, Mr. Speaker, whether I’m 

highlighting in your own constituency, Last Mountain Lake and 

starting in the valley and up through the beautiful plains to the 

northern end of the lake or the great businesses that operate on 

that lake, including folks like G&S Marina’s in at Rowan’s 

Ravine and Strasbourg, Mr. Speaker, that provide incredible 

sport fishing opportunities for individuals all over the world 

and all over Canada, Mr. Speaker, showcasing these assets that 

we know are so special here in this province. 

 

And of course we can continue up through the province in 

through Saskatoon and the rivers and Wanuskewin and all the 

tourism opportunities that exist there or in through the North 

when you get into that incredible boreal forest country, Mr. 

Speaker, Prince Albert National Park, Mr. Speaker, and 

Cumberland House, and all of the great history and all of the 

incredible future that we see in so many of these communities, 

much of which connects directly to tourism as well, or tourism 

is a very important part of it. 

 

You know, yes, I think as I move up further north into the 

province and you move into that region, Mr. Speaker, where 

you think of the Canadian Shield, Mr. Speaker, up into northern 

Saskatchewan where you’ve got these bespeckled land of rivers 

and lakes, Mr. Speaker, that is just incredible to fly over, Mr. 

Speaker, and incredible to be on the ground of or to be paddling 

up these tributary rivers to the Churchill River, Mr. Speaker, 

and what a beautiful area, Mr. Speaker. Whether someone 

enjoys paddling and whitewater, whether they enjoy camping 

and fishing, Mr. Speaker, the opportunities up there are 

incredible. The region, the wildlife, Mr. Speaker, it’s just a 

beautiful, beautiful region. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So I think that that’s the assets that should be the face of 

tourism, Mr. Speaker. I was heckled there by the member from 

Nipawin, who’s actually in a very beautiful part of the 

province, Mr. Speaker; the member for Carrot River Valley, 

Mr. Speaker, that represents Nipawin, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

of Tobin Lake, Mr. Speaker, and those entrepreneurs, Mr. 

Speaker, that have made investments in this province, that have 

developed out incredible assets, Mr. Speaker, to showcase 

Tobin Lake, Mr. Speaker, and that region. I think that those 

individuals are the stories that we should be celebrating. I think 

that those businesses, those operators, and those lakes, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that they should be the face of tourism. I think 

the fact, Mr. Speaker, that, you know, I think it’s the world 

record for walleye, Mr. Speaker, up there on Tobin Lake, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that should be part of the story and the face of 

tourism, Mr. Speaker, not the face of government, Mr. Speaker, 

a government that’s taking control of something that was 

arm’s-length, directed by industry, Mr. Speaker, serving our 

economy, Mr. Speaker, serving to showcase our province. 

 

The golf courses I think in that member’s . . . The golf course 

up in that member’s riding, Mr. Speaker, that is one beautiful 

region, Mr. Speaker. And I’m disappointed that that member 

would support taking over a mechanism that was so proudly 

telling the story here in Saskatchewan of the entrepreneurs and 

of the natural assets that we possess as a province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I truly love the natural assets we have in this 

province. I truly enjoy sitting down with the entrepreneurs who 

have made their livelihood and built out, made investments to 

highlight these special, natural assets all across this province in 

our urban landscapes, in our south Saskatchewan grasslands, 

and certainly in through our North. 

 

And I think that, you know, quite simply it should be these sorts 

of operators, these sorts of natural assets that should be the face 

of tourism in Saskatchewan. Not the face of government, Mr. 

Speaker, a government that’s taking control of something that 

was working so incredibly well and to get control of those 

communications dollars to tell its own story, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s disappointing. It’s disappointing and, I think, questions 

can be raised about, you know, whether or not they . . . why 

they’re doing this. But the biggest reason, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, is to get their hands over the budget of $8 million a 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

year, Mr. Speaker, to have more messaging going out that’s 

controlled by government and less by the people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I kind of stopped at the boreal forest there, Mr. 

Speaker. I was talking about, you know, the parkland and up 

into the boreal forest and up into Nipawin and Prince Albert 

National Park and Sturgeon Lake ranch and all these great 

entrepreneurs and then those golf courses — Waskesiu and Elk 

Ridge — and the incredible lakes that are preserved back up in 

Prince Albert National Park. But it doesn’t stop there, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re almost, we’re not even halfway through the 

province yet at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we continue to move northward, Mr. Speaker, we see the 

Canadian Shield emerge. And of course as I was saying, this 

bespeckled land of gems, gem-like lakes, Mr. Speaker, and 

rivers that are alive, as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, with wildlife and 

alive with fish, Mr. Speaker, in an unparalleled way. In a way 

that we should be so proud to stand up and share ourselves with 

the rest of the world to say, come and paddle our rivers, come 

and join our beautiful festivals and our urban landscapes, come 

and catch the biggest walleye in the world, Mr. Speaker, come 

and fight some of the toughest northern pike that exist, Mr. 

Speaker, come and paddle some of the best whitewater along 

the Churchill River, Mr. Speaker, come and share here in 

Saskatchewan, come for the cultural festivals that exist here in 

Regina and all across the province. 

 

I think of Mosaic that’s coming up here in June, Mr. Speaker. I 

think of music festivals, such as the folk festival, Mr. Speaker, 

that are so special, the children’s festival, Mr. Speaker. This 

should be the face of tourism, Mr. Speaker. The face of tourism 

shouldn’t be the face of government, Mr. Speaker. And that’s in 

many ways why I oppose this takeover of something that was 

so successful in telling our story and doing so with pride and 

serving those that have placed the investment into this province, 

who understand incredibly well the unique assets that we have, 

and sharing that with one another but also sharing that with the 

world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it comes down to commerce as 

well. It comes down to economy. It comes down to investment, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s disappointing for this government to get 

its hands all over something again, thinking it knows best, 

thinking it knows better than the entrepreneurs here in 

Saskatchewan in directing these dollars and guiding these 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. And this has a direct impact. When we 

talk about tourism, it’s not just about great times fishing on 

lakes and sitting around that campfire, being at one of those 

urban festivals or sharing . . . spending time at a hotel in 

downtown Regina that overlooks Victoria Park, Mr. Speaker. 

These are all blessed opportunities, Mr. Speaker, but it’s also 

about dollars and cents and about our economy and commerce 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The tourism industry, members should know, plays an 

enormous role within Saskatchewan. And for them to meddle 

and to take over control of that industry and to direct the 

communications, Mr. Speaker, all to serve their own political 

best interests as opposed to serving the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people is disappointing. And it’s that sort of, I 

guess, dismissal of our economy, Mr. Speaker, in areas such as 

tourism, Mr. Speaker, that we’re so disappointed with. We see 

it in tourism. We see it in the attack on cultural vibrancy and 

the film economy here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s incredibly disappointing because here we are as a 

province that’s worked incredibly hard to achieve and to arrive 

at where we are here today, with challenges but enormous 

opportunities that exist, Mr. Speaker. And here we have a time 

where our natural resource economy is strong, Mr. Speaker, 

from an oil perspective, from a potash perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, from all the minerals that we mine, Mr. Speaker. And 

here we have a government that’s choosing to be less instead of 

being more, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a conscious decision, and it’s 

disappointing. I don’t know what this government has against 

investment in this province, Mr. Speaker, against diversifying, 

diversifying an economy, Mr. Speaker, but it’s disappointing. 

 

You know, the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, worked 

way too hard, Mr. Speaker, to pull ourselves out of 

circumstances of debt, to ride out certain circumstances of 

volatility in resource activity at times, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

worked too hard, Mr. Speaker, to at this point in time where we 

have one sector and sectors of our economy doing quite well by 

way of our resource economy, Mr. Speaker, to take a conscious 

decision to be less than more, Mr. Speaker, to make decisions, 

Mr. Speaker, that drives away film investment in this province, 

dollars and cents that are being spent in communities all across 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to be taking control over our 

tourism budget, Mr. Speaker, a tourism budget that was handled 

best by Tourism Saskatchewan, by those that have invested all 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, that have skin in the game, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s awfully, awfully, awfully disappointing. 

And as I’ve said, you know, in the land of living skies, Mr. 

Speaker, in that bespeckled land of lakes and rivers up in the 

member from Cumberland’s riding, Mr. Speaker, those are the 

assets that should be standing on their own. 

 

When I think of the Athabasca sand dunes, Mr. Speaker, up in 

the member from Athabasca’s riding, those incredible sand 

dunes, Mr. Speaker, those should be part of the story of 

tourism, Mr. Speaker, the face of tourism to the world, one 

that’s incredibly proud, Mr. Speaker, one that I think we share 

in an unrivalled fashion, Mr. Speaker, with the rest of the 

world. A jurisdiction that starts in south Saskatchewan with the 

beauty of those grasslands, Mr. Speaker, and ends in the Far 

North at the Athabasca sand dunes and up into the Canadian 

Shield and the connection to almost tundra-like circumstances, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a beautiful province. 

 

I think it’s places like Pawistik Lodge, Mr. Speaker, that should 

be the face of . . . on the Sturgeon Weir River, Mr. Speaker, a 

historic river, a beautiful river that teams with fish, Mr. 

Speaker, that should be the face tourism. Mr. Speaker, I think 

that it’s companies and regions that they operate in, such as the 

Churchill River Canoe Outfitters, Mr. Speaker, up in Missinipe 

that should be the face of tourism in this province, not the 

government, Mr. Speaker. Companies such as Churchill River 

Canoe Outfitters have showcased that river and that region, Mr. 

Speaker, to so many, not only in this province but also outside 

this province and to the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And those are incredible, special entrepreneurs in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, that understand the important interplay between 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

sustainable environment and a sustainable business, Mr. 

Speaker, and that certainly should be the face of tourism in this 

province. I think we are speaking of Missinipe there, Mr. 

Speaker. I think of Thompson’s Camps, Mr. Speaker, offering 

unparalleled fishing and opportunities for individuals to explore 

our beautiful northern landscape by boat, Mr. Speaker, or in the 

campsite or in the cabins, Mr. Speaker — beautiful, beautiful 

spot. 

 

I think of beautiful spots as, you know, up in that region where 

you can paddle your way down the river to make your way to 

the oldest church in Saskatchewan there at Stanley Mission, Mr. 

Speaker, standing proudly on the shores of the Churchill River, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think of them paddling just a little bit 

further, Mr. Speaker, to the base of Nistowiak Falls, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so you have these incredible, beautiful, natural assets, Mr. 

Speaker, and then this interplay of investment and 

entrepreneurs who have made investments of their time and 

money to help showcase those natural assets but also to build 

out commerce and employment in the region, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of Jim’s Camp at the base of Nistowiak Falls, one of the 

most beautiful places in all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 

the other camps, Mr. Speaker, that exist right on that exact 

region and that same part of the river, Mr. Speaker. This should 

be the face of tourism here in Saskatchewan. Instead we see a 

government that’s more interested with political intervention 

and control of communications, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Walsh Acres heckles from his feet, Mr. 

Speaker. He tries to be loud, Mr. Speaker. He’s probably 

frustrated that his caucus doesn’t allow him to speak on the 

microphone very often, Mr. Speaker, to stand up for 

Saskatchewan people or to stand up for his constituents. But 

what I know, whether it’s the member from Walsh Acres who 

shouts loudly across this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I urge 

members like him to have more of a voice at the caucus table, 

Mr. Speaker, to stand up against the forces within that caucus, 

Mr. Speaker, that are making these decisions that are so poor, 

Mr. Speaker, decisions that are driving investment from his 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, decisions that are driving workers 

from his constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know right now that in constituencies, constituencies like my 

own, Mr. Speaker, and certainly like Walsh Acres, some of 

those individuals, Mr. Speaker, that were working in that film 

industry, Mr. Speaker, are now having the very difficult 

circumstance and prospect of figuring out what their livelihood 

will be, Mr. Speaker. For many, it’s about moving. 

 

The member’s heckling from his feet, Mr. Speaker. He’s 

saying, is there any examples of it? What I would urge the 

member to do is to see the thousands and thousands and 

thousands of signatures that have come in on petitions, to read 

the hundreds and hundreds of letters that have come in, Mr. 

Speaker, highlighting the stories, Mr. Speaker, of the workers in 

this province who have built their life in this province. And we 

urge that member to serve their best interest, Mr. Speaker, and 

to share that voice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, when we’re talking about the film industry 

here, Mr. Speaker, it has a direct connection to tourism in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. You know, in many ways for many 

people, I know they’ll have had their attention focused to the 

province through the story of Dog River, Mr. Speaker, through 

Corner Gas. They’ll have had their attention through Indian 

Head and Little Mosque on the Prairie, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly of course there’s some hard results that also exist there 

by way of commerce and investment in through Rouleau and 

through Indian Head and through Regina and Saskatoon and 

Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, investment that this government is 

driving away. And this is why we question and we challenge 

this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What do they have against investment, Mr. Speaker? What do 

they have about diversifying our economy, Mr. Speaker? Why 

can’t we choose to be more than less, Mr. Speaker? And I 

would highlight . . . You know, members opposite laugh and 

they, you know, they wonder well is that a . . . They’re 

wondering maybe is that a stretch to talk about. Are they, you 

know, against some of that diversification? Well there’s nothing 

else to call it, Mr. Speaker. At a time, Mr. Speaker, where this 

province was hitting its stride, working its way out of some 

challenged circumstances, we were proud to build out aspects. 

When I say we, Saskatchewan people were proud to build out 

aspects. When I say we, Saskatchewan people are proud to 

build out aspects of our tourism industry, Mr. Speaker, proud to 

build out aspects such as our film industry here in 

Saskatchewan that brought a proud spotlight to our province, a 

community vitality to our province, Mr. Speaker, that speaks to 

quality of life. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, now we’re at a time where we have a really 

quite strong resource sector here in this province. This is a 

wonderful thing, Mr. Speaker. But why can’t we utilize this 

time, Mr. Speaker, for us to continue to strive to be more, Mr. 

Speaker, for us to continue to look at ways we can diversify our 

economy or add to it, for ways to add vitality to our 

communities, Mr. Speaker, to add culture to our communities. 

And instead we see sort of this stripped-down approach, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government employs — taking over things 

like Tourism Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and certainly 

eliminating the film economy, Mr. Speaker, and the thousands 

of people who work in that economy, in that industry, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think it’s careless. I think it’s reckless. I think it’s 

disrespectful for any member of this Assembly to dismiss the 

hurt and challenge that is being caused to so many in this 

province that are looking at being displaced from their own 

province, that are looking . . . How are they going to earn the 

dollars they need to provide for their family and where are they 

going to do so? And sadly many of those individuals are having 

to choose outside Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And this is where, when we look at aspects such as tourism in 

Saskatchewan, we look at aspects such as the film industry, and 

as a direct connect, we see disappointing approach from this 

government, Mr. Speaker. As I say, in our blessed province, our 

land of living skies with some of the most beautiful natural 

assets in the world, Mr. Speaker, it’s so disappointing that this 

government thinks that it should be their face, the face of 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

government as the face of tourism, Mr. Speaker, by way of TV 

ads and communications, Mr. Speaker, instead of those natural 

assets and those entrepreneurs that have skin in the game, that 

have done the hard work, that have made the investments, and 

that understand what a special province that we live in. 

 

We see a government that’s moving forward in a sense that’s of 

ideological pursuit, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to common sense. 

We see that here in this Bill certainly. We see a government 

that’s all about serving themselves. It’s all about them, Mr. 

Speaker, not about Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s disappointing. 

 

We see that certainly with the taking over and the takeover of 

the tourism industry, Mr. Speaker — very disappointing. And 

we see that, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about things such as 

adding three more politicians, to spend millions of dollars on 

more politicians while at the same very time, Mr. Speaker, they 

have direct impacts into lives of Saskatchewan people and are 

compromising both our community vitality, our economy, 

driving away investment and taking away communications of 

our beautiful natural assets, our tourism assets and those 

businesses, Mr. Speaker, from those that understand them best, 

Mr. Speaker, just so they can have their stamp and their control 

— sort of message management to the extreme, Mr. Speaker, of 

those tourism communications dollars. 

 

We need a government that’s not all about themselves, Mr. 

Speaker, and about their own political best interest. We need a 

government focused on the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. And, Mr. Speaker, that includes the film industry. Mr. 

Speaker, that includes the tourism industry. Mr. Speaker, that 

includes being able to highlight the incredible assets that we 

have here in this province and constituencies, in all of our 

constituencies, Mr. Speaker, each and every one of you. And I 

urge members to think about this right now. I urge members to 

think of their own constituencies and to think about the 

incredible, natural assets and tourism assets that they have 

within their riding. 

 

You know, I’m getting heckled by the member from Moose 

Jaw, Mr. Speaker, on this. And what I find is interesting is that 

member from Moose Jaw is more interested in having his face 

as the face of tourism, instead of having the Moose Jaw Temple 

Gardens Mineral Spa; instead of having Buffalo Pound Lake 

right beside Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, as the face; instead of the 

Tunnels or the beautiful revitalization of those streets, Mr. 

Speaker, that that member should be more aware of. That 

member should be focusing his attention, Mr. Speaker, on 

letting those assets —the revitalization of Main Street Moose 

Jaw, Temple Gardens Mineral Spa, Mr. Speaker, Buffalo Pound 

Lake — those should be the face of tourism, not the member 

from Moose Jaw North’s face, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

disappointing. 

 

I don’t know why the member from Moose Jaw North thinks 

that it should be him and his face and the face of government, 

Mr. Speaker, instead of those incredible, natural assets, Mr. 

Speaker, instead of highlighting the beautiful assets that we 

have as a province, whether it’s aspects, as we’ve said, such as 

the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa or our historic Globe Theatre, 

Mr. Speaker, in downtown Regina and all the connect that 

occurs to restaurateurs and to activity in this province. 

Disappointed with what’s going on. 

 

And I hear members heckling opposite, Mr. Speaker. Members 

heckling opposite; maybe we struck a chord. What I urge those 

members to do is to have their voice at caucus. What I want 

them to do is they should be thinking about all of those 

incredible, natural assets in each of their riding, and the special 

businesses that operate, those entrepreneurs, the small business 

operators that have made investments in their ridings, Mr. 

Speaker, that operate in their ridings, that highlight our special 

story. And I urge them, all those backbenchers that shout across 

the floor, Mr. Speaker, I urge those members to bring that voice 

and that sort of energy to their caucus table to make sure we’re 

not advancing and pushing forward a Bill like this that should 

simply be pulled, Mr. Speaker, that should simply be pulled, 

and allowing the tourism industry to operate in the fashion by 

way of partnership with government but in a fashion which is 

arm’s length from government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because quite simply, we think all the natural assets I spoke of, 

Mr. Speaker, the Churchill River down through the businesses 

that operate through Grasslands to Moose Mountain Park, we 

think that our natural assets, the businesses that operate there, 

Mr. Speaker, the incredible special places in a place that can 

only be described as the most beautiful place — being our 

province — and the diversity we offer to tourists to come to this 

province, for travellers to come to this province, and for 

Saskatchewan people to explore and play and invest in their 

own province, Mr. Speaker, and so it’s for all these reasons that 

we oppose this piece of legislation. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan was something that was very 

successful, that was operating well, serving Saskatchewan 

people, serving the businesses, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, 

highlighting our proud story, showcasing our land of living 

skies, our exceptional lakes and rivers and highlighting the 

special businesses, Mr. Speaker, that have made the choice, 

made the commitment to do the work and to invest and roll up 

their sleeves in this province. We think it’s those people, we 

think it’s those natural assets, we think it’s those gems across 

this province that should be the face of tourism, Mr. Speaker, 

not the faces of members opposite. 

 

And you know, I find it absolutely astounding that members 

opposite heckle across the floor on a piece of legislation that 

they in this Assembly . . . They should be hiding under their 

desk, Mr. Speaker. And after they’re done hiding under their 

desk, Mr. Speaker, they should be taking their voices back to 

the caucus table because this is a piece of legislation that I 

believe from a common sense perspective, Mr. Speaker, 

members opposite realize this legislation, this change isn’t in 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people. It isn’t in the best 

interest of our tourism sector. It isn’t in the best interest of our 

province, our economy. 

 

Why this government thinks they need to use the heavy hand of 

government with a very large majority that they’ve earned, Mr. 

Speaker . . . And I give them that and I respect that. But the 

problem is that majority that they earned and the mandate that 

they earned isn’t what they’re delivering, Mr. Speaker. And 

instead of taking the mandate that they earned and doing what 

Saskatchewan people do best — is rolling up their sleeves, 

working humbly and proudly towards those goals, Mr. Speaker 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

— we see a government doing something entirely different, 

whether it’s spending millions of dollars to increase the number 

of politicians, whether it’s cutting the film economy in 

Saskatchewan, driving away investment and workers, Mr. 

Speaker, the cultural loss that exists in our cities or certainly as 

it relates to Bill 37, the takeover of Tourism Saskatchewan here 

in Saskatchewan. For a government that is all about themselves, 

Mr. Speaker, about serving their own political best interests, 

about controlling those $8 million, Mr. Speaker, that have 

proudly been used in years previous to showcase the incredible 

assets we each have in each of our ridings and all across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think, you know, as I look to the member from Estevan, 

there’s beautiful aspects of her constituency, and tourism 

entrepreneurs who have made investment, and hunters and 

fishers and all that natural landscape, just the same up through 

so many of our ridings or all of our ridings, Mr. Speaker. And 

those are the people we should be standing with. 

 

Why would the member, you know, any members opposite 

choose to stand with making their government the face of 

tourism to take control of that budget with the heavy hand of 

government, Mr. Speaker, not being straight with Saskatchewan 

people in the last election about doing this? Doing this with no 

analysis, Mr. Speaker, that somehow, you know, somehow 

trying to suggest this is in their best interests instead of standing 

with the entrepreneurs in their constituencies who have made 

the tourism investments that help us tell our story as a province, 

that help us showcase ourselves to the world. 

 

And it’s about those natural assets I talked about, Mr. Speaker 

— the grasslands, the fish, the wildlife, the lakes, the rivers — 

but it’s also about those very special, unique businesses that 

have made those investments, rolled up their sleeves, done the 

hard work and are a very important part of the economy here in 

Saskatchewan and the vibrancy, Mr. Speaker, to our province. 

 

So for all those reasons, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this just 

simply doesn’t make sense, we oppose this piece of legislation. 

We oppose the takeover, heavy-handed takeover that we’ve 

seen of these communications dollars of Tourism 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s not warranted. It’s not in the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people, and we’re going to 

continue to push to make sure that those voices are heard. 

 

And I find it astonishing, Mr. Speaker, that as we discuss this 

piece of legislation, that any members in this Assembly 

somehow think . . . If they’re in it to serve their constituents, if 

they’re in it to serve their province, if they’re in it to serve our 

economy, Mr. Speaker, if they’re in it to serve the people of this 

province, then I don’t know how a member stands up and 

supports the takeover of these dollars, these communications 

dollars, the takeover of Tourism Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

without . . . Unless that’s not what they’re in it for, and it’s all 

about their own political best interests, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

disappointing. 

 

So I would urge the government to reconsider its position. I 

urge members opposite who are now listening — which I 

appreciate instead of heckling, Mr. Speaker, for something that 

I know is very important to their constituents — I urge those 

members, Mr. Speaker, to have that voice at caucus. Let’s bring 

forward some reasonable solutions on this front. Let’s continue 

to build this proud province. Let’s continue to showcase the 

entrepreneurs who are playing the support role in our tourism in 

this province, and let’s choose to be more instead of being less, 

Mr. Speaker. Our government is consciously choosing to make 

decisions that limit and reduce some of the vibrancy and 

economy here in this province — film industry and taking 

control of tourism here in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to speak against this legislation. I 

look forward to, and hopeful that government may be able to 

come to a different mind on this front. I’m not incredibly 

optimistic towards that. We’ve seen them ram forward with the 

heavy hand of a large majority, Mr. Speaker, some changes 

already that certainly aren’t in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. And I think this is why we’re starting to 

hear from Saskatchewan people that these guys have changed, 

Mr. Speaker, that these guys have changed. And that’s what 

we’re hearing from Saskatchewan people. When they went 

before them just in the fall with their glossy brochures and 

positive message, now they’re doing all of these things, Mr. 

Speaker, that weren’t mentioned and certainly aren’t in their 

best interests. That’s where I think those questions are coming 

from. 

 

And then the other thing that we’re hearing in many of the 

letters, many of the phone calls, and just general conversations 

is that there seems to be a bit of an out-of-touch nature of this 

big majority with Saskatchewan people and the businesses and 

entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker, that build this beautiful province, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing a little bit about maybe there’s a 

sense of being out of touch. We hear a bit that it seems that this 

is all about them, Mr. Speaker, and their own political interests 

instead of taking the energy of that majority, working towards 

their mandate, and focusing their energies and efforts towards 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people, utilizing this 

economy that we have, Mr. Speaker, to make improvements, 

meaningful improvements in the lives and communities all 

across Saskatchewan. That’s the opportunity we’re presented, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s an exciting proposition. I think 

it’s a tremendous opportunity, and I’ve been so disappointed to 

see a government losing its path. 

 

So we urge them to reconsider pushing forward this Bill that 

takes over Tourism Saskatchewan, takes over the budget of 

Tourism Saskatchewan, takes control of the communications 

budget of Tourism Saskatchewan. And we say, let those natural 

assets stand on their own two feet and speak proudly to our 

province, speak proudly to the world. 

 

And as I’ve said, whether that’s in urban Saskatchewan or a 

spot such as Wanuskewin or whether it’s up in Meadow Lake 

park, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s down in southern 

Saskatchewan, this is something we should be making sure 

we’re enabling that to be the face of our tourism industry in this 

province, not this government or these MLAs putting their face 

and their stamp on our tourism budget, Mr. Speaker, just to run 

more ads, Mr. Speaker, that somehow are controlled by 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we stand opposed to this legislation. We stand with 

Saskatchewan people on this front in all communities across 

Saskatchewan, and we’ll continue to push against this piece of 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

legislation that certainly doesn’t serve the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter this debate, although I’m 

disappointed this legislation’s on the table. We call on the 

government to withdraw it. At this point in time, I adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 37, The Tourism 

Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 38 — The 

Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to wade into the debate and discussion today about Bill No. 38, 

An Act to amend The Active Families Benefit Act. 

 

What this Bill does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is basically, well I 

should . . . I’ll talk a little bit about what the active families 

benefit is, and then I’ll chat a little bit about what this Bill does. 

So the active families benefit, it’s an annual, fully refundable 

tax benefit that was introduced . . . The Bill was introduced in 

2008, and it came into force in 2009 when the goal was to help 

families with the cost of their children’s participation in 

cultural, recreational, and sports activities. So basically what 

happens, effective January 1st, 2009, a parent or legal guardian 

of a child from 6 to 14 years of age who’s registered in cultural, 

recreational, and sports activities is eligible for this fully 

refundable tax benefit up to $150. And what this Bill is 

proposing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in the Act itself right now, 

the age requirement is that children be between 6 and 14 is in 

the Act, but that is going to be removed and section 2 clause 2 

is being repealed and the following is being substituted. That: 

 

“(d) „eligible child‟ means a child who: 

 

(i) meets the prescribed age criterion as of the last day 

of a taxation year; or 

 

(ii) in the case of a child who dies during the taxation 

year, would have met the prescribed age criterion as of 

the last day of the taxation year”. 

 

So basically the age is being taken out of the Bill, and section 6 

is amended in such that it’ll now be in regulations and the 

government is . . . We’ve heard in a news release that the 

government is planning on moving the age to 18. So children 

from the age of 6 to under 18 actually will now be eligible, their 

families will be eligible to apply for the active families benefit. 

But the age is no longer prescribed in the legislation. They’ve 

said it will be in the regulations, but we’ve not seen the 

regulations yet. 

 

So the active families benefit . . . As a mom of two kids I can 

speak to the importance of . . . We all want to make sure that 

our kids have the best opportunities to be involved in sports and 

cultural activities. I think we want our kids to be loved and we 

want our kids to be nurtured, and one of the ways we nurture 

them is to make sure that they have access to as many 

opportunities as possible. 

 

I know as a mom that sometimes that finding that balance 

between making sure that our kids aren’t in too many activities 

sometimes and over organizing them . . . But this Bill and this 

active families benefit, a fully refundable tax credit, is great up 

to $150. But there is one flaw with the system. The reality is 

you have to pay for the activities upfront and then you wait for 

your tax credit. And that is a bit of a problem, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because not everybody has money upfront to pay and 

register for activities. I know my daughter’s dance school 

wouldn’t be willing to wait for payment until a tax credit comes 

back. So in principle, this active families benefit is one step or a 

great option to support families, but the reality is a benefit isn’t 

always the best way to do things, or a tax benefit. 

 

Speaking of my own childhood, I’m the youngest of seven kids. 

My mom was at home with us and we were involved in 

everything. You know, at the time you don’t realize what your 

parents might be giving up so you can participate. As I said, 

there’s seven of us in our family and we all played badminton. 

The Riverside Badminton & Tennis Club was just about a 

kilometre or two kilometres from our house and it was an 

inexpensive way for my parents to get us involved in sports. 

They could buy a family membership and it was fairly 

cost-effective, so all of us played badminton. I have four 

brothers and two of them were very serious about hockey. I 

have a brother who was a gymnast and very involved in 

gymnastics. We danced . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did you beat your brothers at 

badminton? 

 

Ms. Chartier: — The member opposite is asking if I was able 

to beat my brother David in badminton, and the jury’s still out 

on that. There was a time where I could but he’s I think a little 

fitter than I am these days, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we danced, 

my sisters and I . . . actually and my brother Dave danced, 

although he probably wouldn’t be very happy about me putting 

that on the record. I have the pictures to prove it actually, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

We all took piano lessons, all seven of us, from kindergarten to 

grade 8. My parents made sure that we had as many 

opportunities as possible but it wasn’t . . . My family didn’t 

have a lot of money. My mom was at home with us and my dad 

was a police officer, not a huge income. But again, like I said, 

you don’t realize as a child what your parents are giving up so 

you can have all kinds of wonderful opportunities. I know as a 

badminton player I got to travel all across Canada. I know my 

brothers with hockey and my brother with gymnastics all had 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

really wonderful opportunities that sports afforded them. I have 

to say on the cultural side, I did play the piano for eight years 

but that wasn’t my forte, much to my piano teacher, Ms. 

Smith’s chagrin, I’m sure. But sports were really big in our 

house, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But my point again, we were a family with not a huge income 

and my parents did without so we would have the opportunity 

to participate in activities. And again, as a child you don’t see 

what your parents are doing without. But I do remember around 

income tax time actually, in the spring, my mom, if we needed 

new clothes or we needed . . . Spring was always a little bit 

tight and I can remember my mom — and this was before the 

day of the active families benefit — but just, my parents made 

sacrifices and shelled out the money out front so their kids 

could have all kinds of opportunities. But I remember in the 

spring and my mom saying, well Danielle — or Dan, she calls 

me Dan — well, we couldn’t, we can’t do that until our income 

tax comes back. 

 

The reality is, income tax benefits, it’s not that they’re not 

helpful, but there are so many families who don’t have any 

leverage or any room to pay for things upfront. Again my 

parents didn’t have a lot of money and they priorized sports and 

cultural activities for all of us, but I don’t know at what cost to 

them. My parents, I’m sure, made great sacrifices for us but I 

clearly remember that income tax time or the spring, growing 

up and being a little tight for money at that time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The one thing about the active families benefit. If you take a 

look at the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will see actually, 

interestingly enough, on page 134 of the 2012-2013 budget, 

you have the active families benefit which will be going from 9 

million last year to 12 million this year. But right above it is the 

. . . So that’s a $3,000 difference because we’ll be including 

those under 18. But just right above that is the film employment 

tax credit which last year was going from 8,200,000 to 

5,200,000. So we see a $3 million increase for the active 

families benefit and a $3 million decrease on the film 

employment tax credit. 

 

So although I would applaud the government increasing the age 

limit for the active families benefit, I’d like to ask at what cost 

to other areas in Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. And it’s 

clear that we’ve seen the government’s decision to axe the film 

employment tax credit as one of those decisions. And obviously 

governing is about making difficult decisions, but the decision 

. . . You can see where the active families money is coming 

from, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I would challenge the 

government: perhaps they could have found the money by not 

putting forward legislation adding three more politicians, or 

perhaps they could have looked to cuts in their own Executive 

Council — to make cuts in the Premier’s office basically, 

Executive Council — to find that $3 million to support active 

families benefit. 

 

Instead though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has 

decided to pull the rug out from underneath an industry that 

creates jobs, creates many, many jobs in Saskatchewan, not just 

in the film industry, but with respect to economic spinoff, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. There’s one store in Regina, one production, 

one production, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a production 

wardrobe . . . On the set of one production, a wardrobe person 

came in and spent $8,000 for one production in a local Regina 

clothing store, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There’s lumber yards. There’s caterers. There’s restaurants. 

There’s no shortage of businesses here in Saskatchewan that 

benefited from the film employment tax credit, because 70 per 

cent of investment in the film industry comes from outside of 

our border, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is new money, not here in 

Saskatchewan already. This is money that was new money here 

in our province that out-of-province investors were spending 

here in our province. So the loss of the film employment tax 

credit is about now, unfortunately, it will be about the loss of 

jobs. It’ll be about the loss of economic spinoff. It will be about 

the loss of the ability to take that pride in place. 

 

There’s something pretty fabulous about seeing your 

neighbours or seeing someone you know or seeing your 

neighbourhood or the school that you attended or a house where 

a production is shot, on TV or on the big screen. It creates that 

amazing pride of place and that will . . . The reality is, with the 

loss of the film employment tax credit, we will have a loss of 

that, the loss of the ability to share our stories around the world, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Corner Gas, Corner Gas was shared in 

more than 100 or shown more than 100 . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Please state your point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I believe we are on Bill 

38, The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012, and the 

member is clearly not speaking to that Bill, and I would ask that 

she do so. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Clearly the 

member is making a link between the budgetary connection 

between the film employment tax credit and the active child 

family benefits. There’s a clear connection between it and she is 

speaking directly to the impact of that on the budget. And she 

has the budget estimates and that’s what she’s referring to. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It’s been a long-standing practice that 

members speak to the motion before the House. However, there 

is some latitude, but I will be listening carefully to make sure 

that that member’s comments are tied in. And I would 

encourage all members to tie in their comments to the Bill 

before the House. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to Bill 

38, I was pointing out that the active families benefit has seen 

an increase of $3 million. And for this year, the film 

employment tax credit will see a cut of 3 million, and then 

going forward, it will no longer be existing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So there is a direct tie here between the active families 

benefit and the film employment tax credit. These are about 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

choices that the government makes. And my point has been this 

government has made . . . This shouldn’t have been a choice 

between adding the active families benefit and cutting the film 

employment tax credit. 

 

I’m suggesting that perhaps the government should have looked 

a little bit closer to home for savings, perhaps in the Premier’s 

own office in Executive Council where, despite the fact that the 

civil service is being cut 15 per cent over the next four years, 

Executive Council isn’t seeing a single cut, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So with respect to Bill 38, the active families benefit, I think 

I’ve spoken a little bit about the reality that a tax credit is nice 

and a fully refundable tax credit, which this benefit is — which 

I commend the government for doing that — a fully refundable 

tax benefit is a very positive thing. And the fact that it covers 

not just sports activities, but culture and recreational activities, 

is very positive. 

 

But there are pitfalls with tax benefits. I spoke about my own 

family, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who because my parents on a tight 

income made many sacrifices, we were always waiting for that 

income tax time to be able to make other financial choices 

because kids in activities, the reality is the dance school, the 

hockey school, all those kinds of places, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

can’t wait for a tax credit to come back to receive their 

payment. So again the active families benefit is a good thing. 

 

But there is a really great program here in Saskatchewan that 

does some wonderful things and that would be KidSport. And 

KidSport is a children’s . . . So KidSport actually does a little 

bit to fill in some of the gaps, but a charity can’t be relied on. 

 

I’m a social democrat. I believe that government has the 

responsibility and the ability. It’s our job to make people’s lives 

better, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And although the third sector or the 

not-for-profit sector does amazing, wonderful work, I don’t 

think government should be off-loading everything onto them. 

And KidSport is a really great organization. But the reality is, 

supporting families and individuals to become the best possible 

people shouldn’t be left up to charity alone, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But just a little bit about KidSport. KidSport is a kids’, a 

children’s charity dedicated to assisting children of families 

facing financial obstacles to participate in community sport 

programs. The KidSport goal is to provide these children with 

the opportunity to learn the fundamentals of teamwork, 

dedication, and responsibility through participation in sport. 

And again, having grown up in a family where that was really 

emphasized, I think some of the skills that I have learned — 

and I look at some of my siblings as well — that ability to 

participate, be part of a group, be part of a team. You’re not just 

getting physical activity but you’re learning how to work with 

others, how to win and how to lose, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

both gracefully, which I think is very, very important. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So KidSport is a really great organization. It does fill some of 

the gaps. The mission of KidSport Saskatchewan is that no kid 

should be left on the sidelines and all should be given the 

opportunity to experience the positive benefits of organized 

sport. KidSport provides support to children in order to remove 

financial barriers that prevent them from playing organized 

sports. 

 

So interestingly enough, according to the report card on 

physical activity for children and youth, only 51 per cent of 

Saskatchewan kids aged 5 to 14 years of age are regularly 

involved in a meaningful sport activity. The reality of social 

and economic obstacles are major barriers that prevent these 

young people from participating in sport and receiving its 

significant benefits. 

 

I just had an opportunity to chat with a family today actually 

who . . . Both parents are employed. They work really darn 

hard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and happen to receive the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement. Their kids actually 

participate in or have had the support of KidSport to play 

sports. But I think one of the things that is most frustrating for 

this family, they receive the employment supplement at only a 

small amount. They have always been right on the cusp of the 

cut-off line. And the husband actually just got a small boost in 

his annual contract, and so now they’re $25, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, $25 over the limit for the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement. So it wasn’t actually the employment supplement 

benefit that mattered most to them. It was being eligible for the 

family health benefits. The husband is a diabetic. The kids 

have, need glasses, dental work, all those kinds of things. So 

when we talk about choices of government and what a 

government could be doing differently, the rates for the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement and the cut-off point 

hasn’t changed since 2008, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is a 

bit of a problem as well. 

 

So the other thing that this mother’s asking about, her children 

get KidSport money or KidSport support, but she also has 

mentioned the Regina . . . There’s a program here in Regina 

through the city to help kids participate in local activities. And 

this woman’s children, this family’s children were able to take 

swimming lessons. But the one thing she pointed out about the 

Regina program is that every year there is, perhaps not every 

year, but they do increase the amount that you’re able to make. 

 

Because the reality is in the last four years, actually since 2005, 

we’ve seen population increase. We’ve seen, we have seen 

income increase. But programs haven’t been indexed to meet 

that, Mr. Speaker, and so this individual — who she and her 

husband work really, really hard and don’t have much 

themselves, who make those sacrifices that I was talking about 

earlier — still don’t have the opportunity because something 

like the Saskatchewan employment supplement hasn’t been 

increased and which I think is a huge shame. 

 

Obviously children being involved in sports and cultural 

activities and recreational activities is great and really 

important, I think, for the again not just about physical activity 

but about the growth of us as individuals. I think the 

opportunity to play piano or take art lessons or take language 

classes, all those things enhance . . . Those little brains are little 

sponges, and there’s all kinds of evidence that shows that early 

opportunity to participate in these kinds of things make us a 

little bit smarter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

So finding any mechanism to be able to allow families who 

have financial constraints to be able to participate in activities, 

their kids be able to participate in activities, again it’s great. 

Again I would argue that there are some challenges with the tax 

credits. It’s a good program, but we have to look at not just 

other mechanisms to ensure, we have to make sure that families 

have money in their pocket, whether it’s indexing minimum 

wage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is another issue that the 

government . . . Actually when they were elected in 2007, there 

was a plan in place. The Minister of Labour at the time, I think 

back in 2005 or 2006, had put an incremental step for the 

government to raise the minimum wage and at the end of that 

last wage increase was the commitment to index. So yes, this 

government has increased minimum wage but the one thing 

they’ve failed to do is index it. 

 

So thinking about ways to better support families so they have 

the opportunity to not have to rely on charity to be able to have 

their kids participate in activities, I think is a very important 

thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But with that I know that in 

committee my colleagues will have many questions to ask. 

Again we’re supportive of the active families benefits but 

would like to just draw attention to the reality that that’s only 

one piece of the puzzle, and there should be many other things 

put in place to ensure that families have the opportunity to live 

the best possible life. 

 

So with that I’d like to conclude my remarks. And again I know 

my colleagues will have questions to ask in committee. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

that Bill No. 38, The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 

2012 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred to? I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 38, The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 

2012 be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 39 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 39 — The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to rise to speak to Bill No. 39, An Act respecting the Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan and making 

consequential amendments to other Acts. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill has been introduced by the Minister 

of Justice and it’s a broad, sweeping Bill to create a new 

organization within the bounds of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And it has quite a number of activities that are 

pulled together in a Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority. 

My reading of the legislation is that it does provide an efficient 

way to deal with a whole number of disparate matters that relate 

to the regulation of financial businesses, financial affairs, as 

well as consumer affairs, and I’m not necessarily opposed to 

that concept. 

 

But I think all of us need to be very careful when this type of 

legislation is created because it moves the authority and the 

responsibility perhaps one step a little further away from the 

Minister of Justice, who is also the Minister of Consumer 

Affairs. And so when we look at this legislation and see all of 

the different Bills or Acts that are its responsibility, which 

include the consumer protection legislation, and I think it’s 

worth just reminding ourselves which ones those are: The 

Auctioneers Act, The Cemeteries Act, The Charitable 

Fund-raising Businesses Act, The Collection Agents Act, The 

Consumer and Commercial Affairs Act, The Consumer 

Protection Act, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, The Credit 

Reporting Act, The Direct Sellers Act, The Film and Video 

Classification Act, The Funeral and Cremation Services Act, 

The Motor Dealers Act, The Sale of Goods Act, and The Ticket 

Sales Act, you look at those pieces of legislation and then the 

catch-all that says any other Act which is deemed to be of a 

consumer nature, they encapsulate that whole role of the 

protection of the consumer. 

 

And what our question should be as this legislation goes 

forward is, will the minister still take responsibility for all of 

these types of protections for consumers? Now I’m hoping that 

the answer to that question is yes and that he’s doing it or she’s 

doing it through this type of legislation, but that becomes one of 

the fundamental questions. 

 

And then when you look at the financial services legislation, 

which are sort of the other side of this legislation, and you look 

at the Acts that are covered under that side and you look at The 

Co-operatives Act, The Credit Union Act — the credit union 

Acts, I guess I could say — The Mortgage Brokerages and 

Mortgage Administrators Act, The New Generation 

Co-operatives Act, The Payday Loans Act, The Pension 

Benefits Act, The Real Estate Act, The Saskatchewan Insurance 

Act, The Securities Act, The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 

plus any other Acts which may be designated to be under this 

particular organization. 

 

And so what we see is that all of these pieces of legislation 

which have been developed over the decades to protect 

individuals as it relates to both consumer issues, purchasing of 

services, and also then financial services, your banking and 

credit union types of transactions, they’re all being brought 

under this particular authority. And we can ask the question, 

why is that happening? Well one of the things clearly that is 

happening is that within the Ministry of Justice there is some 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

consolidation of the workload. There’s that aspect. 

 

But another aspect is that some of these types of legislation 

actually generate fees and generate revenue. And by setting up 

an agency or an authority like this legislation does, they can, the 

Ministry of Justice can take all of this, the financial resources, 

and run them through this authority outside of the regular 

budget of the Ministry of Justice. And unfortunately sometimes 

when monies are dealt with slightly out of the regular system of 

the books of the government, we don’t always have full access 

to the information about them. And so we will be watching 

carefully as this legislation is put forward to see exactly how 

this is organized and how this is done. 

 

It does also, I think, play into some of the questions about 

where are these people employed that will be working here. 

And I noticed that in the minister’s speech when he started or 

when he presented this legislation, he talked about the numbers 

of employees that would be transferred to this particular 

authority. Now that’s not necessarily a bad thing but also there 

are specific issues that need to be dealt with to make sure that 

employees are treated fairly but also that the resources are 

appropriately shared to make sure that the work is done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, on the face of it, is relatively 

straightforward, but it has all of these other questions related to 

it. And I know that as we continue to watch the legislative 

process and then, more importantly, the regulatory process as 

this authority is put into place, that we will be watching very 

carefully along with, I’m sure, the Provincial Auditor and many 

other businesses in the community who will be paying 

substantial fees to this particular authority. I have no further 

comments on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 39, The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Which committee shall this Bill be 

referred to? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 39, The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority 

of Saskatchewan Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Bill No. 40 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 40 — The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 portant 

modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 

speak to Bill No. 40, An Act to make a consequential 

amendment resulting from the enactment of The Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act which is Bill 

No. 39, which we were just discussing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a bilingual Bill that deals with a 

specific reference to the new Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan in The Co-operatives Act, and it 

effectively deals with this bilingual question, and I have no 

further comments. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 40, The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 40, The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority 

of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 41 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 41 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal 

Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure I 

rise today to speak to Bill No. 41, An Act to amend certain 

Statutes with respect to certain municipal taxation matters 

affecting school divisions. This is a fairly straightforward Act, I 

believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, although I will want to go 

through it in a little bit of detail here this afternoon just to make 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

sure for the record that there is an explanation that the people 

can have a look at it as well, and perhaps provide some 

comments that will help clarify exactly what the intent of the 

Bill is. 

 

The first clause that we have in the new Bill, other than the 

short title in section 1, is section 2, and what it does, it amends 

The Cities Act. So this is a fairly lengthy Bill, The Cities Act. 

What they’re doing here is just repealing one subsection. 

They’re repealing subsection 242(1.1). And what it’s doing 

here is substituting a new section. And the explanation that 

we’ve been provided indicates that the provision will 

discontinue the application of tax incentives on education 

property taxes levied by cities on behalf of the school division. 

 

So this is something that is really transferring responsibility to 

cities and the incentive is no longer being there, will make it 

more difficult for them to be able to collect taxes in an early 

and reasonable fashion. So it seems to be a burden created now 

for cities, and that’s really unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

says that the cities will no longer have the authority to apply an 

incentive such as a discount to a current year’s education 

property tax, all or part of education property tax arrears and 

penalties, applied by the municipality’s education property tax 

arrears. 

 

So the new subsection just basically says: 

 

“A city shall apply the same incentives that it has 

provided for by resolution or bylaw pursuant to subsection 

(1) to any taxes that the city levies on behalf of any other 

taxing authority except for taxes the city levies on behalf 

of a school division. 

 

So that’s the way the first clause is reading under The Cities 

Act, and then they go on to add a new subsection in the same 

relative area of The Cities Act. Now we’re talking about section 

262(4), and they’re adding a subsection there. The explanation 

we’ve been given is that it ensures that all properties exempted 

are assessed and added to the assessment roll for the length of 

the exemption. So what the goal here is to ensure that this 

provides for full transparency of tax exemptions. And the 

section reads, the new section reads: 

 

“If a council exempts property from taxation pursuant to 

subsection (3) or (4), the assessment for that property must 

appear on the assessment roll in each year of the 

exemption”. 

 

Now this seems to be a fairly reasonable proposal, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because when people get exemptions it’s important for 

the public to be aware of that. We don’t want anyone getting 

special treatment for their taxes unless there’s a public, 

accountable process in place that ensures that that public or that 

that individual who’s getting the benefit of the law is made 

public and that other people are aware that they can also apply 

for those exemptions as well. So that seems to be a reasonable 

proposal as far as the second amendment to The Cities Act. 

 

And then we see further on in the Bill that now we’re looking at 

The Municipalities Act, and there’s a couple of amendments 

there. In The Municipalities Act, the section that’s being 

amended is the one that’s entitled manner of payment. And 

what the proposed provisions in this new Bill are going to do 

will discontinue the application of tax incentives on education 

. . . sorry, on education property taxes levied by municipalities 

on behalf of a school division. 

 

So again these tax incentives, I think, were ones that helped 

cities and municipalities collect these taxes in a timely fashion. 

People are encouraged to pay early when there’s incentives that 

are available to them, and unfortunately when those are taken 

away, I think it will be a burden for the collection of education 

property taxes in a timely and perhaps proactive fashion. So as 

the monies are collected later, it means less access to those 

funds for the operation of the municipalities and the cities, and 

it’s not sure why this is necessary. The minister, I think, is 

feeling that he’s been very generous to municipalities and 

cities, and therefore they now need to look after these matters 

on their own. 

 

I am not sure if that is equalled out in the equation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because it does seem to add burdens to city 

administration and municipal administration. And again if it’s 

the public servants that are being given the burden of looking 

after these things, it just doesn’t seem that that’s something that 

the taxpayers would want to support. And indeed I like paying 

my property taxes on my rural property as early as possible 

because we do get that 2 or 3 per cent incentive. And it’s 

encouraging. It’s much like the go green programs that have 

been in place and are now being discontinued where people just 

need incentives, and good things happen. And this is, I think, 

something that government can do successfully and create 

social change and create new habits for people if there are 

proper incentives in place. 

 

So the removal of a tax incentive on education property taxes 

seems to be a bit of a disincentive now because it’s gone 

altogether. And I think the burden of administration and 

collection that the municipalities bear at this point in time will 

be greater. And I’m not sure that that’s a positive move on the 

part of this government. 

 

The next provision that’s amended now is also in The 

Municipalities Act, and that’s an addition to subsection 295(2). 

And what that is, is they’re repealing a subsection, 295(2). It 

used to say, if council can “enter into an agreement with the 

owner or occupant of any property for the purpose of 

exempting that property from taxation . . .” And in this case, the 

new provision reads . . . 272(4). Sorry, I have to go to the next 

one, 295(2). I’m sorry. It says subsection (3) is added, and it 

says: 

 

“(3) If a council exempts property from taxation pursuant 

to subsection (1) or (2), the assessment for that property 

must appear on the assessment roll in each year of the 

exemption”. 

 

So again I think this is a clause that’s designed to ensure 

transparency of tax exemptions in the same manner that the 

change is being made to The Cities Act. So in this case, it’s The 

Municipalities Act, and it requires the municipal authorities to 

add the exempted properties to the assessment roll. 

 

I’m not sure in what circumstances a council would want to do 

an exemption of property from taxation. And certainly we’d 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

question that because, you know, everybody pays taxes. And so 

for certain individuals or ratepayers to get an exemption would 

have to be an extraordinary move on the part of a municipality 

or city or a northern municipality because it’s an expectation, I 

think, of any property owner that you have to pay your fair 

share of taxes. And certainly exempting any one taxpayer or 

ratepayer from taxation, as proposed by section 295 of this Act, 

The Municipalities Act, seems to be giving an advantage to an 

individual taxpayer, to the disadvantage of the other ones who 

make their commitments in taxation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So again it seems to be a positive move, this particular 

amendment. And ensuring that there is full transparency is 

always a good thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The third and final portion of this Act that is being amended is 

now The Northern Municipalities Act. And again it’s similar 

changes that we’ve seen to The Cities Act and to The 

Municipalities Act. And it says here that they’re amending 

section 293(4) of The Northern Municipalities Act by repealing 

it. And the explanation for this is that “The proposed provision 

discontinues the application of tax incentives on education 

property taxes levied by northern municipalities on behalf of a 

school division.” 

 

So again it’s the same idea that we saw in the first two parts of 

the Bill, that there’s no more tax incentives for payment, at least 

not that the minister will support and backfill, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Northern municipalities have no authority to apply any 

discounts to current year property taxes, all or part of the 

property tax arrears, or penalties applied by the municipality to 

education property tax arrears. 

 

So the new section reads as follows: 

 

“A municipality shall apply the same incentives that it has 

provided for by bylaw pursuant to subsection (1), (2) or 

(3) to any taxes that the municipality levies on behalf of 

any other taxing authority except for taxes the 

municipality levies on behalf of a school division”. 

 

And then they have added again the same change that we’ve 

seen in the first two parts of the Bill. There’s the notion of 

transparency. So subsection 315(2) of The Northern 

Municipalities Act is now followed by subsection (3), a new 

subsection which indicates that if any exemptions are 

happening to the property from taxation, that it has to appear on 

the assessment roll in each year of that exemption. 

 

So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems that these very basic 

changes to these three particular pieces of legislation are 

twofold. One is that there’s full transparency now required for 

any exemptions that municipalities, northern municipalities, or 

cities apply to properties. So that seems to be a positive move. 

Unfortunately, it’s countered by the discontinuation of the 

application of tax incentives on education property taxes. So 

there’s no ability now for municipalities to apply those 

incentives. And it will, I think, make life more difficult for 

municipal authorities and administrators and people who are 

responsible, the public service that are responsible for the 

management and monitoring and collection of those taxes. 

 

As I said, incentives are motivators. We’re human. We like 

incentives. We like sales. We like deals. And that’s how we 

operate, and that’s seen time and time again. Just open the 

newspaper and you see that there’s all kinds of incentives for 

shoppers out there. This is the same thing for taxpayers. And 

taking away those incentives, I think, are obviously a 

disincentive to taxpayers to be prompt in paying their taxes 

which will then delay the amount of funds available to the 

municipal authorities and to the school divisions and may 

indeed increase the number of collections that are required in 

tax enforcement. 

 

So again, it’s unfortunate that the government chose to do this 

in this Bill. But I think as far as comments at this point in time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there will be some other questions once 

this gets to committee. But at this point, I think that would 

conclude my remarks on this particular Bill. 

 

I’m just going to double check one more thing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. At this point, I am going to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 41, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 9 — The 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to rise today to participate in the debate on Bill No. 9. This 

primarily focuses with the Community Initiatives Fund’s 

provisions within The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act. 

 

The CIF [Community Initiatives Fund] as it’s commonly 

known, Mr. Speaker, has been around since the gaming deals 

got set up and since Casino Regina and then Casino Moose Jaw 

came on stream. And again, Mr. Speaker, the intent of the 

Community Initiatives Fund was to ensure that a good portion 

of proceeds from the casinos, Regina and Moose Jaw, went 

back to the community. And certainly over the years, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to see different of these 

grants at work and for different causes in through the inner city 

of Regina. And certainly it’s, in my experience, dollars that are 

put towards some pretty good causes. 

 

So in terms of the work of the committee or the Community 

Initiatives Fund, certainly the current program streams on offer 

deal with (1) community grants for human development, (2) 

youth leadership and Aboriginal inclusion including the urban 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2012 

Aboriginal community grant program, (3) physical activity, 

which is a stream that went to the Saskatchewan in motion 

campaign — and certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if you’re 

still keeping track of how far you’re walking every day, but 

certainly there is a good challenge that was put out under that 

program and good work that has been done to try and invigorate 

the body politic here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker — (4) is a stream devoted to problem gaming and 

mitigation payments, and (5) is the community vitality program 

including small capital investments and milestone community 

celebrations. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the provisions in this particular 

amendment to the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, they 

focus primarily with the provisions around the Community 

Initiatives Fund and certainly the question of tightening up 

governance and ensuring that you’ve got better provisions, a 

better refining of the governance regime for a particular sort of 

fund such as this. And again, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

multi-million dollar fund that has had significant dollars flow 

through it over the years. And again you can never rest content 

in terms of the work that need be done around ensuring the best 

possible governance and in terms of refining the relationships 

as exist in the legislation. 

 

So when the government brings this forward under the aegis of 

including the terms of appointment for the board of trustees, 

including the establishment of quorum, including the 

designation of Chair and Vice-Chair, the remuneration and 

reimbursement of expenses, the ability to engage in technical 

expertise, the ability to provide appropriate pension and 

benefits for employees, well, Mr. Speaker, that’s certainly 

important work and work that should be given its due under this 

legislation. 

 

There are other issues that arise in the legislation as touched 

upon by the government in introducing this legislation. One is 

the establishment of full authority to manage and operate the 

fund. That is there in the legislation, but what was required was 

more explicit direction in terms of the ability to hire necessary 

employees for the management of the fund. And certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, having some familiarity with the individuals that have 

been tasked with the management of this fund and their 

outstanding record in past of community involvement and 

contribution to the community at large, obviously we would 

like to see their standing in terms of employment be clarified. 

Because if I might say, Mr. Speaker, they’ve got, in certain 

positions with this fund, some very capable people, some very 

good people that have made a contribution over years to the 

broader community. So that is something that we’re glad to see. 

 

The second point is the clarification of liability protection under 

the Act. Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of trustees and any future 

employees requiring liability protection from legal actions for 

good-faith decisions, carrying out the management of the fund, 

that is as it would seem to be in terms of a decent proposal. 

 

The third is the clarification of the stewardship and oversight 

responsibility in terms of the Community Initiatives Fund. 

Reporting the relationship is again established by a 

memorandum of understanding that is not legally binding, but 

this is something that should clarify that. 

 

Fourth and finally, Mr. Speaker, the amendment concerning the 

updating and modernization of the granting provision, again 

that is as it would seem to be needed in the legislation. 

 

So we will watch this development with interest, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of the way this goes. We’ll have more questions on this 

in committee. But certainly any time when it comes to the 

stewardship of this government of public dollars, or dollars that 

arise from public enterprise, we’re very interested to see how 

those are watched over and managed. We’ll be very interested 

to see how the board evolves over time, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of who is appointed to that. And we’ll also be very interested to 

see the impact of the current negotiations that are being 

undertaken in the gaming framework agreement and what effect 

those might have. 

 

But that being said, Mr. Speaker, we have further questions that 

would lend themselves to the committee process and the 

scrutiny that that opportunity provides. And as such I will 

conclude my remarks and for helping to allow this to go to 

committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport that Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading 

of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill 

be referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I designate that 

Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 be referred to the Standing Committee 

on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 34 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 34 — The 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

gives me great pleasure to rise to speak to An Act respecting 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, Bill No. 34. This 

is a Bill that introduces quite a few new features to The Crop 

Insurance Act and we will certainly want to look very closely at 

all of those new features. 

 



April 24, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

There’s in particular, I think, the main change that we see in 

this Bill is the additional, or the introduction of agricultural 

product insurance, which is a new feature in the Bill. Typically 

it was only applying to crops, but appears that now there’s a 

whole new area of extended benefits being afforded to 

agricultural products. Now the only problem with the Act, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we don’t know what those products will be 

because this is another instance where the government has 

decided not to list those products in the Bill itself and in the 

legislation proper, but that it would be prescribed through 

regulation. So again we don’t exactly know what the whole 

intent of the Bill is going to be because we don’t know what 

those agricultural products will be. But what we do know is 

that they will be able to apply for insurance for those products 

in the event of the types of occurrences in weather or whatever 

that causes crops to be eligible for insurance. 

 

The other thing indicated by the minister in his comments in 

the introduction of this Bill is that the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation, which is I believe currently responsible 

for AgriStability, a farming program that’s shared with the 

federal government, is they’re going to continue to administer 

it. And the intention of this Bill is to bring in some provisions 

that make sure that AgriStability is, I think in the words of the 

minister, bringing it up to date and make it into a 

forward-looking Act. So I believe the goal of the government in 

this case is somewhat clear, but we will have a lot of questions 

about how those products are going to be insured and the other 

changes that are in place. 

 

The minister indicated that authority for the crop insurance to 

deliver the AgriStability program was originally on a temporary 

basis. But it appears that, in his view, it was okay for interim, 

but the preferable long-term solution is a specific legislative 

authority for the Crop Insurance Corporation to administer 

AgriStability. 

 

So if you look at part II of the Bill, you will see there are a 

number of provisions in there that deal with the implementation 

and authority for the SCIC [Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation], the Crop Insurance Corporation, to manage the 

agricultural income stabilization program. Now it’s a very 

complicated program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s one that as a 

newcomer to this world as the critic for Agriculture that it’s a 

complex program that I’m starting to understand, but I’m going 

to want to be able to ask specific questions to the minister and 

I’m anticipating that those questions would be better asked in 

committee at this point in time. 

 

The whole sections, I think, basically sections 3 and 4 of the 

Bill, bring in the authority for the Crop Insurance Corporation 

to be the manager of this and it authorizes the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to enter into agreements with the 

Government of Canada respecting the income stabilization 

program. And it also defines who the producers are in respect 

of the agricultural income stabilization program. 

 

So I think at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 

reserve those types of specific questions for the minister in 

committee because it’s easier to get information from the 

minister as to the intent. And therefore I think we’re ready to 

proceed and I would conclude my remarks on Bill 34. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 34, The 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 34, The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation Act be referred to the Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 

the work of committees this evening, I move that this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1227, 1230 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1228, 1230 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1228 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1228 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1228 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1228 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1229 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1229 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1229 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1229 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1229 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1229 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1230 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1230 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1230 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1230 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Hockey Hall of Fame Inductees 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1231 

 National Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1231 

 Coffee House Serves Regina Residents 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1231 

 Entrepreneur Creates Innovative Solutions 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1231 

 World Meningitis Day 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1232 

 Saskatchewan Waste Minimization Awards 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1232 

 Comparing Provincial Budgets 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1232 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Lean Process 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1232 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1233 

 Dealing With Growth in the School System 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1234 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1234 

 Saskatchewan EnerGuide Program  

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1235 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1235 

 Possible Second Bridge for Prince Albert 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1236 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1236 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 42 — The Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1237 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1238 

 Bill No. 43 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1240 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1240 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1242 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 1244 

  McCall (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................... 1244 

 



 

 Bill No. 38 — The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1251 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 1252 

  Sproule (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................... 1252 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1254 

 Bill No. 39 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

  Nilson ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1254 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1255 

 Bill No. 40 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Financial and Consumer Affairs  

 Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1255 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1255 

 Bill No. 41 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1255 

 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1257 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1258 

 Bill No. 34 — The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation Act, 2011 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1258 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1259 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


