




















































Hansard: November 13, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 11B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1901 

 November 13, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I will call the 

House back to order. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 54 — The Seizure 

of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter the debate on the bill before us, Bill No. 54, An Act to 

amend The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009. What this 

bill does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it amends a bill that was first 

passed just a few short years ago in 2009 which provided the 

authority for the province to take the responsibility for the 

seizure of criminal property processed from the police services 

in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So just to outline, as this bill has only been before the House for 

a couple of weeks, as the opposition does, it is our job to review 

these bills and make sure that we’re holding the government to 

account and make sure that there’s nothing that’s being missed. 

But we’re in the early stages of that, Mr. Speaker, right now, 

having just seen the bill, so we have to reach out and speak with 

stakeholders and people who will be impacted by this bill. But I 

would like to first outline what this Bill No. 54, An Act to 

amend The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009 will do. 

 

So what this Act will be doing, Mr. Speaker, it: 

 

Defines “defendant” to mean the defendant named in the 

statement of claim and it includes a possible defendant for 

the purposes of an ex parte application for an interim 

order under Section 6. 

 

Subsection i(i) is amended by adding the words “or was 

likely to result in or is intended to result in” to the 

definition of “instrument of unlawful activity”. This 

change is intended to clarify that evidence of intent or of a 

likelihood that the activity will result in the acquisition or 

production of property or in bodily harm to a person will 

be enough to establish property as an “instrument of an 

unlawful activity” for the purposes of the Act. 

 

So that means, Mr. Speaker, that no longer does it have to be 

about directly the proceeds of crime or proven to be, but there 

doesn’t have to be . . . So perhaps if it was, let’s say a 

counterfeit operation, Mr. Speaker, and there was the 

opportunity to make money but no money had been made yet, 

the house could still be forfeited. So that’s what that means, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Subclause (i)(ii) is amended by removing the word 

“serious” to avoid the high evidentiary standard this 

creates. Evidence of bodily harm is sufficient for these 

purposes. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, is added that: 

 

“Respondent” is defined to mean a person named in a 

notice of motion and includes a possible respondent for 

the purposes of an ex parte application or an interim order 

in Section 6. 

 

What else does this Act, Mr. Speaker, do? Subsection (1.1) is 

added to make it clear that the director may proceed by way of 

notice of motion or statement of claim at the discretion of the 

director. And the director, Mr. Speaker, is laid out in the 

original Act in section 22, I believe, as someone who is 

appointed by the minister. 

 

Subclause (3)(b) is amended to remove reference to the owner 

of the property as an individual that must be named as a 

respondent. So this will allow the director to proceed where 

there is difficulty in determining the owner and serving them 

for the purposes of an application under the Act. So I take this 

to mean, too, if it’s a numbered company, that if they’re having 

trouble finding out who actually owns the property, that the suit 

can still go ahead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What else does this Act say, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Subsection 6(5) is amended to extend the period for an 

order made under subsection (1) from 30 days to 60 days. 

Thirty days has been viewed as too short given the 

requirements to produce affidavit evidence under The 

Queen’s Bench Rules. 

 

Clause 6(6)(b) is amended to provide that instead of a 

single . . . day extension, the court may extend the order 

for such term as it deems fit. 

 

Subsection 6(11) provides for a sealing order with regards 

to a respondent’s affidavits. 

 

Subsection (12) provides for a process by which the court 

may, on application by any party, vary, amend or rescind 

an order granted under subsection (11). 

 

And: 

 

Clause 12(b) is amended to make it clear that evidence 

that a person was not charged with an offence will not be 

taken as relevant in making a finding of fact. The standard 

of proof for this application is the civil standard of proof 

on a balance of probabilities rather than proof beyond a 

reasonable doubt. Accordingly, criminal activity may be 

found under this Act when it is not able to be proved on 

the criminal standard. 

 

And it also, Mr. Speaker, this Act in subsection (1) provides 

that The Queen’s Bench Rules will apply to all proceedings, 

including those commenced by statement of claim and less 

specifically stated. 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

Subsection (2) addresses how an ex parte application under the 

Act should proceed and how the process for noting for a default 

judgment would proceed on an ex parte application under the 

Act. 

 

Subsection (3), which is new, provides that a defendant is 

compellable to attend an examination for discovery where a 

statement of defence has been filed, and subsection (4) provides 

that the director and any person acting for or under the direction 

of the director is not a compellable witness for the purpose of 

an examination for discovery. 

 

Subsection (5) provides that where the defendant is examined 

for discovery, the transcript will be sealed to ensure that there is 

no argument that a right to trial is being jeopardized in the 

criminal context, and subsection (6) provides for a certificate 

process for filing with the court any prior legal interests in any 

property where the proceedings are ex parte. 

 

Subsection (7) clarifies: 

 

The Queen’s Bench Rules with respect to expedited or 

simplified proceedings do not apply to applications made 

pursuant to this Act unless agreed to by the director”. 

 

And the last thing that it does, Mr. Speaker, is section 38.1 

provides that evidence based on information and belief will be 

admissible for the purposes of applications made under this 

Act. 

 

So as I said, the opposition is in early days of taking a closer 

look at this bill and talking to people who have a specific 

interest in this bill. I do know that in the minister’s comments 

. . . So I thought it was important to get on the record some of 

the explanatory notes what this bill sets out to do. But I know in 

the minister’s second reading comments, on November 6, 2012, 

the minister says: 

 

While there have been successful seizures under this 

legislation since making this change, counsel and 

operational staff have identified a series of changes to 

make the seizure process more efficient and effective. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in 2009, just three short years ago, this Act 

was first passed and so we’re amending this Act just three short 

years after it was first introduced. I’m always glad when a 

government, and particularly this government, recognizes that 

there’s been shortcomings in things that it has done, and 

obviously recognizes that it has not seen some unforeseen 

consequences or recognized some of its errors. So I always 

think it’s a good thing to revisit things that we’ve done and 

improve upon them. And it’s good to hear that this is coming 

from direct stakeholders, but I would say, I would perhaps call 

into question this government’s ability to consult in the first 

place. 

 

We’ve seen across the board this government’s difficulty in 

embarking upon real and meaningful consultations with a broad 

swath of people who generally need to be consulted on a whole 

variety of issues, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that we are 

amending a bill that was introduced three years prior would 

lead me to think that they didn’t do the proper consultation on 

this piece either. 

Again, I commend them for recognizing the errors and trying to 

beef up or enhance the existing legislation. But a good example 

of a government, the government not listening to stakeholders 

and people impacted by decisions is the film employment tax 

credit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that perhaps this government in March, on budget day, 

didn’t realize the impact of its decision to cut the film 

employment tax credit and could be forgiven in the short term. 

Well probably I shouldn’t say that, actually. Any time you 

make a decision that has huge ramifications for an entire sector, 

you should be doing proper consultation, Mr. Speaker, as this 

on Bill No. 54 sounds like it’s been done after the fact as well. 

But consultation is absolutely imperative, and recognizing that 

you’ve made an error. So on budget day, this government didn’t 

see the error of its ways with respect to cutting the film 

employment tax credit, but shortly thereafter they heard from 

people in the film industry saying, no, we need a refundable tax 

credit, something that is bankable that we can take to the bank 

and leverage other dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they heard from the industry, but that wasn’t enough, Mr. 

Speaker. It wasn’t enough that this government heard from 

people who are directly impacted by a decision that this 

government had done. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? The 

members opposite are wondering if this is relevant. It is 

completely relevant. This is about a government who does not 

know how to consult and does not know, does not know how to 

admit its mistakes. As I’ve said with Bill No. 54, it’s very good, 

Bill No. 54 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member from 

Moose Jaw North always has such eloquent things to say from 

his seat, Mr. Speaker. It’s too bad we don’t hear from him on 

his feet in this legislature a little bit more often, Mr. Speaker. 

He’s always so eloquent. 

 

With respect to Bill No. 54, so they have acknowledged that 

there were things missing in the Act. But I again want to talk 

about consultation and government hearing from people saying, 

there is something wrong; you’ve made a decision that isn’t 

correct. So they didn’t have the sense when they heard from the 

film industry saying, we need you to make changes, Mr. 

Speaker. But then the chamber of commerce, who probably has 

the ear of government a little bit more than the likes of someone 

like me perhaps, Mr. Speaker, has said this government has 

made a mistake, that this government has made a mistake. 

 

And the process was flawed, Mr. Speaker, as clearly the process 

was flawed with Bill No. 54 as well because they’ve seemed to 

have left out some very key points that they have had to come 

and amend an Act three short years later, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So not only did people, with respect to the film employment tax 

credit, did we not only hear from people in the spring who work 

in the industry and from them, but from the chamber of 

commerce. And it’s still not good enough, Mr. Speaker, that 

this government is so stubborn and set and refuses, absolutely 

refuses to admit its mistake on this one particular file. 

 

I’m glad to see they can admit that there are holes or flaws in 

what they’ve done just three short years ago, but this is a 

government who should learn its lessons and apply it across all 

aspects of governance, Mr. Speaker, which again goes to proper 

consultation, real and meaningful connecting to people who 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

know something about the policy area, connecting to people 

who are directly going to be impacted by policy changes you 

make. This government has not had a strong record when it 

comes to consultation, Mr. Speaker, almost across the board. 

 

But with that, I know, as I said, this is early days for us taking a 

look at this bill with a critical eye, Mr. Speaker. This is early 

days for us taking a look at this bill, and we will reach out to 

stakeholders and make sure that there’s nothing in here . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And actually the member from 

Martensville is suggesting that we do that, and I assure her that 

we will in fact be doing that, Mr. Speaker, because that is our 

job as opposition. So we will continue to reach out to 

stakeholders, unlike this government who only likes to speak to 

people who are of like mind. But, Mr. Speaker, we will 

continue to do that. 

 

And with that today I would like to move to adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 54, An Act to amend The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Act, 2009. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 54, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 55 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 55 — The 

Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to stand today and enter into the debate on Bill No. 55, 

An Act respecting Consumer Protection and Business 

Practices, to repeal certain Acts and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts. 

 

I also appreciate the time of day that we’re doing this, just after 

7 o’clock. Maybe some people are tuning in. This is a piece of 

legislation . . . I think ratings actually spike after 7 o’clock, and 

especially when they are knowing we are doing second reading 

speeches. But I think this is one that most people will want to 

know more about, you know. 

 

And I think that in a province that at this point in time when we 

see economic indicators that, you know, the average weekly 

salary is going up and different indicators that generally this 

province is doing well, that people are maybe out spending 

more than ever before. And so a bill like this is very important. 

And one of the things that we need to do is to make sure that 

they have adequate protection and consumer protection is in 

place and business practices also have the knowledge of what 

they’re expected to do in terms of protecting their consumers. 

Because if people are out doing more things, then it’s important 

that we all know what kind of expectations are around the rules 

and regulations. 

 

So it’s quite a substantive piece of legislation, as the minister 

talked about rolling in 12 pieces of legislation. The Act is some 

. . . Well is it 50 pages? It talks about 120-some sections, 50 

pages, quite a hefty piece of legislation. And so for sure this is 

one that I know the opposition is going to take a lot of interest 

in because when things . . . wheels go off the car, we want to 

make sure we’ve got the protection and we know what to do 

about it. So I think this is an important piece of legislation. And 

so we’ll have lots, lots to say about it. 

 

[19:15] 

 

I just want to take a moment to review for the House and for 

those people who may be tuning in about what the Minister of 

Justice had to say about this, you know. He talks about how this 

was . . . the legislation began with the process of updating and 

rationalizing the consumer protection framework for 

Saskatchewan, began with a consolidation and simplification of 

existing consumer protection, making the legislation more 

accessible and easier to understand. So that’s very important 

that we have good legislation. I’m not sure if it covers all the 

bases, but if we can start from that, that’s really important. 

 

He talks about how the consumer protection in Saskatchewan is 

spread out across 12 separate statutes, each with different 

standards, enforcements, mechanisms, and results. And so he’s 

rolled them in together. 

 

He does talk about how they have gone out and done some 

consultation with . . . Well you know, it is funny what he said, 

and I quote, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to assure you and this Assembly that 

thorough consultations will be undertaken with affected 

industry groups, consumer and business groups, the legal 

profession, and the public before any regulations are 

passed. 

 

So he’s talking about when they put the regulations in. But I’m 

curious to know what consultations happened for the legislation 

part, the legislative part, because that provides the framework 

for the regulations. And what are they going to be doing going 

out in terms of consultations? 

 

At length we talk on this side about the surprises that this 

government does because of lack of appropriate consultations. 

Myself, you know, we have raised a lot of concerns around the 

upcoming labour legislation, where it was just a 90-day mail-in 

consultation process. We’ve not seen, I was not aware, and the 

minister did not refer to any consultation process that was 

taking place in regards to the consumer and protection . . . 

consumer protection and businesses . . . or business practices 

Act. Let me get that right — The Consumer Protection and 

Business Practices Act. 

 

I think that he doesn’t speak to the consultation that happened 

prior to this, so this is something the government has done and 

they’re going to go out and consult on the regulations. And I’m 

concerned about that because I think this kind of Act, what it 

tries to do is putting together the different statutes across the 

legislative field, but if you haven’t talked to people out there 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

about what are the emerging issues, you may have missed 

some. And so I want to talk about that a little bit later. But let 

me finish reviewing the minister’s comments. 

 

He talks about “The Act will allow for individuality of rules 

governing the businesses depending on the particular needs of 

the industry being licensed.” So I’m not sure what the 

individuality of rules . . . He talks of bringing the rules together 

under one big piece of legislation, but then he talked about 

individuality of rules. So that’s quite a handful and I’m not sure 

if many in the House . . . Maybe the lawyers in the House know 

what that means. We’re not sure. And so we’ll be asking more 

questions about what does it mean, individuality of rules? It’s 

an interesting phrase. I think this is one that we’ll have to know 

more about. 

 

He talks about the flexibility that will apply to consumer 

contracts and he talks about the five types are typically 

regulated pursuant to The Consumer Protection Act. And they 

are Internet sales, future performance, professional or personal 

development services, travel club, and remotely formed 

contracts. And that’s interesting as well. So he talks about five 

areas that they want to focus on, and I think that those are 

interesting ones, ones that are very relevant to consumers as we 

talk about different consumer spending practices as our world 

changes, especially the Internet, online shopping, that type of 

thing. So it is very important. But we’ll need to know more 

about that. We have a lot of questions about that for sure. 

 

And the other one that he talks about, and I think this is 

important, he talks about some of the recent rulings, particularly 

from the Supreme Court of Canada, recent cases which caused 

them to add clarification to this, particularly when it prevents 

contracting out and stopping some of the protections of the Act. 

 

And it’s an interesting process. I’m glad to see that in this area 

that the Act really speaks from the consumer point of view and 

not the business point of view when it comes to how you set up 

the arbitration process; that really it’s from the consumer point 

and what that really means. It’s not the supplier’s choice about 

what happens in terms of the dispute resolution mechanism, but 

it’s more the consumer’s choice. That’s good news. 

 

So I think there’s some good points but some that we’ll have to 

know more about. And of course the devil’s in the detail, and 

what we’re talking about here is what the implications are, and 

we sure don’t want to get into unintended consequences. So 

clearly they’re taking signals from the courts on what should be 

done in terms of best practices when it comes to consumer 

rights and how they should be protected and how they should 

be executed in terms of dispute resolution mechanisms that 

solve issues. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that, I think it’s interesting that it talks 

about, make it easier for the consumer protection division of the 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan to 

do its job. So we’re going to want to know more about the 

Consumer Affairs Authority. And many people just tuning in 

now may not have heard of the Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan and probably will want to make themselves 

familiar with that, particularly when it comes to the new 

legislation that is out this fall. And so I ask people to think 

about challenges that they are facing when it comes to 

consumer protection, some of their recent experiences. And 

maybe they want to write in. They can write in definitely to us 

because we are . . . that’s our job is to scrutinize this. 

 

And this legislation really speaks to protecting the citizens of 

Saskatchewan because we want to make sure we have the best 

consumer protection and business practices Act that you can 

possibly have, and that there’s no stone left unturned because 

we want to make sure that when things happen in Saskatchewan 

— whether you’re buying a new vehicle or buying things 

through the Internet or through your travel club or whatever — 

that you have some sense of protection. That’s hugely, hugely 

important. And I think as we experience more and more the 

rights of consumers, and there’s expectations that they get fair 

quality, they get the fair quality they’re expecting from a 

product, and if it’s oversold or seems to have been endorsed by 

some group and it’s not, it’s falsely endorsed, then things need 

to happen here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk a little bit about, you know, 

what some of the emerging issues that are happening in the last 

decade or so and even more so, particularly since we know that 

the US [United States] has experienced a housing crisis in 

2007-08 and what the impact of that is. And I would suggest 

that there probably are four, but there could be more emerging 

issues, and I’ve seen as many as 10. But I think that particularly 

what relates to people here in Saskatchewan, more than 

anything, are four or five issues. And I would like to raise them 

tonight and see if this . . . because these are the lenses that we’ll 

be looking at this legislation through. 

 

Of course one is housing, and we see an emerging housing 

market. Brand new housing is being built at a rate that is strong 

in Saskatchewan. But what are we talking about in terms of 

warranties, protection of different products you find in your 

house, all of that kind of thing — the major appliances that 

you’re buying, the furniture that you’re buying, the 

workmanship, the contracting that you may be having — and so 

I think that in terms of housing, I think that’s an issue that a lot 

of people would like to talk about in terms of consumer 

protection and business practices. 

 

I think that it’s important, particularly around warranties or if 

you’re hiring somebody to do some renovations, that all of 

those things are part of the discussion. We’ve all heard of those 

horror stories of where people come in and do renovations and 

they say they have the qualifications, but then sometimes you 

wonder about whether or not they do. Is this part of this 

package here? And how will that get communicated out to the 

public because I think those are big money items and people 

have concerns if they’ve been misled, thinking that they’re 

hiring quality work tradespeople and they’re not? They’ve been 

misrepresented. And so what does that mean? Does this relate 

to them? We’re not sure so we’re going to have questions about 

that. 

 

And we definitely ask people, particularly if you’re listening or 

watching, if you’ve got consumer issues, this is the time to raise 

them because the legislation is new and we’re going to be 

talking about it over the next few months, talking about 

consumer protection. And so here’s the time to raise those 

concerns. 

 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

Another issue that is emerging, and is very, very important, of 

course, is health care and personal development. These two go 

together. Probably health care is more important than ever, 

whether we’re buying vitamins or products that we think will 

extend or help us with ailments or the aches and pains that we 

all suffer, or will help us in terms of preventing potential health 

issues. How do they relate in terms of this legislation? So this is 

important because more and more people are spending dollars 

on that sector. 

 

There’s more advertisements, more opportunities to do things 

that relate to your personal health. And that’s not a bad thing. 

That’s a good thing that we should be more concerned about 

our personal health whatever we do, and also in terms of that, 

relates to personal development. Clearly whether it’s joining a 

fitness club or joining a club where you’re developing skills, 

that’s also very important. Lifelong learning is a huge, huge 

thing, and it’s an important thing that we promote in terms of a 

healthy society. How do we engage people to become a better, 

healthier, more well-balanced person? 

 

And of course those are issues that we can see that relate to 

consumer protection and business practices. How do we make 

sure that we’re protecting those people in Saskatchewan from 

people who may not be doing practices or business practices 

that are not the very best in terms of giving consumers fair 

value for the dollars that they’re paying? 

 

So health care and personal development are very, very 

important. And I think that more and more this is becoming an 

issue in Saskatchewan, and I think this is one that I would like 

to know more about in terms of how does this legislation 

address that specifically. And that’s hugely important. 

 

Another emerging trend in terms of consumer behaviour is 

around green issues. More and more people are saying, I’m 

willing to spend money to make sure that I live in a green or 

sustainable manner and that the lifestyle I have chosen is a 

sustainable manner. So when you see that products say that 

they’re organic, that they truly are organic; that products say 

that they’ve come from recycled products, that they truly do 

come from that. 

 

So how does this relate to that? And we see this is as an 

important . . . You know, we have to recognize and congratulate 

and acknowledge and hope more and more people think about a 

sustainable or an ethical way to buy products that are built or 

created, designed in an ethical way. You know, we often think 

of the three Rs — reduce, recycle, and reuse. But the fourth 

one, the fourth one really is in the engineering. Can we make 

sure when we have a consumer product that it actually has less 

packaging, less materials that are not necessary for the product 

to do what it’s said to be done or saying that it’s going to do? 

 

[19:30] 

 

And so we want to make sure that we protect consumers from 

that kind of false behaviour when they think they’re doing the 

right thing, that they’re making an ethical choice, and they find 

out that’s all wrong. But we also want to make sure it’s a level 

playing field for businesses who are out saying that they are 

doing an ethical project. 

 

And I think, and I just remember there’s a group here, I think 

it’s Ten Tree. They buy, for every product they go out and they 

do, they plant ten trees. And think that group should be 

congratulated for that. Clearly an ethical business. And I think 

we want to create a level playing field for those people when 

they say they’re ethical . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, 

they were in here the other day. And we want to say that when 

you have a business that’s doing the right thing that they are not 

being penalized by other groups who are making similar claims, 

but in fact aren’t and taking the easy way out. 

 

So I think that when we see groups, businesses like that in 

Saskatchewan — and there’s quite a few in Saskatchewan that 

are making an ethical choice to be green or sustainable 

businesses, and there’s people who are supporting them by 

making similar choices by saying, I’m going to spend my 

dollars with them — and we should recognize them and do all 

that we can to give them a level playing field so they’re not 

penalized by people making false claims that they’re doing the 

same thing but in fact they are not, and they have no intention, 

no intention of doing that. 

 

So I think that — I hope — and we need to take a careful look 

at this. Because as I said, this is a pretty thorough bill. And 

those people who are at home, I do say, if you’ve got concerns 

about any of these consumer issues, this is the time to raise 

them. The government now has taken this on in terms of 

consumer protection, and they should be contacting their MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] or contact us and say, 

these are our experiences with consumer protection. And we 

will raise that and try to see, how does this mesh with this? Is 

this a better piece of legislation, or does it leave a hole in the 

area that the people are looking for? 

 

And of course and as I said earlier, the government does talk 

about Internet contracts, but the whole Internet online shopping 

again is a major, major concern. We see that as an emerging 

trend, as people are now shopping more and more online. It’s 

an easier way to do it. It’s one that you can do 24 hours a day 

from your own home, and it’s becoming quite a business. And 

so I think this is one that is important and we’ll have lots of 

questions about it because people are shopping more and more 

online. And as I was reading through it, some of the comments 

or some of the legislative aspects in terms of having to return 

products, that type of thing; making sure you get your credit 

back, that type of thing; things are advertised as they are online 

— I think that’s important. 

 

So it is, Mr. Speaker, as I continue on, I think that I know the 

other one that . . . There’s a couple of others I really do want to 

speak to. One, of course, is travel. And of course, you know, in 

fact yesterday I was making some travel plans for Christmas. 

And it’s so easy to go online and book things and book your 

plane tickets. And of course, you think you’re getting the 

cheapest ticket and then you . . . You really should shop around 

online to make sure you are getting the best value because just 

because they say they’re the cheap tickets or the most 

inexpensive tickets, that may not be so. But it’s important that 

we do have some protection for online shopping and travel 

because how they connect together. 

 

And as a province we see that we’re travelling more than ever, 

particularly as we head into this winter season. And particularly 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

now as we’ve seen the snow that we’ve got, people . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . As I said, and I’ll start from the 

beginning here; I’ll say the best parts.  

 

But no, Mr. Speaker, you know what’s really wonderful about 

our province, and it really, truly it’s a gift that where we live 

because we have people, and I think it’s actually everyone — 

everyone appreciates the winter sports that we have. And we’ve 

seen this over the weekend. The snow caused a bit of travel 

problems for people and it was really unfortunate that plans had 

to be cancelled. But the other wonderful thing was it got people 

out. And whether you were snowmobiling or out cross-country 

skiing or just enjoying the snow, it’s a wonderful thing. And 

people are looking now to make their travel plans accordingly, 

and whether it’s going to the mountains for downhill skiing or 

trying to connect with a place here in the province, a chalet, or 

just getting out and making sure you have a good day out skiing 

or snowmobiling. 

 

But it’s really critically important, it’s critically important that 

consumers have protection. And those people who are 

providing the services, the services — whether it’s 

snowmobiling, guiding, or whatever — that they do have a 

standard and when they advertise their standard, it is actually a 

true standard. And so this consumer protection bill is hugely 

important. So that’s very, very important. 

 

The other issue I wanted to say and wanted to talk about a little 

bit, and I know it’s probably related to another area, but I think 

the other issue around consumer protection is around food and 

food safety and all of that. But it relates a little bit into 

consumer protection because you do go online, and whether 

you’re looking for recipes or whatever, buying things, you 

know, it is interesting. 

 

I just bought a new set of pots, and it was by some . . . you 

know it was interesting because it was a German name. And I 

thought that’s absolutely wonderful. I’m going to go down. It 

was a great sale at a department store, but it was engineered by 

the German company, but it was made in another country and it 

wasn’t quite the same pot. They have several different 

standards. And it was interesting going online and reading 

about it and reading what people had comments about this line 

of pots because they said, yes, it’s got the German name on it. 

But they’re the designers, but it’s not their steel and it’s not 

their workmanship. And it’s very interesting when that 

happens. And so, fortunately, I was aware when I bought it, this 

set of pots, that clearly my expectations were a little lower. I 

didn’t think that I had hit the gold mine. 

 

But this is what is important, is that people are aware and they 

know what they’re getting into. Because clearly, as we get more 

into marketing, more into marketing — and I know the other 

side is very much into marketing — that people really watch 

what you buy, what you’re buying into. And you have to be 

very clever in terms of thinking of all the different questions. 

And it is interesting when you go online and you ask, so what 

do you think about this set of pots or this other line of whatever, 

or going to this place or whatever, that it’s very important that 

you do that. So you know, you can have a consumer protection 

Act, but I think we need to engage the consumers and educate 

the consumers and make sure that they know what their rights 

are and how to ask the right questions. That’s so important. 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a very thorough bill, and I do want to 

talk about a couple of specific parts of it. Actually, I want to 

talk about part II, under unfair practices. And I just want to . . . 

I won’t go into all of them because, I mean, it’s quite a long list, 

but I think it’s very interesting and I think that people at home 

might be interested. And I think that it’s very important that we 

just take some time and reflect on some of these things. 

 

Now it goes up to, I think there must be 15, 20 — 20 examples 

of what unfair practices are. So if you have a concern about an 

unfair practice, go against this checklist and see what they are. 

 

But I just want to talk about the first couple. The following are 

unfair practices. This is part II, division 2, section 7. I’ll talk 

about: 

 

(a) representing that goods or services have sponsorship, 

approval, performance characteristics, accessories, 

ingredients, components, qualities, uses, or benefits that 

they do not have. 

 

And I think that’s a huge one, Mr. Speaker, the first one. 

 

And of course, you know, the other night we were listening to a 

speaker, and he was talking about how Viagra had got into 

trouble and had been fined, I think, 1 or $2 billion. I think it 

was a $1.2 billion penalty or fine because they did not list one 

of their ingredients. So Viagra is . . . But it’s interesting, a drug 

like that, I guess they could afford a $1 billion fine. But what’s 

$1 billion to them, a billion or two? But here it’s really 

important that we make sure that we have all the information 

about ingredients, and it’s not only just because of some 

protection or something like that. But what they’re really 

looking for, especially in terms of ingredients that we’re 

becoming much more aware of allergies and that type of thing, 

and so it’s very important that you know what you’re buying 

completely and accurately. And if they’re not and if things are 

omitted, then that’s a problem. 

 

The next one is: 

 

(b) representing that the supplier has a sponsorship, 

approval, status affiliation, or connection that the supplier 

does not have. 

 

And that’s also very critical because quite often we’re looking 

for third party endorsements or some validation. You know, we 

often look to sport figures who we believe should know 

something about . . . And this again relates back to that personal 

development aspect, that they would know something about, 

say, a pair of running shoes or a tennis racket. And if they don’t 

have, they don’t really have the sponsorship, they’re misleading 

people. This is really, really a problem. And so that’s important. 

 

The next one:  

 

(c) representing that goods or services are of a particular 

standard, quality, grade, style, model, origin, or method of 

manufacture if they are not. 

 

Clearly that makes sense. But quite often, as I was alluding to 

my example about buying some pots, that really you had to dig 

a little bit deeper because the implications were that these pots 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

had a certain standard and that they had, you would assume, a 

certain method of manufacture but not necessarily so. So it’s 

really important that you take a look. 

 

Next one:  

 

(d) representing that goods are new or unused if they are 

not or if they have deteriorated or have been altered, 

reconditioned, or reclaimed. 

 

And clearly, Mr. Speaker, this is one that’s very important. And 

especially when I was talking about those big-ticket items, the 

appliances or things where you think you’ve bought a brand 

new machine and you find out that in fact it’s been 

reconditioned, and then what do you do? This is very important. 

 

(e) representing that goods have been used to an extent 

different from the fact or that they have a particular 

history or use if the supplier knows it is not so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they’re not talking about what they may be 

. . . giving you a specific example, but I can think of vehicles, 

cars, trucks, as a good example. Quite often they’re sold and 

you’re not sure what the history of the vehicle has been in terms 

of whether they’ve been involved in accidents. Hopefully the 

odometer has not been altered, that type of thing. But clearly 

when you talk about big investments, this is one that you want 

to make sure that you’re getting exactly what you’re buying and 

it hasn’t been changed. And truly if you ask about the 

background of the item, that you will get the straight answer. 

 

Here’s one I think is very interesting: 

 

(f) representing that goods or services are available if the 

supplier does not supply nor intend to supply or otherwise 

dispose of the goods or services as represented. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a few years ago we had a shower installed 

and there was a part that was missing. And you know, what we 

often hear now is just-in-time delivery, JIT. Just-in-time 

delivery, that really if the product is not there, they’re waiting 

for enough orders to build the product. And if they get X 

number of orders, then they will build it. But if you’re below, if 

you’re X minus 1, then you’re out of luck. 

 

And so this is really important, that products are there so that 

you can either . . . You know, I’m thinking whether it’s a light 

bulb, that certain light bulb that fits to a lamp, hopefully they 

still have those light bulbs. And we often see that with the new 

designs, the creative designs, the things that we have. And 

that’s just not happening. And so clearly this is an important 

thing, that if you’re buying something, that all the parts should 

be available and you’re not going to be left out in the cold 

because there are no parts and they have no intention of doing 

that. And this is hugely important. 

 

(g) representing that goods or services are available or are 

available for a particular reason, for a particular price, in 

particular quantities or at a particular time if the supplier 

knows or can be reasonably expected to know it is not so, 

unless the representation clearly states any limitations. 

 

[19:45] 

So I’m glad that one’s there because that one is the one that 

really, really brings us into a sale. We’re quite often captivated. 

We watch the Saturday papers, we listen to the advertisements 

on the radios. And we go, we are looking for a certain product 

and we find out this thing’s on sale and for a particular price, 

for a particular time. And you go there and it’s not there. And 

so what do you do? And so you’re kind of left out. And I think 

that people can expect more than that. It should be expecting 

that if, if suppliers are making claims about particular items at 

particular prices, then they should be there. So I think this is, 

this is a good one. 

 

So I think they’re covering off a lot of the bases, and I think 

that again though, we’re not sure whether we thought of 

everything. And this as I go through the list and I’ll continue 

down the list, it’s really important that we cover all the bases. 

Because clearly people who are marketing goods and services 

or have thought a lot about how they can maximize their 

products get their best profit by doing . . . It’s a balance. It’s a 

balance, isn’t it? You want to make sure you have a good 

product and it’s in the right place, but at the end of the day, 

you’ve got to get a good return on that product. And so to do 

that, you have to look at all angles. 

 

(h) representing that a service, part, repair or replacement 

is needed if that is not so, or that a service has been 

provided, a part has been installed, a repair has been made 

or a replacement has been provided if that is not so. 

 

So if somebody tells you that they fixed your washing machine 

and they’ve put this part in, how are you supposed to know 

whether that part’s actually been in? How are you to know if 

it’s a brand new part? And so clearly when you can’t, when you 

actually can’t determine for yourself, but you have to believe 

that it is the case, but if it’s not the case, then there has to be 

some action taken. 

 

And clearly this is important:  

 

(i) representing that a price benefit or advantage exists 

respecting goods or services if a price benefit or advantage 

does not exist.  

 

So if they’re telling you that there is a great sale on, and it’s 

been marked down, but actually maybe it hasn’t been marked 

down. And they say it’s, you know, 20, 40 per cent off, but 

clearly that’s not the case. But how are you to know because 

you haven’t been shopping around? So that’s very important, 

very important. 

 

So I’m just going to go down, I think this is an important one:  

 

(o) using exaggeration, innuendo or ambiguity in 

representing a material fact, or failing to disclose a 

material fact, if the representation or failure is deceptive or 

misleading. 

 

So if you’re leaving out something that can be true, that is a 

material fact, can’t be disputed, but in fact the advertisements 

use exaggeration, innuendo, or ambiguity around that fact. 

 

I think that’s something that I know the members opposite kind 

of think that’s A-okay. A little exaggeration every once in a 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

while when it comes to the facts has not stopped the 

government from telling their story. But I think, when it comes 

to consumer protection, that it’s important that we stop that, and 

it’s clear in this province that we stop that in its tracks. And I 

think that’s important that we move to the straight goods, the 

straight facts about products that people are looking for. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, and the last one:  

 

(s) taking advantage of a consumer by exerting undue 

pressure or undue influence on the consumer to enter into 

a transaction involving goods or services.  

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, that clearly is one that we often have the 

case where we see people pressured into making purchases. 

And we’re talking — it might be a small thing, you know, it 

could be a larger thing — where people are pressured into 

buying today because the sale may not be on tomorrow, or this 

is the right thing, or this is the last one. And I think that it’s 

very important that we protect consumers against this type of 

thing and make sure we’re not caught in vulnerable situations. 

 

And I think there’s a whole lot of reasons for these things, and I 

think that clearly we need to do more around consumer 

protection. Clearly we see that. And we’ve heard this, we’ve 

heard about the increase in debt, particularly for young people, 

the concerns around credit cards, how easy it is to get a credit 

card. And of course the line is, you should have a credit card 

because if you have a credit card then you can establish a credit 

rating. And you have to have a credit rating if you want to buy 

anything of significant size. If you want to buy a car, that type 

of thing, you want a loan, better have a credit rating. And so all 

of a sudden you’re going down this garden path. And so this is 

why it’s important to have good consumer protection. 

 

And so while this is, you know, a step that must be taken, but I 

am concerned again about how did we arrive here in the 

consultation that took place for this consumer protection Act 

because I think that people can rally behind and understand and 

be looking forward to legislation that meets their needs if 

they’re part of that process. But if they’re not part of that 

process, I wonder how many people out there in Saskatchewan 

will be aware of this. And how many people will be thinking 

about all these different reasons why, when we talk about unfair 

practices, and I think it’s an exhaustive list. I’m not sure if 

they’ve thought of everything. I don’t have any to add right 

now, but we’ll be thinking over the months ahead. Are there 

other practices that should be listed as unfair? And I think that, 

Mr. Speaker, that clearly this is one that needs a lot of attention. 

And I would like to think that the government has and will take 

more time to work with that. 

 

And so one other area I do want to talk a bit about is around the 

consumer contracts. And of course this is — and really, just to 

refer back to what I was talking about, some of the emerging 

trends here — but consumer contracts is a very important 

procedure that people who are buying goods want to have laid 

out in terms of protecting themselves when it comes to a 

contract. 

 

So first they define a consumer as meaning any: 

 

. . . individual who participates in a consumer contract and 

includes an individual who receives or has the right to 

receive goods or services from a supplier as a result, lease 

or other arrangement. 

 

And then they outline six different types of contracts that 

they’re talking about: a future performance contract, an Internet 

sales contract, a personal development services contract, a 

remote contract, a travel club contract, or any other prescribed 

contract. 

 

Now somebody might be asking out in television land, what is a 

remote contract? And I’ll give you the definition of what that 

means. That means a “. . . consumer contract that is entered into 

when the consumer and the supplier are not physically 

together.” Now I don’t know why that would be different than 

an Internet sales contract, other than the Internet really does 

specifically talk about the Internet. So a remote one might be 

through the mail. It might be over the phone. I’m not sure, but 

they do speak specifically to that. 

 

A personal development services contract means: 

 

(i) services relating to any of the following:  

 

(A) health, fitness, dieting or matters of similar nature.  

 

Modelling and talent, and we’ve heard lots of stories about that, 

particularly around people thinking they have a contract, but 

then they find out that’s not the case, especially in this day and 

age of reality TV. But: 

 

(B) modelling and talent, including photo shoots 

relating to modelling and talent or matters of similar 

nature; 

 

(C) martial arts, sports, dancing or similar activities;  

 

(D) any other prescribed services;  

 

Or facilities provided for instruction, training or assistance with 

any of the above. So this is very important. 

 

And then they talk about the travel club contract which is pretty 

well straightforward. But really the key word there is club. So 

I’m not sure whether travel contracts, that probably would fall 

under personal development services. And I would think the 

one that is of interest for many people, future performance 

contract: 

 

means a contract between a supplier and a consumer for 

the supply of goods or services for which the delivery, 

performance or payment in full is not made at the time the 

contract is made or partly executed.  

 

And I can think of my own experience with this. Just a few 

years ago, I thought I’d hire somebody to look after our lawn, 

and thought, you go through the phone book and you look at 

who would be somebody who would provide services like that 

in a quality way, in a way that you could be assured that they’re 

going to do it. You may not be home that morning when they 

show up, but they leave the sign on your grass that they visited 

you and hopefully everything’s okay. I mean, and then you find 

out that it’s not happened. 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

In fact what happened one time for me is the person just left the 

bill. And I came back and I said, so what happened? It looks 

like, I mean, it was not fertilized. There was nothing. The lawn 

looked exactly the same. So I phoned the company, the 

headquarters in Ontario, and the guy in Saskatoon had just 

disappeared. And so here we were arguing about it. And of 

course, the Ontario people were very good about it and it 

worked out well. But of course that is sort of a future 

performance contract where you’re paying ahead and you’re 

assuming everything will be done, and there is a real . . . you’re 

really relying on trust. 

 

And so I think this is important that we talk about this. But as I 

said, I would have liked to have seen more specific wording 

here around some of the other areas that we had been talking 

about, the emerging issues — now more than ever — around 

housing and all the parts around housing and trades that are 

being done and any of those kind of components in terms of 

new housing or old housing or renovations, things that you 

think will be done. Clearly we’ve seen the shows on TV about 

shoddy workmanship and what has been the results of that, or 

buying a house that you thought was in good shape and then 

you find out later that’s not the case. 

 

And so housing is not addressed specifically that I can find. 

Now that may be the case, but that’s something we’ll find out. 

 

They talk about personal development, but they don’t really 

talk a lot about health care and personal health. And I think 

that’s an important issue, specifically when it comes to health 

products that give the impression around better healthy living 

and curing ailments and that type of thing. And I’m not sure. 

You know, as I was going through that list of unfair practices, it 

didn’t really talk about health care in any fashion. 

 

But I did catch one other one that I think is one to get on the 

record if anybody hasn’t heard this one: taking advantage of a 

consumer by including in a consumer agreement terms or 

conditions that are harsh, oppressive, or excessively one-sided. 

Now if you come across a contract like that, then I do think 

that’s unfair and should be stopped in its tracks. But that’s 

hugely important. 

 

So we didn’t hear about health care. There’s no specific 

references to green practices or sustainable practices that are in 

that list of unfair practices. And I think that’s important because 

that is one that people are really looking to. Should I buy this 

product or that product? And if you find one that’s more green, 

more sustainable, then you say, maybe I’ll go with this 

company. So I do think that that’s not in the list of unfair 

practices. Because as we said earlier, that really we should be 

thinking more about that. 

 

It’s important that when we talk about consumer protection we 

are talking about people of all ages. We’re talking about young 

people who may be buying their first major product, and 

whether that’s an iPod or an iPad or some electronic device, 

whether it’s a first vehicle, whether it’s a first house. All of 

these things are important that we make sure we protect the 

consumers but we also let the businesses know what is the 

playing field out there and what will be tolerated and what will 

be expected and what will not be tolerated, and what they can 

expect will have penalties attached to them. 

[20:00] 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s clear that, you know, 

consumer protection really has been in the forefront for the last 

five or six decades and we really can’t lose the ground that 

we’ve taken. And so when the Minister of Justice talks about 

how we want to protect consumers and we want this piece of 

legislation to have a world view that it’s the consumer that is 

being served by this legislation, that’s important. But we can’t 

lose any ground. And we can’t lose ground when we know that 

there are emerging issues out there. And I’m talking about the 

issues around health, personal health care, around sustainability 

or sustainable, green products, housing, online purchases. All of 

those are very important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will be asking a lot of questions about who 

was consulted, who will be consulted, what will be the 

education component of this so people will know their rights, 

what will be the . . . how will people be able to access this. And 

you know, we talked about the consumer protection authority, 

that it’s a new body here in Saskatchewan. How do people 

access that? 

 

So it’s important that we create some profile for this legislation 

because people have a certain expectation that they can turn to 

the government for redress in terms of fairness, that when they 

feel that they’ve been wronged that there’s somebody out there 

who will do something for them, who will stand up for them. 

And if there’s nobody who will do that, then they become 

frustrated and they’re disappointed in the government. 

 

And so clearly, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have lots more questions 

about this. I think that we are interested in hearing more from 

the minister specifically about this. We’ll be asking a lot of 

people over the next few months, what do they think of this? 

What do they think of the unfair practices? Are there any 

contracts that are missing? That type of thing. And in potential 

amendments because we know that there is trends happening in 

Saskatchewan and Canada that we really should be addressing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there’ll be many people on our 

side who will want to talk about Bill No. 55, An Act respecting 

Consumer Protection and Business Practices, to repeal certain 

Acts and to make consequential amendments to other Acts. And 

I know people who are just turning the channels after 8 o’clock 

and wondering what we’re talking about, we’re talking about 

consumer protection. And we really want you to call in, write in 

about . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ring those phones. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Ring those phones about consumer protection. 

If you’ve been wronged in the consumer, in the marketplace, 

this is the time. This is the time to call in. This is the place. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Give them your home phone number. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — All right. And so . . . I don’t know whether I’d 

give any phone numbers out. That would be an unfair practice, I 

think. But at any rate, this is our job and this is why we’re being 

televised. It’s a serious issue, Mr. Speaker, because if you’ve 

been wronged in the marketplace, you do get angry and you do 

get upset and I think that we need to have the best legislation 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

we possibly could have. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know there’ll be many members on 

our side who will want to speak to this issue but tonight I know 

we’ve got many other items that we want to get to, and so with 

that I move adjournment of this bill. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 55, The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 56 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 56 — The Court 

of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi 

de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to rise on Bill No. 56, An Act to amend The Court of 

Appeal Act, 2000. And this is a little shorter bill. This is just a 

one-page bill with only four sections to it, but still clearly an 

important piece of legislation. Any time that we are dealing 

with the courts, we have to make sure that we’re dealing as 

thoughtfully and carefully as we can. We definitely do not want 

to have any unintended consequences at this level because 

when we talk about courts of appeal, when things end up in the 

courts, there’s clearly have taken a wrong turn. And we want to 

make sure that everybody feels that when they’ve had their day 

in court that it’s been fair and that they’ve had all the avenues 

that are due any person — that they have confidence in the 

system. 

 

And so, with that, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at this, 

clearly this really speaks to what happens when a judge . . . And 

I’ll read parts of this, but it’s very short piece of legislation. 

 

A judge who resigns his or her office or is appointed to 

another court or otherwise ceases to hold office may, 

within six months after the resignation, appointment or 

date that he or she otherwise ceases to hold office, give a 

decision in an appeal or matter he or she heard while 

holding office, and the decision is as effective as though 

he or she still held office. 

 

And so this really speaks to the fact that sometimes, because of 

changes in who’s sitting on the bench, that you may have to 

retry the court case. And of course that can lead to different 

problems. And it’s just important in fairness that if there can be 

as much continuity as possible, then we should encourage that. 

And the fact that if we can streamline the court’s procedures 

then, and yet maintaining a sense of fairness — and that 

particularly is the case if the judge has heard the case — then it 

only makes sense that they continue and they can finish up their 

work. 

 

So I think this is a relatively straightforward case. Of course we 

would like to hear from others about this and whether or not 

this is as it seems. Quite often the legislation appears to be 

straightforward and then we find out it’s anything but, that there 

are reasons why you may want to think that the old and true and 

tested way actually had a lot of merit. So maybe it did, you 

know, because we’ve had this situation for many years and so 

why has it taken so long to make this kind of decision? But 

that’s for us to find out, and we will be definitely talking to 

people to find out, is this a suitable solution? Is there any 

concerns about this? 

 

I know the minister in his speech talked about the costs, that 

this is a good thing. He talks about preventing rehearings 

benefit the public as well as the courts. All parties, all parties 

incur costs when you have to redo the court hearing, and so that 

means there’s legal costs, time away from work, that type of 

thing. And so there are costs. So hopefully that will reduce that. 

And then it also makes sure that people have a time that they 

are so fresh with the information. 

 

He talks about most, the minister talks about most other 

provinces allow a period of time for judges who have left office 

to participate in decisions on matters that they previously heard. 

In some places it’s 90 days, other places up to six months. And 

so what they’re doing is they’re landing with six months here. 

This is what the minister is recommending, and he says that it’s 

consistent with British Columbia, Alberta, New Brunswick, 

Newfoundland and Labrador. So that makes some sense as 

well. 

 

So we will be, we’ll be thinking about this. This is a very 

important issue that, you know, I think that in terms of, as the 

minister talks about, the deadlocks or bottlenecks in the courts, 

that this will help clear the way a bit and make sure that things 

are more expedient in terms of getting things done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, very short but straightforward piece of 

legislation, and we’ll be asking a little bit about this in terms of, 

what can this mean? You know, is six months the right amount? 

Ninety days? What the impact will be on the courts? It will be 

interesting to see, but relatively it seems straightforward. So I 

don’t think I have much more to say with this, but I know that 

we’ll all have something to say about this over the months 

ahead and of course that we’ll be asking some of the 

stakeholders their thoughts. I know that I’m not really well 

versed in this. I can’t tell you as many stories about appearing 

in court as I can about pots and pans and lawns and that kind of 

stuff. I just don’t have that experience, but I think this makes 

sense. But we’ll have to ask that question to those who are more 

in the know. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment now of 

Bill No. 56, An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act, 2000. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 56 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member has moved adjournment 

of Bill No. 56, The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 57 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 57 — The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

this evening to discuss the changes to The Condominium 

Property Act and Bill 57, The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

This appears to be a very comprehensive review, and many, 

many changes are being made to The Condominium Property 

Act. I believe this results from a study done in 2011 by Crown 

counsel for the legislative services public law division. And an 

extensive review was done at that time, and several 

recommendations were made. And it appears that many of these 

recommendations have now been incorporated into this bill. 

 

Again I think kudos go to the faithful public servants who spent 

countless hours poring through the recommendations, doing the 

consultations, and working very hard to ensure that the ministry 

is given the proper information it needs to consider these 

changes and actually do the actual drafting of the legislative 

changes. So again kudos to the public servants that are holding 

their end up on this deal. And as always I like to acknowledge 

the work that’s done by the good people over at the Ministry of 

Justice. 

 

The minister’s introductory remarks for this bill when he 

introduced it in the legislature in second readings were fairly 

extensive and identify a number of areas that the bill is working 

to improve, and in particular he indicated it would be consumer 

protection, dispute resolution, condominium conversions, and 

insurance. And I won’t go into detail on all the changes tonight, 

Mr. Speaker. We are going to take close looks at all of these 

issues. I just want to speak to a couple of the situations that 

present themselves with the changes to this bill and the 

introduction of this bill. 

 

Certainly I think the additions for protections for purchasers of 

the new condominium units which are converted from 

apartments are important. We understand that occasionally 

when a conversion happens, the new purchasers find out that 

there’s large and unexpected fees to replace or repair these 

condos right after they buy it, and that’s obviously not a good 

situation for them. So there’s certainly changes in the bill that 

will rectify that situation. 

 

There’s some areas in there regarding dispute resolution 

mechanisms. As you know, when you live in a condo, you’re 

living there with other condominium owners. And quite often 

there will be disputes that arise when people have differing 

views on how things should be handled at the board level or the 

condominium corporation, and often there’s disputes between 

owners and the condominium corporation. So the ministry has 

heard concerns regarding that and have introduced a number of 

changes that intend to address those concerns and ensure that 

both sides are heard and that the issues can be resolved fairly. 

 

There’s also ability for owners, even mortgagees, to make 

application to court to have their disputes heard in a fair 

manner. That appears to be an order, Mr. Speaker, although 

these are very complex changes and will require fairly 

extensive review. 

 

Again as my colleague pointed out previously, the purpose of 

this being televised tonight and as always televised is to ensure 

that people who are tuned into the legislative channel can think 

about these bills and also talk to their friends if there’s people 

who are having trouble with conversions or people who are 

having trouble with disputes between themselves and the board 

or if the board’s having trouble with the owners. They’ll 

understand that there are changes here that are being made to 

reflect that. And they should have a look at them and at least 

get in touch with someone from government or the official 

opposition to raise those concerns and see whether the draft 

proposal is meeting the needs of these people. 

 

[20:15] 

 

I guess the one area that I have the most familiarity with in 

particular in my riding in Saskatoon is the process and the issue 

of condominium conversions. As you know, Mr. Speaker, the 

city of Saskatoon didn’t have any moratorium on condominium 

conversions. And there are some interesting numbers that were 

done a couple years ago. For example in October 2010, 

Saskatoon actually had 8,200 condominium units and Regina 

only had 2,900. And that’s a huge difference between the two 

cities. And apparently the reason for that is that Regina actually 

had a moratorium on condominium conversions. So in that 

situation, you can imagine what the rental vacancy rate would 

have been in Saskatoon compared to Regina for a number of 

years. 

 

And that is definitely something that people are concerned 

about and are experiencing difficulties with. And I hear that’s 

one of the common complaints I have in my riding is from 

renters who are experiencing huge rates in their rental fees. The 

rates are increasing, and there just isn’t enough stock or housing 

on the market for these rates to be slowed by market 

availability. And it’s causing considerable hardship, not only 

for students — I have a number of university students that live 

in my riding — and also seniors, seniors who have chosen to 

live or needed to live in rental units and don’t have ownership 

of their own home or condominium. They’re all experiencing 

severe hardship due to the shortage of good rental stock in my 

riding in Saskatoon. When you see the rate of conversion in 

Saskatoon of rental units to condominiums, you can understand 

why that shortage is there. 

 

So what this bill is proposing to do, and we really want to take 

a close look at that, is the changes to the regulation-making 

authorities to prescribe the rental vacancy rate that must be 

achieved before a conversion can be approved. On the face of 

it, that appears to be an interesting proposal, Mr. Speaker, but 

as always the devil will be in the details. Until we have an 

opportunity to actually review the regulations that are being 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

proposed or how these regulations will choose to prescribe what 

the rental vacancy rate should be, municipalities are going to be 

held to that and so will developers who want to do the 

conversions. So that’s something that I think is going to require 

close observation. 

 

And again it’s being done through regulation, so it won’t be 

vetted really very well or at all in this House. Most of the time, 

once those decisions are made by the government, it’s through 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council, and there’s actually no 

opportunity for comment on those from the official opposition 

or from the public. And those are the kinds of things that could 

really cause problems for especially the municipalities who are 

approving the applications for the conversion. 

 

I guess the minister has indicated in his comments that the aim 

for this regulation-making authority is “. . . to prevent 

condominium conversions from depleting rental 

accommodations in the province.” And we certainly, certainly 

do support that notion and that goal. 

 

He went on to explain “. . . that the prescribed rate will be 

linked to the results of rental vacancy surveys conducted by 

Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation on a quarterly 

basis . . . ” So again that appears to be some thought. But he’s 

indicated that city managers are welcoming the criteria “ . . . 

and the flexibility that the new regulation-making authority will 

provide when concerns arise in the future.” It’s just that we 

don’t have any information on what that new regulation-making 

authority will look like, and that’s something that would be 

useful for us to have opportunity to review and comment on. 

And we just simply don’t have any of that information at this 

point, so we’ll be looking for that in detail, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s a number of other areas that have been addressed in this 

draft bill. The minister indicated that one of them is insurance. 

There’s changes to the insurance provisions. There will also be 

requirements for liability insurance to be held by directors and 

officers and there’s concerns from individuals about whether 

they’ll let their name go forward on the board if they’re going 

to be carrying some liability. And so the goal of the 

amendments in that case is just to alleviate those concerns 

because, as you know, if you put your name forward as a 

volunteer on a board for a condominium, it’s a lot of work and 

a lot of headache and often not a lot of reward. So you want to 

encourage people to do their part. 

 

We also understand that there is a number of issues where 

condominium units, the owner is not even living there. And so 

there’s no incentive for the owners who are renting out their 

units to be involved in the decision-making and the 

responsibility of the common areas. So these things need to be 

looked at, and this bill attempts to do that. And we’ll have a 

close look at it and talk to stakeholders to see whether indeed 

these provisions are meeting their target. 

 

There are a number of changes to the parking provisions, and if 

I understand correctly, the goal there is to make it more easy for 

registration of plans and the titling associated with the parking 

units for these condominiums. So this is something else that is 

very complex, and we do want to take a closer look at it, as we 

have some time to do that, and talk to people that are affected 

by this. 

There was a number of changes on the bylaws and enforcement 

of bylaws. There’s changes in the tax assessment and 

enforcement proceedings, especially as they apply to parking 

units. And also there’s changes in the bill related to completion 

of phases and how the phase developments go forward and 

changes to the board’s bylaw making authority. There’s quite a 

few changes that are being proposed. So we’re going to want to 

have a very close look at all of these changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess the one other thing that we don’t see in this bill, despite 

its length and the complexity of the proposed amendments, is 

one of the concerns that you often hear condominium owners 

talking about is the fact that they’re not eligible as a 

condominium owner for energy saving programs and grants 

because the heating, cooling, and ventilation systems are the 

property of the common, and so there isn’t an ability for them 

to apply for energy saving grants. And unfortunately we don’t 

see any proposals in this bill to assist condominium owners in 

the common element, common ownership of the condominiums 

to apply for those kinds of grants to ensure that the building is 

sustainable and is able to capitalize on energy savings. The 

incentive is simply not there. 

 

I guess the other thing that I did want to raise before I cede the 

floor, Mr. Speaker, is that one of the things I found when I was 

working with Information Services Corporation 10 years ago 

was the importance of the land titles registry for the 

condominium ownership in Saskatchewan. And indeed I think 

Saskatchewan has been a leader in the condominium 

legislation, but also it’s tied with our land registry and how that 

works. And the conversion of the land titles registry to an 

electronic registry in early 2000 was particularly difficult in the 

condominium area. And the new land titles Act, they had to 

work very hard to ensure that the conversion worked, and there 

was a lot of issues that were resolved at that time. 

 

I guess my concern in this case is that if the government goes 

ahead . . . And we haven’t heard much lately about what the 

plans are in terms of the sale of ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] as a Crown corporation to 

private ownership. But certainly these kinds of efforts that 

we’ve seen the Crown corporation and before that the land titles 

registry through the Department of Justice was the attention to 

these kinds of issues and the motivation coming from a need to 

serve the public and ensure that condominium owners are well 

served rather than the bottom line or the profit that a private 

owner would be focused on. 

 

So this is just another example. I think if you look through the 

changes, you’ll see all the relations between condominium 

ownership and the land registry. And there is a number of 

changes required in the registry to ensure that these 

condominium changes suit the public and the people that are 

purchasing condominiums. 

 

So again it’s just another reason I think that we need to look 

very carefully at any privatization of a registry where 

condominiums and landownership is being affected, where 

mortgages are being affected, and all the other issues that affect 

landownership here in condominium land. 

 

So beyond that, Mr. Speaker, I think my colleagues are going to 

want to have a lot to say about this bill as well. There is a 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

multitude of changes that will affect condominium ownership 

across the board, and we want to take a very close look at all 

these changes to ensure that it is indeed dealing with the needs 

of the public. 

 

So at this point I would like to adjourn the debate on this bill 

and see if other of my colleagues want to address it. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 57, The Condominium Property Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 58 — The 

Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

evening to be able to enter in on the debate on Bill No. 58, An 

Act respecting Compensation for Injured Workers and making 

consequential amendments to certain Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 58 is a fairly significant piece of 

legislation. It’s significant in length and, Mr. Speaker, it’s also 

significant in its relevance and its effect on the lives of 

Saskatchewan workers and the lives of Saskatchewan 

employers on their businesses. We know that the Workers’ 

Compensation Board, or WCB, is hugely important to the 

province in terms of providing benefits to workers who are 

injured on the job as well as creating a culture and atmosphere, 

Mr. Speaker, where we do in fact want to have fewer injuries, 

fewer lost days with respect to injuries and not being able to be 

performing their duties. And we’re reminded, Mr. Speaker, 

most especially, once a year on the day of mourning when we 

consider the workers who have lost their lives on the job over 

the past year. 

 

And in recent days in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been 

discussing proposed legislation concerning asbestos. And we 

think of the actions and the advocacy of Howard Willems in 

working towards having a safer environment for workers but 

also for patients and for students and for all Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

So we know this is a very important topic. It’s a topic that 

deserves our attention, and it’s a topic that deserves close 

scrutiny when we are making changes to the Act. 

 

The changes, Mr. Speaker, that are presented in this piece of 

legislation come out of the six member committee of review 

which conducted its business, Mr. Speaker, over the course of 

parts of 2011, and the final report is 2011. And the report was 

of course put forwards by the Ministry of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety. The final report, Mr. Speaker, that was a 

joint effort of the employers and workers, with 

recommendations made, where consensus was achieved, is 

fairly substantial as well — a good number of pages for 

individuals that are wondering. It’s 80-plus pages, so it does 

touch on a number of areas. And these are areas where 

employers and employees can come together and see where 

changes ought to occur in the Act in order to ensure that WCB 

is as effective and as efficient and as well positioned as it needs 

to be to provide the benefits to injured workers. 

 

The changes, Mr. Speaker, that are included in this piece of 

legislation, coming out of the committee of review final report, 

some of them are of a minor nature, and some of them are more 

significant. And the minister in his remarks gave an overview in 

his second reading speech about some of the different or some 

of the major changes that are standing out. 

 

But I will say that with a piece of legislation that is this long 

and that is this significant, we will have work to do in the 

months ahead as MLAs in listening to our constituents and 

listening to employees, listening to employers, and see whether 

or not the proposed changes are in fact, in their opinion, in the 

best interests of the province. And so I make that a general 

statement before I get into some of the specifics with respect to 

the legislation. 

 

In looking at the minister’s second reading speech which does 

highlight a number of the main aspects, Mr. Speaker, to do with 

this legislation, the one component where it talks about the 

maximum benefit level, I would like to just make a 

clarification. This might be something that we want to clear up 

in committee later on. The recommendation of no. 8, which was 

non-consensus, it said: 

 

The maximum benefit level which is currently set at 

$55,000 be raised immediately to $59,000. Over the next 4 

years, it be increased annually by a percentage of the 

annual average . . . in Saskatchewan until it reaches 165% 

of that average annual wage. Henceforth, the maximum be 

adjusted yearly to remain at 165% of the annual average 

wage in the province. 

 

So for folks in Hansard that want to know where that quote is, 

it’s on page 19 of the 2011 report, recommendation no. 8. I’m 

not an expert, Mr. Speaker, on WCB, but as I understand this, 

it’s increasing the benefit, the maximum payable to a recipient 

from 55,000 raised to 59,000. 

 

[20:30] 

 

In the minister’s second reading speech, he stated that “The 

minimum wage rate will be increased from 55,000 to 59,000 for 

workers injured after this bill comes into force.” I think that 

should read maximum, but if I’m mixed up on this, which could 

be possible, Mr. Speaker, that might be something that we want 

to talk about in committee just so that everyone at home and 

individuals that are affected by this have an understanding of 

what is occurring with respect to the maximum wage, not the 

minimum. 

 

We also see, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a $10,000 fine for 

employers who fail to . . . well employers where there are 

breaches in their obligations under the Act, as the minister 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

states, “. . . such as failing to notify the Board of an injury, 

collecting money from an employee for a medical expense, and 

refusing to let the Board inspect their records without a lawful 

excuse.” So there’s some, it would appear some teeth being 

added to the Act to ensure that the employer side of the 

equation is living up to its responsibilities as detailed under the 

Act. 

 

We also see in the Act, as the minister said, an increase in the 

borrowing limit up to $25 million which the minister states is 

an appropriate amount given the premiums that are being paid 

into WCB and the size of its operation. So, Mr. Speaker, we 

will be looking for a bit more information on that with respect 

to whether or not that is an appropriate change. Whenever 

we’re dealing with a situation that involves increase and in 

taking on debt or the debt ceiling or debt limits, it’s important 

to make sure that the actions are in fact in the best interest. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we see some changes in this legislation 

coming out of the report that addresses the issue of the 

return-to-work program which I think is important. As the 

minister said: 

 

[The] . . . Work programs assist in maintaining the 

employee’s connection with the workplace. They also 

increase the employee’s sense of self-worth during the 

recovery process. This change will pay dividends to the 

employee, the employer, and the workers’ compensation 

system. 

 

I would agree with that. Any sort of step we can take when 

someone has been injured to get them back into a rhythm of 

work and into a place in doses or in amounts that they can 

handle, I think that’s a positive thing at face value. And I hope 

that is in fact the case, that it is a positive thing. 

 

An important change also, Mr. Speaker, or an important issue 

that is being addressed is the fair practices office which has 

been in existence since 2003. And I know just speaking 

first-hand from my own constituency perspective, Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to compliment the individuals that work in the fair 

practices office, as they have helped a number of my 

constituents with cases and issues that they’ve had with WCB. 

 

It’s often, probably for members on both sides of the House, a 

bit of a baptism by fire the first time we’re elected and a huge 

WCB file comes into our office. They’re rarely straightforward, 

rarely cut and dried, often very complicated, and often very 

emotional as well because of the reality of workplace injuries 

and then the effects that this has on individuals and on their 

families. So if there are steps we can take for the fair practices 

office to ensure that due process has always taken place and 

that individuals have been treated and handled in a proper and 

fair manner, that is the type of public policy we should pursue 

as a provincial government, and I would support efforts to 

strengthen and to improve that approach. 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, as identified by the minister, there are 

changes with respect to language and gender, be more gender 

inclusive, and some changes that are required there. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that of course is a good step whenever we 

are working to modernize our legislation and ensure that it is in 

fact in keeping with a modern-day view on language and what 

is appropriate, especially at the level of the provincial 

government. So as I say, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the 

highlights based on, well based on some of the comments from 

the minister and my own review of the final report from the 

committee of review. 

 

But as I said in my remarks at the start, whenever you’re 

dealing with WCB and the workplace and employees and 

employers, when it involves injuries, when it involves the 

premiums paid by employers, it’s important that we get these 

changes right. And I know that the committee of review has 

done work, and I recognize that there was participation from 

employers and employees — and that’s a positive thing. But 

any sorts of changes like this, Mr. Speaker, can have 

far-reaching consequences, and sometimes unintended 

consequences. 

 

So I think it’s important that in the coming days we have the 

opportunity to consult with individuals, to hear from 

constituents, as I said, to hear from employers and employees in 

order to ensure that the changes that are being brought forward 

in Bill No. 58 are in fact in the best interest of the province. So, 

Mr. Speaker, those are my remarks for Bill No. 58 and with that 

I would move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 58, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 61 — The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Railway Amendment Act, 2012 is a very brief bill which causes 

some members to toot like a train. 

 

Anyway, there are two clauses that are being changed here. 

And if I understand the minister’s comments correctly, he’s 

ensuring that the abandonment process of the railways is done 

in a way that doesn’t negatively affect either the purchasers or 

the buyers. What it’s doing is it’s allowing the Highway Traffic 

Board some authority to remedy a situation where someone’s 

negotiating in bad faith. So I assume that this is coming out of 

real-life situations where there has been experience in bad-faith 

negotiations, and this is an attempt to insert some sort of 

government oversight into these transfers to ensure that the bad 

faith is dealt with. 

 

He refers to the government purchase phase and, at that point, if 

there is no purchaser, the government and municipality can 

purchase the railway for the net salvage value. And the net 

salvage value application and determination is now being done 

under section 22.2 of The Railway Amendment Act, or The 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

Railway Act. And the goal here is to ensure that if there is a 

determination required for the net salvage value, that the 30-day 

clock is paused until that assessment can be made and then they 

can decide whether or not they want to buy it at that value. 

 

So really, you know, it just appears that in this case on the sale 

of railways, the Minister of Highways has deemed it necessary 

to intervene where there’s negotiations in bad faith. And 

apparently there’s also powers to evaluate disputes and issue 

orders for the parties to enter into an agreement that the board 

believes is fair and reasonable. So it’s a fairly strong measure 

on the part of the board. When you think about negotiations on 

any other kind of fair market purchase — a house, for example 

— you can’t imagine a board intervening between a buyer and a 

seller of a house. But we are talking about railways here, and 

that’s a very important part of the transportation system in our 

province and indeed in our country. 

 

And I understand that some of these changes were reflecting 

what happens at the federal level in the abandonment process in 

the federal railways. I mean it’s a sad thing to see the old 

railways all disappearing as they are, and that’s, I guess, a 

change in the way our transportation system has evolved over 

the last 100 years, particularly in the transportation of grain. 

And we know that with the abandonment of the single desk for 

the Canadian Wheat Board and also drastic changes that are 

being made to the Canada Grain Commission and the extra 

costs and all the extra liabilities and burdens that are being 

borne by the producers, certainly this is just another example of 

how the whole transportation system and the marketing of grain 

has become more and more difficult over the years. 

 

So just a few comments then on that bill, Mr. Speaker. We will 

watch with interest how this unfolds and I suspect that my 

colleagues will also have a couple of comments on this 

particular bill. But at this point I’m prepared to adjourn debate 

and we’ll leave it at that. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 61, The Railway Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 63 — The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and join in debate tonight. I should state off the 

top, this summer I had the pleasure of staying at the regional 

park in Nipawin, and through the rain and thunderstorm that 

took place all around me I, despite all that, had a wonderful stay 

at the Nipawin Regional Park . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 

didn’t have a chance to stay at the Nesslin recreational park, but 

you know, it’s so many parks, such little time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess the legislation under consideration, Bill No. 63, the first 

area of improvement identified by the speaker in the second 

reading introduction of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, the first 

area of improvement under the proposed legislation is to 

provide a much clearer description of the minister’s power with 

regards to the regional parks program, wherein the existing 

legislation describes the powers of the department versus the 

minister and does not specifically describe the types of powers 

required to carry out the minister’s responsibility. So the first 

area of improvement is a matter of clarification in terms of the 

respective roles and authorities of the ministry versus the 

minister. So we’ll see how that plays out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second area of improvement identified in the speech was to 

introduce the proposed, to establish the authority to delegate 

certain of the minister’s powers to the Saskatchewan Regional 

Parks Association via a formal administration agreement 

approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ll be watching that to see how it plays out in actual 

fact and how, if the minister is seeking to do things in 

partnership with the Regional Parks Association or in fact to 

take a more subversive role in rolling things through the 

association that would be more forthrightly put through the 

ministry. 

 

The third area identified in the second reading speech addresses 

the formal recognition of community and non-profit 

organizations in the establishment and operation of regional 

park authorities. Previously only municipalities have had this 

formal recognition. Again, Mr. Speaker, a lot depends on how 

this is actually implemented and carried out. Certainly the 

municipalities were the logical vehicles for this previously but, 

you know, who gets rolled into the community and non-profit 

organizations in establishing regional park authorities? We’ll be 

watching to see how that plays out. Again, there may be, but 

there may not be the same kind of accountability that is there 

with municipalities back to the community affected. 

 

The fourth key component identified is the overall improved 

clarity throughout the legislation. Again, largely housekeeping 

measures, removing out of date and redundant references dating 

back to the original drafting of the legislation of 1960. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation clarifies the 

processes required for regional park boundary adjustments. And 

I guess this is where it gets particularly interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the land swaps that might go on to refine 

or fix the boundaries of the regional park. The legislation 

allows the minister to set certain conditions such as the 

completion of public consultation process before such 

adjustments are made to boundaries and any said conditions 

needing to be met prior to creating an order to dissolve a 

regional park. Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what’s going on 

throughout the province right now, particularly in regional 

parks, it will be mighty interesting to see how this holds out. 

 

[20:45] 

 

There is some consultation cited by the ministry in terms of 

what went into the drafting of this legislation, but in the interest 

of due diligence and broader consultation, we in the official 

opposition will certainly be undertaking our own consultations 

on this piece of legislation. 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

As such, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are others that would 

desire to participate in the discussions around Bill 63, The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012. And with that, I would move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 63, The Regional Parks Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 45 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to make a few remarks on Bill No. 45, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act and The 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is not too long in length, 

but I would say, Mr. Speaker, that it does have fairly significant 

implications for SaskTel and for the province. So it’s important, 

Mr. Speaker, that it does receive the attention and the 

discussion that it deserves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to the minister in his second reading 

speech and in reading the brief legislation which is about, 

which is a page, the main items here, Mr. Speaker, though one 

would be to change the monetary limits for when an order in 

council is required with respect to spending money for the 

purchase of land with respect to cell towers, as one example. 

The limit right now is $100,000, Mr. Speaker, so this would be 

increased. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that land prices have increased and 

there may be a rationale for this change, as the minister 

suggests there is, according to the recommendations coming out 

of committee. However, Mr. Speaker, any time that we are 

reducing transparency and reducing the availability of the 

public, of the media, of the opposition, of community members 

to receive information about what is being spent, and when and 

where, I think it is an important issue. 

 

And it’s important to ensure that the step that is being taken to 

increase the limit, thereby meaning that an order in council 

would not be required, I think that it is a significant issue and 

something that we should take seriously. And there should be 

an awareness about that that change is occurring because 

purchase of land is important, and transparency with respect to 

finances is most certainly important, and decisions around order 

in councils are also very important. It’s an important means and 

an important avenue that individuals are able to receive the 

transparency that they desire when it comes to government 

actions. 

The second component, Mr. Speaker, as identified in the bill 

and through the minister’s second reading speech where this 

bill is making a change, has to do with lengthening the term of 

borrowing that SaskTel can do. And as stated by the minister, 

the point of this is in order to access some new bond options 

with respect to 30-year bonds, some different options for 

borrowing with the idea that this would save dollars. Mr. 

Speaker, of course we want to borrow wisely. We want to 

borrow in a prudent manner. We don’t want to do anything, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not in the best interests of SaskTel or in the best 

interest of the province. But whenever there is the issue of 

borrowing, it’s very, very important that we have a thorough 

examination of what is actually being done and what are the 

implications. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the borrowing would be used for 

infrastructure needs within SaskTel — things that would need 

to be purchased, expanded upon, improved upon in order for 

SaskTel to fulfill its mandate. SaskTel as we know is important 

to many, many Saskatchewan people in terms of the services 

that it provides. But it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to the 

province and to the family of Crown corporations that we have 

in Saskatchewan, that we are fortunate to have in Saskatchewan 

a family of Crown corporations that have provided many great 

services to the province over the past decades. 

 

So the question of taking on more debt, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important because it speaks to the financial strength of the 

organization, of SaskTel, and it speaks to whether or not 

SaskTel is on a sound footing. So it’s a very important 

discussion. And we’re talking about millions of dollars that are 

required, Mr. Speaker, for SaskTel to do its job, to fulfil its 

mandate to the people of Saskatchewan. And we know it costs 

money to operate and to make infrastructure investments. So in 

some situations, Mr. Speaker, it may be appropriate to borrow, 

but it’s important at the same time to consider what resources 

are currently available to SaskTel through the profits that it 

receives through the services that it provides. And it ties in 

very, very closely to the issue of how large of a dividend the 

government is taking from SaskTel, and from other Crowns 

really, with respect to allowing the corporation to continue to 

do the work that it needs to do. 

 

And what I sincerely hope is not the issue, Mr. Speaker, the 

circumstance here that we’re seeing is the stripping of equity or 

the taking of dividends beyond what is appropriate, beyond 

what allows SaskTel to stay on a sound footing and do the 

long-term planning and investments that it needs to do, and 

shifting the availability and the provision of those resources to 

being provided through debt as opposed to using the profits that 

SaskTel has. 

 

And I think that really is the question that we need to examine 

closely here, that is there a move being taken here in order to 

provide more funding for the province by taking it from 

SaskTel through a larger dividend at the expense of SaskTel’s 

ability to fulfil its mandate of what it needs to do, and then 

turning to SaskTel and saying, actually you need to borrow 

more money over now what will be beyond a 30-year period, 

Mr. Speaker? That’s an important question because it talks 

about the long-term viability and sustainability and 

effectiveness of SaskTel to deliver services to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

And I say I hope that is not the situation. But if we look at other 

actions that the government has done with respect to institutions 

that are public, that are tied to the province but are separate, the 

most glaring example where we have seen these types of 

actions actually takes place, Mr. Speaker, at the University of 

Saskatchewan with the province forcing the university to take 

on close to $100 million of debt, thereby maxing out its debt 

capacity on campus, Mr. Speaker, in order for the government 

to get out of its election promise of paying for a project up 

front. 

 

So it’s a little bit of a different dynamic but it’s a similar 

approach, Mr. Speaker, where we see a tendency and a pattern 

of behaviour from members opposite where they will take 

actions and ask other organizations to take on debt in order to 

have their own financial picture look better, either through debt 

that they don’t have to take on or dollars that they don’t have to 

send out through the door, in order to pay for a project. 

 

I hope that is not what is happening, Mr. Speaker, but I truly 

believe that is what has happened in the case of the University 

of Saskatchewan. So given that track record, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

worried that this is a possibility as well with our Crown 

corporations. 

 

So the minister’s remarks are rather brief. The legislation itself 

is rather brief, but the issue is important. The issue is 

significant. The issue has to do with the long-term well-being of 

our Crown corporations, and it has to do with transparency and 

openness with how we are taking in dollars and spending 

dollars and borrowing dollars. And when we think about the 

well-being of the province, those are the questions that ought to 

be top of mind. Mr. Speaker, with that I will conclude my 

remarks and move adjournment on Bill No. 45. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 45, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 46 — The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to wade 

into the debate on Bill No. 46, An Act to Amend The Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act, there’s a couple of things that stand out 

for, about this Act. The minister’s remarks are relatively brief 

on this, but a couple of things that Act proposes doing is 

providing or allowing the chairperson and vice-chairperson to 

be appointed for one additional term of one year, Mr. Speaker. 

Interesting, and I know that the minister commented that these 

changes came from a review that, a review of the Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Commission, and to align it with certain 

provisions. So this is coming out of a review of the 

commission, and you’d like to think that it’s well-thought-out, 

but interesting to extend the term for another year. It’s just a bit 

curious why you wouldn’t, I’m sure that’s there’s some 

rationale behind it, but it’s curious why you wouldn’t just 

extend the length of the term instead of saying that they can add 

it. 

 

I know in the minister’s comments, he said: 

 

The proposed amendments, Mr. Speaker, are it will allow 

the commission to extend the terms of the chairperson and 

vice-chairperson at times when leadership continuity is 

vital and their original terms are nearing an end. 

 

I would argue that isn’t leadership continuity important at all 

times when you’re doing this work, Mr. Speaker? So we’re 

curious on the opposition, as the opposition to learn a little bit 

more about where that change is coming from. And that’s part 

of our role here as the opposition: you always ask yourself, 

where is this coming from? Where has it arisen? What kind, 

why are these changes being proposed? So those are questions 

that we will be pursuing with stakeholders who are impacted by 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another provision is that this, in subsection (2) of 7.01, they’ve 

added a subsection here that . . . Sorry, Mr. Speaker, the hour is 

late here and I’m not functioning on all cylinders here, I think, 

but — which is highly unusual for me, Mr. Speaker, I might 

add. I hear from the members opposite there is no, no 

sympathy, no mercy, but that’s okay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what has happened here with one of the, this additional 

clause is if you don’t agree, if you . . . I’d like to read it here 

actually for the record: 

 

The following section is added after section 7: 

 

“Majority and restriction on liability 

7.01(1) Subject to subsection (2), a decision or any other 

action taken at a meeting of the commission constitutes a 

decision or action of the commission if it is voted for or 

approved by a majority of the members of the commission 

present at the meeting. 

 

(2) No member of the commission is liable with respect to 

a decision or an action taken at a meeting of the 

commission if: 

 

(a) in the case of a member who was present at the 

meeting, the member: 

 

(i) did not vote for or otherwise approve the decision 

or action taken at the meeting; and 

 

(ii) requests that his or her dissent be entered into the 

minutes of the meeting; or 

 

(b) the member was not present at the meeting at which 

the decision was approved or action taken”. 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

And that’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t know if there 

are clauses in other legislation and that’s something we’ll be 

examining. So the hypothetical . . . Well there are ten people on 

this commission, Mr. Speaker, so if there’s an 8 to 2 vote and 

there are two people who didn’t agree with the decision and 

didn’t support it, then those two people can register their dissent 

and not be liable. So is there a precedent in other legislation for 

this or will this in fact be precedent setting? So this is 

something that we’ll be looking into as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that, as I’ve said, our job is to take a look at legislation 

and then talk to those who will be impacted about it, from it, 

look at other legislation as how it relates to this. So in the 

coming days, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve only seen this legislation 

in the last couple of weeks, but in the coming days we will 

continue to examine that. And with that I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 46, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 47 — The 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and join in the debate on Bill No. 47, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 and 

to make consequential amendments to other Acts. 

 

Essentially what this bill does, Mr. Speaker, is provide for a 

name change, changing the Watershed Authority’s name to the 

water security authority. I guess the water . . . Pardon me, the 

Water Security Agency. So that’s about the sum total of the 

changes involved in the bill. I’ve heard of turning water into 

wine but I’ve never heard of turning the Watershed Authority 

into the Water Security Agency. So it’s a new one on me, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I guess the only thing else that it’s, other things that it’s 

remarkable for is the penchant for the minister in terms of 

quoting noted conservative thinkers, Tom Axworthy and Jean 

Chrétien, in his second reading speech. We thought that was 

interesting as well. And also the almost sort of mystical quality 

that the minister recounts the appearance of the opposition critic 

at the announcement for the water security 25-year plan. So it’s, 

beyond that, Mr. Speaker, not a lot to commend this piece of 

legislation. It’s largely a change of a name and, you know, 

we’ll take it out for consulting but I can imagine what the 

reviews will be like. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d adjourn debate on Bill No. 47. 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 47, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 48 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to speak to the second reading on Bill No. 48, An Act to 

amend The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Act, which is clearly a very important Act in Saskatchewan 

right around the world when we talk about climate change and 

what should be done about it. 

 

And of course we have a lot of concerns about this. And of 

course we are looking forward to knowing more about this. 

We’ve got lots of questions about it. Very interesting to read 

the minister’s comments about this. It’s always interesting to 

read this Minister of Environment’s comments about hot air and 

what can be, how he responds to challenges. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, you know, he goes on and talks 

about coordinating this with the federal government and how 

that’s important, and what that needs to be done there. But we 

need to see much more than just hot air. We need to see much 

more than words about this. We are concerned that this 

province is getting a bad reputation of not doing enough around 

greenhouse gas emissions, and clearly when they keep 

reintroducing legislation about this, that more needs to be done. 

More action needs to be done — not more words, not more 

words. 

 

And I find it very interesting, you know. He talks about, and I 

quote, “Extensive consultation has been undertaken. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when I mean extensive . . .” He talks about 

extensive — some 1,200 submissions across the province from 

interest groups. So we are very interested to know more about 

this. Who was doing the consultation? What was this all about? 

What was the format? 

 

And it’d be interesting to know more about this process here 

because clearly he’s making a lot of the 1,200, but we’ve not 

heard that or seen that. And this is one of the first times this has 

been brought up. So we have some real concerns here about 

what this is all about when he’s talking about this and this 

government. I think that when this government leaves office, 

there’s going to be a book about consultations — 101 different 

ways of doing this. They’ve done it 101 different ways, you 

know. And I think that clearly I don’t know whether it’s a 

master’s or undergraduate, at least a certificate, something, 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

should be awarded to these folks — trying different things, but 

not talking to ordinary people. They refuse to talk to ordinary 

people. 

 

So we have made a lot of comments about their consultation 

process, and it’s all over the map, all over the map. And so this 

minister makes a lot about this, but clearly what we need to see 

is more action and less rhetoric and getting down to the job at 

hand because clearly we know climate change is the issue of 

this time period and we need to do more. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many of us will want to 

get up and speak at length on this, but I know the hour is 

getting late and so with that, Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading, I move adjournment, adjournment . . . Get ahead of 

myself. Had you guys with me on that. Let me rephrase that. 

Less rhetoric, more action, adjournment of Bill No. 48, An Act 

to amend The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 48, The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 49 — The 

Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise in the debate on The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

I’ve had an opportunity to review the minister’s comments as 

they relate to the amendments here and he’s describing them as 

concrete demonstrations, which is an interesting way to 

describe the government’s confidence in the forestry 

professionals. Anyways I have a few comments I’d like to raise 

about the changes and as they relate to other professions in the 

province as well. 

 

The main thrust of the Act, it appears, is to remove people who 

are teaching forestry and conducting research activities from 

forestry, from being eligible to be professional foresters. And 

it’s not entirely clear to me why that will improve the 

management of Saskatchewan’s provincial forests. I have 

trouble seeing the connection on this. 

 

And he also indicates that this right-to-title protection will deal 

with the concerns of public safety, and again it’s not entirely 

clear to me why, if someone has met all the other requirements, 

if they are teaching it, they somehow would be a threat to 

public safety, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a bit curious and indeed 

when I look at my own profession of law, certainly professors 

that are teaching law are considered to be lawyers and even me, 

as a legislator, although I’m not practising, I’m still considered 

to be a lawyer and a member of that profession. So if I was a 

professional forester and decided to go teach, somehow I am 

going to lose that designation when I have the same 

qualifications as an existing forester. 

 

So unfortunately the minister’s comments don’t clearly indicate 

why this is going to protect public safety or the environment, 

and we hope to be able to discern that at some point, to 

understand why removing the teaching and research parts of the 

definition somehow will improve public safety. And quite often 

I can’t see why a teacher of forestry couldn’t also be able to 

offer professional forestry services. In fact I would hope 

teachers would have some practical experience in the field of 

forestry. So it’s not entirely clear why this change is necessary 

and how it will help public safety. 

 

The other part of the bill, there is a couple other changes. It’s 

actually expanding the use of the professional seal to other 

categories of membership, but then it’s making it an obligation 

rather than a right. And I guess the other thing that we find in 

the minister’s comments is the idea of elevating the forestry 

profession to the same level as other provinces in Canada do. 

 

We have other professions being dealt with in bills so far in this 

session. But one of my concerns, and I mentioned earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, is I understand the registered music teachers of 

Saskatchewan are actually being demoted by this government 

and they’re being told that they’re no longer eligible to be a 

profession despite the fact that the designation of RMT 

[registered music teacher] is something that is taken very 

seriously. If you have the designation as a registered music 

teacher and are allowed by law to put those letters after your 

name, that means something, and means something to parents 

who are choosing where to have their children instructed in 

music. And it also means something to the profession itself 

because they can then choose the requirements for membership 

and have some say in who has that designation. 

 

So it seems a shame that the registered music teachers are being 

actually . . . Their legislation, which is quite old, has been 

wiped out completely. But here we have the professional 

foresters — and that’s the link to this legislation, Mr. Speaker 

— is that the professional foresters are actually being elevated 

to the level of other provinces in Canada. So I’m not sure why 

this government would choose to treat some professions this 

way and then treat other professions in the way that the 

Registered Music Teachers’ Association have been forewarned 

that legislation is forthcoming. Now we haven’t seen that 

legislation yet, although I’ve seen letters to the association that 

it’s coming. So maybe this government has changed their mind 

and they’re going to continue to ensure that other professional 

associations are being treated in the same way that the forestry 

people are being treated. 

 

So the minister talked a little bit about, in his comments, about 

the downturn in the forest industry. Certainly the price of 

softwoods is not recovering quickly and we know that that’s a 

real problem for the forestry industry. We still don’t see mills 

opening here in Saskatchewan despite promises of the same. 

We’re still waiting to see it happen, and we keep hearing that 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

it’s imminent, but they’re not open yet. 

 

And so the whole issue around forestry, there’s a number of 

them. We see reforestation companies taking a hit when the 

changes were made to the way contracts were being awarded. 

We see people who are actually growing trees here in the 

province, and the seedlings, being excluded from opportunities 

to contract with local contracts for providing trees, and that’s 

been very difficult on the local growers. 

 

And so when he talks about the hit to the world market of 

forestry, it’s also some of this government’s policies are having 

a direct negative impact on local producers of trees and of 

reforestation companies. So it’s unfortunate that this isn’t being 

addressed at all by this government. And he speaks about the 

New West Partnership provinces, and indeed a part of that is 

having a negative impact on local reforestation companies. 

 

At any rate the other changes that are being proposed to this bill 

are fairly minor, and they just are further defining who the 

members of the association are and what it would take to 

engage in the professional practice of forestry. 

 

So we’ll have more to say. I’m sure my colleagues will have 

more to say on this bill, but at this point I think that’s the extent 

of my comments on this bill. And read the minister’s comments 

with great interest on this in his second reading comments 

because he goes way beyond what the bill is actually referring 

to. But they’re worth a read, Mr. Speaker, so if you have time 

over your next coffee break, you might want to take a look at 

those. At any rate, at this point I’m prepared to adjourn debate 

on Bill 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 49, The Forestry Professions Amendment 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m., Wednesday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:13.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1901 

 Bill No. 55 — The Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1903 

 Bill No. 56 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1910 

 Bill No. 57 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1911 

 Bill No. 58 — The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1913 

 Bill No. 61 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1914 

 Bill No. 63 — The Regional Parks Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1915 

 Bill No. 45 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Saskatchewan Telecommunications) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1916 

 Bill No. 46 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1917 

 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Amendment Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1918 

 Bill No. 48 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1918 

 Bill No. 49 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1919 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


