




















































Hansard: November 20, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 15A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2043 

 November 20, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of the House, I would like to 

introduce 19 grade 11 and 12 students from Lake Lenore high 

school. Give us a wave, gang. There we go. They’re sitting in 

your west gallery. Accompanying them is Lindsey Korte and 

Curtis Strueby. And chaperones, we have Rachel Voz, Sherri 

Schemenauer, Naomi Prodahl, and Scott Lessmeister. 

 

And thank you all for being here. We are going to get a tour, 

and then we’ll spend some time together. And I’m raising the 

bar for other MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 

Usually it’s drink boxes, but from Batoche, we’ve raised the bar 

to Dilly Bars from Dairy Queen, guys. That’s the challenge, 

gentlemen. Dilly Bars for my class. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce two remarkable young students that are with us here 

today. These two students are grade 11’s at Campbell 

Collegiate. And they’re Nasra Moumin and Areeb Salim. These 

two young individuals are in fact not just Saskatchewan’s best 

debaters, they’re Canada’s best debaters. And they actually are 

now taking their game to the international stage. Mr. Speaker, 

before they leave here today, I’m hopeful they might give 

myself a little bit of advice on how to refine my own debate 

skills. I know the other side wouldn’t disagree. 

 

They’re also joined by somebody that’s very important to them 

and very important to improving the life of students here in 

Regina, Ms. Janessa Weir who teaches with the Huda School 

and works as well with the Saskatchewan elocution and debate 

society and supports these two students and their success in a 

very significant way. And I know their success is very 

important to her as well. So please join with me in welcoming 

these very successful students and Janessa Weir to their 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition on cellphone 

coverage. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure that SaskTel 

delivers cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along 

with the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans 

Bay; Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, 

and the neighbouring communities of Michel Village and 

St. George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known 

as Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows First Nation along with the community of Turnor 

Lake, including all the neighbouring communities in the 

northwest part of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Dillon, but the petition has been signed from all 

throughout the land. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the finances of our province. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards, and following the Provincial 

Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin to provide 

responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy financial 

management as deserved by Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Swift Current and Success. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Transgender Day of Remembrance 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a heavy heart that I join 

many across the world on the International Transgender Day of 

Remembrance. On this day, we remember many people who 

were murdered based solely on the fact that they were 

transgendered. 

 

Since 2008, 816 transgender murder cases were reported in 55 

countries worldwide. That number continues to increase with 

every year that passes. In 2008, 141 murders were reported. In 

2011, that number rose to 248 — over 100 more people. 

Unfortunately these disturbingly high numbers only speak to 

murders that have actually been reported. 

 

This past Sunday here in Regina a vigil was held at St. James 

United Church to remember all victims. At the event there was 

a guest panel of speakers, a video presentation, and a reading of 

names of individuals who passed away this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this kind of hatred is unacceptable. It is only 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

through compassion and acceptance that we can begin to help 

transgendered people feel safe in their communities. I deeply 

appreciate the continual efforts by St. James affirming 

committee and the OneSong Transgender Support Services for 

their commitment to equality. My heart goes out to the many 

victims’ families and friends, and together I hope that we can 

strive towards creating a world where this kind of violence does 

not exist any more. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

National Child Day 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in this House to remind all members that today is National 

Child Day. In recognition of children’s rights and the incredible 

potential of our home-grown youth, our government is joining 

today with the rest of Canada to celebrate National Child Day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, National Child Day is celebrated on November 

20th of each year. This date marks the occasion when Canada 

adopted the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the 

Child, outlining the basic human rights for children and youth. 

 

In the very same spirit of this important UN [United Nations] 

convention, the Government of Saskatchewan is working hard 

to make life better for Saskatchewan children. Through the 

cabinet committee on children and youth and the Saskatchewan 

child and youth agenda, our government is working to ensure 

that children get a good start in life, youth are prepared for their 

future, families are stronger, and communities are supportive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our children represent the future of this great 

province, and as such they deserve the best possible start in life 

that we can provide them. This is why it is imperative that we 

provide our most vulnerable and valuable citizens with the 

supports they need to reach their full potential and to live 

healthy, productive lives. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Campbell Collegiate Students Win Debating Honours 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to recognize 

the outstanding efforts of two Campbell Collegiate students, 

Nasra Moumin and Areeb Salim, who have become two of 

Canada’s best debaters. 

 

I personally watched this duo in action as they won the 2011 

junior nationals. Their performance was truly impressive. This 

year they placed second at senior nationals, where Nasra and 

Areeb faced off against members of Team Canada, beating 

them soundly. They have proved to debaters and coaches across 

the country that they are a force to be reckoned with. They 

make our province proud. 

 

Nasra and Areeb are members of the Saskatchewan elocution 

and debate society and are supported by coach Ms. Janessa 

Weir. I understand that Nasra and Areeb individually strive to 

do their best with fierce competition between them. And as a 

team, they support and help each other, an important culture, 

supporting success. 

 

They are competing this weekend in the North American 

Debate Championships. Nasra has been training with Team 

Canada, and she will head to Turkey in January to compete for 

Team Canada, and in Thailand in 2014. The support and 

sacrifices made by their family must also be recognized. Nasra 

and Areeb represent leaders in our province today and I’m 

certain into our future. 

 

I ask this Assembly to join with me in congratulations to these 

two leaders as well as thanks to their parents, their coaches — 

specifically Ms. Janessa Weir — for their support of these two 

young talents, and to extend our best wishes. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, November 19th to the 25th is 

Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week, which coincides 

with the National Addictions Awareness Week. Saskatchewan 

Addictions Awareness Week, or SAAW, aims to draw public 

attention to the associated harms of alcohol and drug misuse, 

and it also promotes available resources in Saskatchewan which 

support healthy lifestyles. Mr. Speaker, addictions affects many 

lives in Saskatchewan. It is a serious health issue that has 

tremendous impact on individuals, families, businesses, and 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government supports those who are dealing 

with addictions. On September 13th, the Valley Hill Youth 

Treatment Centre in Prince Albert opened its doors. This 

15-bed facility provides a six-week residential treatment 

program to Saskatchewan youth ages 12 to 17. 

 

Looking into the near future, we can expect an eight-unit 

provincial family treatment facility up and running in Prince 

Albert in early 2013. It will primarily serve women who 

experience difficulty in providing care to their young children 

due to addictions. Our government wants to support these 

vulnerable individuals on their healing journey. We believe 

they deserve help to get their lives back on track. 

 

During SAAW, the community partners have planned a variety 

of activities that promote healthy lifestyle choices, educate 

people about substance use, misuse, and signs of an addiction, 

and let people know where to go for help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the tremendous work 

that is happening across Saskatchewan. Our government wants 

to thank those who work in the addictions field and the SAAW 

advisory group for their ongoing efforts. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Reclaiming Our Community 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

today to bring attention to an important and impressive 

initiative in the community of Pinehouse Lake, a community 

that I had the opportunity, with the Minister of Government 

Relations, to visit this summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Pinehouse Reclaiming Our Community group 

strives to improve the community of Pinehouse Lake. For 22 

years Pinehouse has been active in the National Addictions 

Awareness Week, and this year the Reclaiming Our 

Community group made the decision to offer a one-month 

challenge rather than the usual week of events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Reclaiming Our Community group and an 

elders group co-operated to spearhead a challenge that asked 

the community to go 30 days without alcohol. Mr. Speaker, the 

groups went house-to-house, challenging community members 

to forgo alcohol for the month of November, and more than 100 

houses agreed to display the poster: We Joined the Challenge, 

Alcohol Free. High school students also signed on and put up 

posters throughout the school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, abstaining from alcohol for a month can be a 

challenge. So to help the community succeed, the community 

group built a calendar of alcohol-free events for the month of 

November and they have planned and organized a month of 

events for people of all ages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

community of Pinehouse in this wonderful prevention initiative 

and wishing them all the best throughout the rest of the month 

and well beyond. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Regina Coronation Park Arts and Crafts Sale 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend the 

Coronation Park Community Association will be holding their 

26th annual arts and crafts sale. This year’s event will be held at 

O’Neill High School and will feature over 80 tables of 

homemade art and craft creations from local artists, including 

home baking and fresh fudge, painting, handmade jewellery, 

and hand-knitted blankets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the annual arts and crafts sale is a great 

opportunity to get in some early Christmas shopping or to stock 

up on decorations for the holiday season. The cost of admission 

is only $2 and all proceeds from the event go to helping local 

Girl Guide organizations. Last year’s Coronation Park art and 

craft sale attracted over 600 attendees and the association is 

hoping to get an even bigger turnout this year. 

 

If you’re out and about this weekend, I encourage you to come 

check out some of the amazing handmade crafts at this year’s 

Coronation Park Community Association art and craft sale. The 

event runs this Friday 6 to 9 p.m. and Saturday 10 to 5. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members to join me in wishing the 

Coronation Park Community Association the best of luck with 

this year’s craft sale. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip Observe 

65th Anniversary 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today to congratulate Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 

and her husband, the Duke of Edinburgh, on their 65th wedding 

anniversary. 

 

On November 20th, 1947, Princess Elizabeth and Philip 

Mountbatten, as they then were, were married in London’s 

Westminster Abbey. It was the first royal festivity since the end 

of the Second World War. Mr. Speaker, today the Queen will 

be the first monarch to celebrate a blue sapphire wedding 

anniversary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for 60 years Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip 

have been the face of the British monarchy. They have 

represented the Commonwealth with grace, dignity, and 

compassion. Her Majesty has visited Canada 22 times, often 

accompanied by her husband. The royal couple’s appreciation 

and fondness for Canada are well known. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip have dedicated 

their entire lives to the service of others, and Canadians have 

always held them in the highest regard. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members to join me in congratulating Queen Elizabeth II and 

Prince Philip on their 65th wedding anniversary, and I ask all 

members to join me in thanking them for their service and 

dedication to our country. God save the Queen. 

 

[13:45] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Information Services Corporation 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has finally 

revealed their true colours regarding their privatization 

ideology. Yesterday, when asked why the Sask Party was silent 

on privatization in the last election, the minister told the people 

of Saskatchewan to look at page 44 of his party’s platform. 

Well what people found there is this vague statement: “Support 

for public ownership of the Crowns has been reconfirmed over 

the last four years.” Privatizing ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] is the exact opposite of their 

platform statement. It’s a surprise that no one has voted for. 

 

And on the front page of today’s Leader Post he says, “In what 

will be its first privatization of a Crown corporation, the 

Saskatchewan Party government is planning to sell off 60 per 

cent of Information Services Corp.” 

 

To the minister: if today he’s selling ISC, what’s tomorrow? 

What else on page 44 of his platform is for sale? Which Crown 

is next? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

Speaker, let’s go back a number of years when the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at the rate they’re 

going, we’re going to have to go back an awful lot of years 

before they ever form government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we go back to when they were government, Mr. 

Speaker. They passed a piece of legislation that was called the 

Crown protection Act. The Crown protection Act was 

supported by this party when we sat on that side. Mr. Speaker, 

we said that we would not act on any of the Crowns that were 

under the Crown protection Act. That was very clear in the ’07 

election, and it was very clear in the 2011 election, Mr. 

Speaker. The Premier and our party was very clear that we 

would not, Mr. Speaker, affect any of the Crowns that were 

protected by the Crown protection Act. 

 

It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that they’re so worried about ISC 

because why didn’t they include it in the Crown protection Act, 

Mr. Speaker? It was in and then taken out. Mr. Speaker, our 

policy has been very clear. Crowns that are in the Crown 

protection Act, Mr. Speaker, will not be affected. They took 

ISC out deliberately to sell it, Mr. Speaker. We’ve acted on it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party says 

it would like to see the ISC head office jobs stay in the 

province. And now they say they would prefer it if 

Saskatchewan residents own the shares of ISC after they 

privatize it. Well, Mr. Speaker, it sounds as if the Sask Party 

should simply keep ISC as it already is, where there is a 

guarantee of the head office jobs staying in the province and the 

people of Saskatchewan own every share, not just some of 

them. 

 

Clearly the public and shareholders have done very well with 

ISC. The Crown paid $15 million in dividends to the people of 

Saskatchewan last year alone and a total of nearly 60 million in 

dividends in the last four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party walking away from all of 

the positive benefits of ISC? Why are they pursuing an 

ideological, nonsensical privatization agenda? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will agree with the 

member on one part of her question, that ISC is servicing the 

province very, very well. Mr. Speaker, that is exactly why ISC 

needs the opportunity to expand outside the borders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the possibility of ISC growing within the borders 

of Saskatchewan are very small. There could be an increase in 

corporations on the corporations side, Mr. Speaker, maybe 

more land transactions, Mr. Speaker, but if we want to increase 

the total size of ISC, it needs to be able to operate outside the 

province. We believe, Mr. Speaker, and obviously the members 

opposite believed that too when they were government, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why we are allowing ISC to be in a better 

position to move into the private sector to offer its goods 

around the world. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, one thing is clear, Mr. Speaker: 

the only reason the Sask Party is privatizing the Crowns, 

starting with ISC, is that they like to put ideology ahead of 

common sense. It’s common sense to keep a company that pays 

great dividends and provides great services. It’s common sense 

to encourage that company to do even more, especially since 

the Sask Party has moved more and more functions of 

governments over to ISC over the years. And it is common 

sense to reject a plan that doesn’t turn a single cent over to ISC 

when it is sold. The proceeds will be spent because Sask Party 

can’t balance the books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the Sask Party is so keen on privatization, 

why didn’t they run on a platform that clearly said exactly that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this government comes 

from five balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker, and that will continue 

into the future. Mr. Speaker, this has absolutely nothing to do, 

Mr. Speaker, with the financial situation of the province, which 

is strong, and we’ll hear more of that from the Minister of 

Finance in the near future. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you that there is one difference that 

we are experiencing in this province that never happened under 

the NDP, and that is growth and that is the need for 

infrastructure throughout this whole province, Mr. Speaker, 

whether it’s highways, hospitals, or post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, for years and years and years, we 

saw a declining population. Mr. Speaker, the money that we 

will see realized from ISC, and only selling 60 per cent of that, 

will go directly into infrastructure such as legacy projects like 

the children’s hospital, $200 million into that, Mr. Speaker. We 

look forward to further announcements as to what this money 

will be used for into the future that will benefit all of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

State of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that government’s 

rationale for the privatization of ISC has been debunked solidly 

by our critic, Mr. Speaker. Everything that that government 

spins about why it’s privatizing ISC simply doesn’t hold water. 

It certainly doesn’t respect the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

The real reason for this government’s actions are clear. They’re 

trying to prop up tight finances. Mr. Speaker, the budget’s 

off-track. There are promises to pay for, and that government’s 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

on the hunt for cash. To the Minister of Finance: in his hunt for 

cash, did he instruct the review and privatization of ISC? What 

exactly was his role? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As part of 

government and part of cabinet, of course I play a role. I play a 

role in decisions that are made, and the decision that we 

reviewed was a decision that was put forward by the Minister 

Responsible for ISC. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the interesting comment by the members opposite, 

the critic who commented that the need was for balancing a 

budget, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you that is the furthest from the 

truth, Mr. Speaker. We have provided the people of 

Saskatchewan a balanced budget on both summary financial 

statements, Mr. Speaker, and the General Revenue Fund, Mr. 

Speaker. And as I indicated to the member opposite who asked 

me yesterday, Mr. Speaker, stay tuned, the mid-year report will 

be a report that he will look forward to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the motivation of the 

privatization of ISC is pretty clear: the tight finances that this 

government’s in and the hunt for money. This is described in 

plain language in the valuation for ISC that was done by RBC 

[Royal Bank of Canada] that spells out the Sask Party is 

looking for “an attractive path to liquidity.” 

 

This government has been on the hunt for cash and they found 

some in ISC. This represents a short-sighted sell-off for all the 

wrong reasons — expensive, costly budgetary spin. Why won’t 

this government be straight with Saskatchewan people about 

the true state of our finances and the real reason for the 

privatization of ISC? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think this 

government has been very straightforward with the people of 

Saskatchewan. To the tune, Mr. Speaker, that is why, that is 

why in the last five years, Mr. Speaker, the population of 

Saskatchewan has grown by 80,000 people, unlike, unlike that 

group over there, Mr. Speaker. That group over there was 

government at a time when Saskatchewan was losing 3,500 

students in our K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system each 

year. Mr. Speaker, this year for the first time, we’re seeing a 

growth of over 1,600. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the best quotes, one of the best quotes that 

has been put in front of all the people in Canada is from the 

Conference Board of Canada, November 19th, Mr. Speaker, 

and I quote: 

 

For the most part, Western Canadian provinces have been 

relatively shielded from the fiscal and economic troubles 

lingering in external markets. The economies of 

Saskatchewan and Alberta in particular have performed 

strongly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s not so much the economy people are 

questioning; it’s his management of the finances in that strong 

economy, Mr. Speaker. At budget, potash was projected at $705 

million. We called that into question on budget day. We did as 

well at the financial first quarter. But this government dug its 

heels in, engaged in spin instead of providing straight talk and 

real action. 

 

The evidence suggests something other than what the Sask 

Party suggested, based on layoffs and current market demand, 

yet this government hasn’t provided any update, including in 

the financial first quarter, on how far off they are on their 

flawed potash projection. Will the minister either table 

something here today to support their numbers or admit the 

government’s mistake and lay out the real numbers to 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, what I won’t table today 

is an NDP plan, an NDP plan in the last election that called for 

$5 billion worth of spend, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I won’t be 

tabling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we’re proud of the fact that we 

have a balanced budget. And we are the only balanced budget 

in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, further to what I 

indicated from the Conference Board of Canada, and I quote 

again, it says: 

 

The economies of Saskatchewan and Alberta in particular 

have performed strongly, and their near-term prospects are 

more favourable than those for the rest of the country. For 

both provinces, real economic growth will remain at or 

above three per cent through 2014. 

 

That’s positive information about Saskatchewan. That’s a 

province that’s moving forward. And that’s a province that’s 

going to rely on growth, Mr. Speaker, not decline as under the 

NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I didn’t hear any reference to the flawed 

potash number. That was the question to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The reality of our finances couldn’t be clearer, and instead of 

owning up and putting forward a plan, this government has 

engaged in expensive spin. The reality, revenues are off-track 

and government is scrambling to hold up its public relations 

line stated on its expensive billboards. Now they’re selling off 

assets, ISC, land, taking a no-money-down private approach to 

infrastructure that’s far costlier over the long run, draining 

another $200 million from the rainy day fund and making cuts. 

Saskatchewan people are common sense. They expect good 

management and their government to be straight with them. 

 

Instead of sell-offs, cuts, manipulation, and spin, when will this 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

minister own up to the poor state that he’s placed these finances 

in? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member yesterday, I believe, 

when he asked me when the mid-year will be released, that 

mid-year will be released next year. It’s going through the 

process . . . Next week, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, next week. 

Next week, as we are in budgetary plans for next year, we are 

going to release the mid-year. It is through the process that the 

governments follow, in that it’ll be a Treasury Board. It’ll go 

through cabinet. 

 

And as I indicated already to members of the press, the last 

week of November is when that mid-year will be released. And 

the member opposite will be pleasantly surprised. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Provincial Roads and Prince Albert Bridge 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Rural and city as 

well as northern residents know that this time of the year, one 

has to be very careful on the highways in our province because 

the Sask Party can’t seem to get the job done and fix the roads. 

 

In the spring, the CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] 

held a vote which road in rural Saskatchewan would be the top 

goat path in the province, Mr. Speaker. That campaign drew 

attention on how terrible a record the Sask Party has had on 

fixing our highways. They spent on rebranding pot holes 

instead of actually filling them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities has 

weighed in. SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] delegates want to see this government to 

actually do something about the goat paths in Saskatchewan 

that the Sask Party is watching over. SARM wants to see $160 

million in new funding go to rural roads in the next four years, 

but the government has yet to answer this question. Mr. 

Speaker, will the minister recognize the need for better rural 

roads, or is he saying absolutely no to SARM? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t see that 

question coming from the former Highways minister. That one 

surprised me, I have to say, Mr. Speaker, especially when you 

look at our record since 2008: $3.1 billion spent on highways, 

Mr. Speaker, a record amount. This year $361 million spent, the 

second highest amount ever in the history of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan could’ve only wished the 

NDP would’ve spent a fraction of that out in rural 

Saskatchewan because they certainly didn’t. And I think it’s 

pretty reflective of who’s sitting on those benches right now, 

Mr. Speaker, not many people from rural Saskatchewan. We 

are continuing to work with SARM and will continue to work 

with SARM into the future. We’ve got programs that are 

directly, directed right at SARM to fix some of their concerns 

of the municipal roadways. We are working on all of our 

provincial highways to make sure that they’re up to standard, 

Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you we had a long pothole to climb 

out of after 16 years of NDP government. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that government brags about 

the amount of money that they have in highways, Mr. Speaker, 

and the people of Saskatchewan are saying, show me that roads. 

That’s what they’re saying to the people of the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The more hot air that this minister has, the less energy he’ll be 

able to actually put something into getting done on our 

highways, Mr. Speaker. SARM delegates also weighed in about 

building a second bridge in Prince Albert and passed a motion 

of support without any further debate. The P.A. [Prince Albert] 

Chamber of Commerce says all the work on Diefenbaker 

Bridge has cost the local economy more than $12 million, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The city and the region need that bridge because without it, it’s 

costing residents and business in the city some serious money. 

Mr. Speaker, the city council, the RMs [rural municipality], the 

chamber of commerce, and people from all over the Prince 

Albert area know the importance of building that second bridge. 

Why does the minister doubt that the Prince Albert community 

needs that second bridge? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In part of 

the question he asked, show me the roads that were fixed. We’ll 

have a long list sent over to him. Mr. Speaker, when you spend 

$631 million in one year, we have a long list of highways that 

we repaired. Mr. Speaker, we’ll be glad to forward that over the 

member opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact we’ve been hearing concerns on this side, 

Mr. Speaker, through the summer months, that it was tough to 

travel anywhere because there was so much construction on the 

roadways. 

 

He referenced the bridge in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, we are 

doing a report in conjunction with the two RMs around Prince 

Albert and the city of Prince Albert. The work is complete. 

There still needs to be some adjustments to the final report, Mr. 

Speaker, that is agreed upon by all members. And the member 

laughs. Obviously they didn’t do any studies, Mr. Speaker, or 

he had no idea of what happens when you do do a study, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very aware of the situation around Prince 

Albert. As I said in previous answers, the two members from 

Prince Albert and MLAs from around Prince Albert have raised 

the concerns, Mr. Speaker, on the time it’s taken to fix 

Diefenbaker Bridge. But I will tell you that, Mr. Speaker, 

unlike the NDP, our government is fully behind those repairs 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

even though they weren’t originally our responsibility. We’re 

fully behind those repairs. We’re paying over $3 million to 

make sure that bridge is fixed, not like the NDP when they were 

in power when they fixed part of it and then expected the city to 

cap it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, he speaks about the 

adjustments in highway spending, Mr. Speaker. The people of 

Prince Albert need a bridge. They don’t need an adjustment, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s an important message we want to give 

to the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And don’t take our words for it. The roads in rural 

Saskatchewan are getting worse, according to CAA members. 

SARM delegates want more invested in the highways because 

they are crumbling under the Sask Party’s watch. And a key 

infrastructure project like a second bridge for Prince Albert are 

nowhere to be found in the Sask Party’s little booklet they call a 

plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Sask Party can’t build highways. They can’t build bridges, 

and they spend money on rebranding potholes rather than to fix 

them, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with so much economic 

potential in rural Saskatchewan — so much, Mr. Speaker — 

why is the Sask Party neglecting the highways that lead to that 

growth, a vital part of our Saskatchewan economy, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further 

from the truth as far as neglecting, Mr. Speaker, that area. Mr. 

Speaker, when the member opposite was minister of Highways, 

I asked him how much work did he do on 914, did they get any 

sort of agreement with Cameco to extend that piece of, stretch 

of road, and provincial responsibility will roughly be $30 

million. How much work was done in that area, Mr. Speaker, 

when they were government? Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under this government, we have agreement to fix 914, which 

will increase economic development in the North, Mr. Speaker, 

will be a huge asset for companies like Cameco and other 

uranium mining companies, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

realize that the northern part of our province has a great benefit 

for all of us in this province. Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’re 

investing infrastructure in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Financial Support for Universities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Advanced Education tried to hide behind the 

autonomy of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] and 

suggest that his government wasn’t responsible for the situation 

that the U of S finds itself in financially. 

 

Well it’s not just the U of S that’s facing closures and cuts. 

Yesterday there was a town hall meeting, Mr. Speaker, at the 

University of Regina, a time for students and administration to 

come together and face and talk about the future of the 

University of Regina. At the meeting, Mr. Speaker, students 

expressed concern about programs and services being cut and 

asked why new faculty members are not being hired to replace 

retiring professors. 

 

My question to the minister: if everything is wonderful and 

perfect at our universities, as the minister would like us to 

believe, why is it that both campuses are facing cuts and 

closures? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I 

didn’t point out that I do respect the academic freedom and I do 

respect the freedom of and autonomy of those institutions. We 

are of course, as citizens and as the province, concerned about 

everything that takes place at those things. We ask a lot of 

questions and we receive a lot of information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the University of Regina has 

conducted a significant academic review. The program review 

started in 2009 when they adopted a new strategic plan that 

called for a comprehensive academic program review. We 

support that type of renewal at all post-secondary facilities to 

make sure that they operate in an efficient and effective 

manner. 

 

I can advise, Mr. Speaker, that there were some programs they 

decided they were not continuing. Those were a BFA [Bachelor 

of Fine Arts] in acting; a BFA in design and stage management; 

a BFA in theatre studies; and then there was a consolidated 

program, a B.A. [Bachelor of Arts] in theatre performance. Mr. 

Speaker, we will work with them on those programs. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today at the 

University of Saskatchewan there was a second town hall 

meeting to discuss the financial situation on campus. 

Community members are concerned with the financial situation 

on campus because of the $100 million of debt that was forced 

onto the university’s books when the Sask Party government 

walked away from its promise. 

 

At the meeting, Mr. Speaker, community members expressed 

concerns about program delivery as well as layoffs, and layoffs 

are a concern because it’s these individuals who provide 

services to students on campus. Surely the minister has been 

briefed on this matter. Can the minister inform the House what 

is the projection for the number of layoffs at the University of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want the 

member opposite to know that the U of R [University of 

Regina], which was the first question that he asked about, has 

indicated and have reassured people that current students will 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

be able to finish out their degrees. Only new admissions have 

been suspended. Mr. Speaker, that was the decision made 

without any budget cuts or without any of the horror stories that 

they’re creating across the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to use some figures again. Mr. Speaker, the 

budget of the University of Regina is $100.9 million, a 38 per 

cent increase from 2007 when it was $73.2 million. Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite ought to go back and look at 

what their history is for funding post-secondary education. Mr. 

Speaker, those things take place within those institutions. And, 

Mr. Speaker, if he wants to talk about layoffs, cut-offs, and 

further his leadership bid doing it that way, we want no part of 

it. Scaremongering does not belong in something like 

post-secondary education. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that answer is insulting to the 

many university faculty members, the many university students, 

the many university staff that care about their institutions. And 

for the minister just to dismiss this and say, everything is fine, 

that does not add up. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, if everything is perfect, if the Sask Party is 

living up to its so-called commitment to fund our universities, 

why are both campuses facing huge closures and cuts to 

programs? Why are there town hall meetings on both campuses 

to discuss what the future will look like, to discuss what layoffs 

will in fact be happening? Mr. Speaker, we haven’t even 

touched on the topic of tuition and what the implications will be 

for tuition in the coming year. 

 

My question to the minister: will he stop hiding behind the 

autonomy of the University of Saskatchewan and the University 

of Regina and admit that the financial situation that both 

campuses find themselves in is a result of his actions? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the admission ought to 

come from the members opposite that they did a pretty poor job 

when they were in government. Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite raised the issue of tuition. Mr. Speaker, under the NDP 

from 1994 to 2007, there were some substantial tuition 

increases. At the University of Regina during that period of 

time, tuition increased 88.6 per cent. University of 

Saskatchewan tuition increased 99.2 per cent. SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

tuition increased 263 per cent. And he wants to talk about 

what’s going . . . [inaudible] . . . when we’ve had the largest 

increases in the history of the province. That member ought to 

apologize for even having asked the question. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/ 

Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I move that Bill No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, 2012 

(No. 2) be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 70, The Education Amendment Act, 

2012 (No. 2) now be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next sitting 

of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 

1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des 

jeux de hasard 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 71, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 

Act, 2012 be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation that Bill No. 71, The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 67, The Community Planning Profession 

Act, 2012. Mr. Speaker, this bill repeals and replaces the 

existing community planning profession Act in order to update 

the Act to standards consistent with other self-regulated 

professions legislation in Saskatchewan. 

 

The bill also proposes consequential amendments to various 

sections of The Planning and Development Act, 2007, The 

Engineering and Geoscience Professions Act, and The Land 

Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Act, to replace references 

to professional community planner with registered professional 

planner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, key changes requested by the Association of 

Professional Community Planners of Saskatchewan, which 

we’ll refer to as the association, are reflected in the new Act, 

and include changing the name of the association to the 

Saskatchewan Professional Planners Institute, replacing the 

term professional community planner with registered 

professional planner, which is a term that has been adopted by 

all professional planning associations across Canada, and 

clarifying the composition and role of the association’s 

professional conduct and discipline committees. This will 

include a requirement that the majority of the members of the 

professional conduct and discipline committees are licensed 

members and enhance disciplinary authority by allowing the 

committee to inform the employer of a member found guilty of 

professional misconduct or incompetence. 

 

[14:15] 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, the ministry and association have 

identified some amendments to ensure the Act fully complies 

with labour mobility obligations under the Agreement on 

Internal Trade and the New West Partnership agreement. This 

includes placing the administration of examinations for 

members with the association, and through them the national 

association, the Canadian Institute of Planners or the CIP 

instead of with the University of Saskatchewan. The University 

of Saskatchewan fully supports this change and has provided a 

letter to that effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out here that beyond this change 

both the new Act and the existing Act currently recognize 

labour mobility and are compliant with the province’s labour 

mobility obligations and commitments. Professional planning 

associations across Canada, including the association, have 

been working towards unfettered labour mobility in conjunction 

with their national association, the CIP. The provisions in the 

new Act represent fine tuning in terms of labour mobility as 

opposed to removing barriers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act does not establish the scope of practice of 

planners or restrict persons from calling themselves planners or 

require that only members can do planning. It simply 

recognizes the association or institute, once the new Act is 

proclaimed, as the professional association that regulates 

professional planners in the province and provides for 

protection of the title of registered professional planner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current Act dates back to 1963. The remainder 

of the provisions generally follow the province’s current 

template for professions Acts and include a number of 

significant updates. They are: providing for public appointees to 

the association’s council; standardizing administrative and 

regulatory bylaw powers of the institute; providing for 

ministerial bylaws if necessary; and standardizing provisions 

related to professional conduct and discipline committees’ 

investigations, hearings, and consequences. The ministry has 

worked out any outstanding issues with the association 

regarding these provisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed new Act continues government’s 

practice to consult with regulated professions to refine and 

update legislation, ensuring it meets the needs of the profession, 

the association, and the public. The Ministry of Government 

Relations also intends to continue working with the association 

to ensure that in the near future clear and appropriate bylaws for 

the community planning profession are established. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 67, The Community 

Planning Profession Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 67, The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

again pleased to stand on behalf of the official opposition to 

give our basic position on Bill 67. And, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

lot of interest in this bill because there’s been so many different 

discussions from so many different groups that our caucus has 

been involved with that really talks about the concept of smart 

growth. You obviously hear the NDP speak about this concept 

at great lengths, Mr. Speaker, and it’s something that really ties 

to Bill 67. And I think it’s important that people in 

Saskatchewan know that there is a significant difference from 

what the Sask Party is doing versus what the NDP are 

proposing under the concept of smart growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You can see that some of the challenges we have in the 

province . . . Obviously when you have a province and 

economy that’s moving as Saskatchewan’s is, we want to make 

sure that we do this very smart, Mr. Speaker. We know that 

when you inherit . . . A good example I would use is that when 

you inherit, as a young lad or young lady, in many instances if 

you have a rich family and they leave you a bunch of money, 

unless you have a plan of action on how you’re going to 

actually manage that money, some of these people that do get 

the inheritance sometimes don’t do very well in managing that 

particular estate or the finances of it. 

 

And that’s what we see evidence of with the Saskatchewan 

Party, Mr. Speaker. They inherited $2.5 billion from the NDP. 

They inherited a booming economy, Mr. Speaker. They 

inherited a province that was growing in population. They 

inherited a plan that was really starting to move forward in a 

number of different areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what happened was when the Saskatchewan Party got 

government, they said, what do we do with all these assets? 

And quite frankly we knew that these guys were very poorly 

prepared and, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t have any action plan. 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

Their objective at the time was just to simply criticize the NDP. 

And sometimes the people of Saskatchewan ought to be told 

that the NDP are a party that’s very proud of its history and that 

we’re very proud of the economy that we built. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, we built that alongside the people of Saskatchewan. 

That’s one of the things that’s really important that I announce 

as well. 

 

So how does this Bill 67 fit into what we think is important, and 

one important step towards making sure that we have that smart 

growth, Mr. Speaker? And there’s such an incredible challenge 

that we understand when the people of Saskatchewan tell us we 

have this growth. 

 

The vast majority of the people of Saskatchewan knew this 

economic boom was going to come. They knew it was going to 

continue on and for a lot of people they said, well let’s try a 

party that seemed to know what they’re talking about, Mr. 

Speaker. So they tried the Saskatchewan Party, and what 

happened, Mr. Speaker, is they’re vastly disappointed. They 

saw a government that took an opportunity like a booming 

economy, growing population, money in the bank, and they 

squandered every opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the economy of Saskatchewan is moving ahead. The 

economy of Saskatchewan is moving ahead in spite of the 

bungling of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. That’s how strong that 

economy is, Mr. Speaker. And we in the NDP want to make 

sure that we embrace that economy under the auspices of our 

plan called the smart growth plan. Now, Mr. Speaker, the smart 

growth plan is quite frankly something that has to occur if 

Saskatchewan’s going to reach its full potential. 

 

Now what does that smart growth plan mean? Obviously 

there’s a number of components to it, a number of pillars to this 

plan, and part of the plan could be to ensure that the 

environment is not sacrificed in any way, shape, or form. We 

are seeing evidence of that right, left, and centre from the party 

across the way, Mr. Speaker. We see that kind of activity 

happening with the federal government as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is something that is very important for our 

position as a party within Saskatchewan is that the economy 

and the environment have to be balanced, that there doesn’t 

make any logical sense, it doesn’t make any sense in any way, 

shape, or form that you have to sacrifice your environment for 

the sake of the economy. And that’s what the federal Tories are 

trying to tell the people of the country. And that’s what their 

provincial cousins called the Saskatchewan Party, the 

Saskatchewan conservatives, are also trying to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that same myth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

From our perspective, Mr. Speaker, the environment has got to 

be protected because what is the economy worth, Mr. Speaker, 

if you have very poor water, very poor air quality, and of course 

your land is arid and dry, Mr. Speaker. It goes without saying 

that one of the pillars of our smart growth strategy is clearly to 

make sure that we make the environmental protection an 

integral part of our plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the second thing that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is 

the labour force of our province, the men and women and 

students that come to work for the province and for the industry 

in general, Mr. Speaker. That’s another pillar of our plan, Mr. 

Speaker. And obviously there is going to be a war between the 

Sask Party and organized labour. And we within the NDP don’t 

see how that is a smart development plan for the province at all. 

Why would you want to go to war with working men and 

women? It doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t 

make any sense whatsoever. 

 

So that’s another pillar that’s really important to the smart 

growth plan, Mr. Speaker, is to embrace the men and women 

that want to earn a living for their families, that want to be able 

to pay their mortgages, Mr. Speaker. They want to be able to 

enjoy some of the comforts of their lives and of their work. And 

yet they’re finding out that you’re seeing a number of massive 

cuts under the Sask Party rule, Mr. Speaker, that they have 

intentionally gone to war with all the organized workers. And 

I’m not just talking about government employees, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m talking about organized labour, the people that have, the 

electrician, the plumber, you know, the technicians, and many 

of the people that work in our health care system, Mr. Speaker. 

Their target is huge, and their plan is quite frankly trying to 

make sure that they go to war with every possible working man 

and woman in this province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a crying 

shame. That’s not smart growth at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when I look at some of the . . . The challenge that they 

will face on that front is organized labour’s not going to sit 

back and let the Sask Party push them around, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re going to make sure that they . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member is 

ostensibly speaking to Bill 67, The Community Planning 

Profession Act, and I haven’t heard any reference to the bill. 

 

The Speaker: — We have a fair latitude in discussion of bills 

traditionally in this House, but I would encourage the member 

to make his references to the bill. I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In Bill 

67, Mr. Speaker — I’ll explain to the member from Meadow 

Lake in case he doesn’t get it, Mr. Speaker — the bottom line is 

that we’re talking about a registered community planner, a 

community planner, Mr. Speaker. That’s really important to the 

growth of Saskatchewan, really important that you plan your 

community out, that you look at your infrastructure needs, you 

look at your labour needs, you look at all these different plans 

that some of these communities may have. 

 

And the member from Meadow Lake will know very quickly 

that it’s all connected, Mr. Speaker. So on Bill 67, if the 

member from Meadow Lake would just sit and listen, I’ll 

explain how it’s all connected, Mr. Speaker. I’ll explain how it 

all fits nice and perfect under the NDP plan, Mr. Speaker. So 

for the member to get up and complain that it’s not relevant to 

the bill I’m speaking about, Mr. Speaker, I’ll walk very slowly 

with him and I’ll talk very slowly with him so that he’s able to 

connect the dots, Mr. Speaker. 

 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is community planners. 

Community planners are an integral part of a smart growth 

strategy, Mr. Speaker. That’s the point. And when I talk about 

smart growth, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we 

explain the entire concept to the people of Saskatchewan and to 

the member from Meadow Lake so he understands, and we’ll 

go slow. But the bottom line is that it’s all connected. So when 

I talk about environmental integrity, when I talk about stopping 

going to war with men and women that build this province, Mr. 

Speaker, organized labour and those that work for industry, and 

then I talk about the role of government which is really, it 

involves Bill 67 which is the registered planning bill, they all 

connect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we also point out that from a New Democratic Party 

caucus — and I would certainly want to make that challenge to 

the Sask Party on this — every time the economy of 

Saskatchewan is moving forward, it’s building up steam, it’s 

really coming along really well, Mr. Speaker, in the history of 

Saskatchewan politics, in the history of Saskatchewan politics, 

every time that the economy is growing and people are 

optimistic and things are happening, Mr. Speaker, check the 

record. It was an NDP government that was in charge at the 

time, not the right wingers across the way, Mr. Speaker. 

Because people of Saskatchewan understand the balance 

between the economy, the labour force, and of course the 

environment, something that we all on this side of the 

Assembly value as building blocks for a great new province. 

And I think it’s something that people out there understand 

fully. 

 

So I’ll say it again. Every single time that the economy of 

Saskatchewan has been on the upswing and things are 

happening, Mr. Speaker, it has been the NDP that has been in 

charge, not the right wing people across the way who claim that 

they have the solution to the economic building of our province, 

Mr. Speaker. Absolutely not. The Saskatchewan Party are 

massively confused, Mr. Speaker. They’re massively confused 

because on one hand you talk about public planning, and on the 

other hand they say, well how is a public planning process 

going to help with smart growth? 

 

Well again, as I mentioned earlier, the member from Meadow 

Lake was complaining about the fact that I need to make my 

arguments relevant to this bill. It’s all connected, Mr. Speaker. 

So I think it’s really important that the people of Saskatchewan 

know that it was not the right wing parties like the 

Saskatchewan conservative party across the way that built the 

economy, but the people of Saskatchewan, alongside an NDP 

government, that valued the environment, that valued working 

people, that valued industry as well, Mr. Speaker, that valued 

industry. And of course all these processes and all these 

principles fit neatly under what we call a smart growth strategy, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 67, I know that from some of the 

discussions we’ve had with some of the groups, when you talk 

about a community planner and some of the changes that the 

minister is alluding to, as opposed to just having a community 

planner title, that is going to actually ensure that some of these 

community planners are registered with their proper association 

so that . . . [inaudible] . . . to a registered community planner. 

These are some of the smaller matters that I think people are 

hoping that it would help the process along. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important is that these 

community planners also have to know where they fit in the 

scheme of things because we have development happening all 

around some of our communities and our cities. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s really important that, you know, we applaud that 

and we support that and we helped build that, so obviously why 

would we work against that? 

 

[14:30] 

 

So it’s important that we put the proper processes in place, we 

put the proper people in place to make sure that that expansion 

to our economy, the people coming to our community, that it’s 

really a smart growth strategy that we employ to make sure that 

we are able to accommodate the growth and to keep the people 

here. That’s another thing that’s really important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve seen some of the examples of the Sask Party with the 

Irish workers where they had to go back home and some of the 

other people that came to Saskatchewan to work, of how they 

dropped the ball. And those young students that came here to 

come to the university, how they were holed up in a church and 

the Sask Party didn’t do anything about it. The Minister 

Responsible for Immigration, the member from Kindersley, sat 

on his hands and saying well, why didn’t you guys do 

something about it? Well news flash — you’re the government; 

you should be figuring these things out. 

 

So the big thing, Mr. Speaker, is that that’s the kind of 

irresponsible, don’t-blame-me attitude that the Sask Party has 

when it comes to building this economy and, Mr. Speaker, if we 

want people to come to Saskatchewan, we’ve got to make sure 

that we have the values that’ll keep them here, Mr. Speaker, the 

values that’ll keep the growing population staying here. 

Because what we don’t want to see happen is we don’t want to 

see these guys head out after a few months and not really 

participate in making Saskatchewan their long-term home and 

participate in building our province. 

 

So it’s really important that people know that when the NDP 

talk about smart growth, these are the values, these are the 

ideals, and these are some of things that we need to work on. 

And we’re seeing the Saskatchewan Party miss the mark on a 

regular basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we’re hearing about their financial mismanagement. 

We’re hearing about their P3s [public-private partnership] 

concept. We’re hearing about the fact they’re selling the Crown 

corporations, and now we’re hearing the cutbacks. The 

universities are suffering. Oh my goodness, Mr. Speaker, now 

we’re finding out the real truth after the last election, Mr. 

Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan just absolutely cannot 

handle somebody betraying their trust like that. And there’s 

going to be a price to pay, Mr. Speaker. There’s going to be a 

price to pay for those 49 members across the way, Mr. Speaker, 

and the people of Saskatchewan are just about fed up with the 

way that they’re doing business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is another example of how Bill 67 in its small process, 

in its small way trying to make things work but really in truth, 

it’s the bigger issues that the Saskatchewan Party are really 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

messing up on. And sometimes these bills, Bill 67 as an 

example, they simply are a little effort to a huge bungling of the 

economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why I think 

it’s important we offer our original comments. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think when we talk with the growth 

strategy for Saskatchewan — I’ll give you a good example — 

but the real estate industry itself, of course they want to see the 

continuing growth in building for our province. That’s 

something that they certainly want to see happening, that the 

realtors are an industry that’s very helpful in movement of 

homes and selling and purchasing of homes, and that’s 

something that I think that we all are happy that is happening. 

 

So the realtors themselves are people that really want to see 

things happen and quite frankly want to make sure that there is 

a smart growth strategy attached to anything that the 

government does. And I can tell the realtors’ association that 

you’re going to be severely disappointed with the actions of the 

Sask Party because quite frankly the Sask Party don’t know 

what they’re doing. You, the realtors, probably have a fairly 

good idea what needs to be done, and the disappointment is that 

your senior government is massively confused, not only their 

financial file but how do we have a smart growth strategy that 

really embraces the notion of building for the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I want to point out that from the realtors’ perspective when 

they talk about development and community planning, of 

course they want to have a professional process attached to 

anything that the community may want to plan out. And this 

bill is really relevant to some of those things that they raise. 

 

When you look at an example of Vancouver as an example, 

where we have a community planner, and they look at what 

options they have, they’ve got the mountains on one side and 

they’ve got the sea on the other side. So it’s only a very 

confined space that you can actually plan out the community. 

But the problem is, the community planners in BC [British 

Columbia] area, well they kind of figured out the only way that 

we can grow now is grow up, is build upwards. So you see a lot 

of the skyscrapers and the condominium development and so on 

and so forth happening in BC. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the . . . I want to do the 

contrast between BC and Saskatchewan to really drive home 

the point of our plan, entitled the smart growth plan, that how 

it’s important that we realize the differences and the 

opportunities we have in the province. So while you look at BC 

as an example of how community planners are saying, the only 

way we can build is to build straight up because we don’t have 

the land space or we’re blocked in by the mountains on one side 

and the sea on the other, what’s going to happen in 

Saskatchewan? If you look around, Mr. Speaker, you see a vast 

expanse of land, so it should be easier, right? It should be a lot 

more easily done in terms of getting a proper community plan 

in place and to actually get the community building and 

growing. And that’s exactly what every party in the province 

wants, including the NDP. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, there is something of a problem 

between the community planning process in the expansion of 

our communities and the realtors’ role. And so how are we 

going to figure out the differences? Because you want to do this 

right. That’s the bottom line. We want to do this right, Mr. 

Speaker, and there’s a lot of confusion, I think, between the 

players. And some of the groups are not as confused as others, 

I’ll grant them that. However there’s got to be a concerted 

effort by the government itself to figure out how we do this 

right. How do we do this right? How do we community plan 

out our communities so we can see a continual growth, a 

sustained growth, and that we are able to actually see 

communities expand as opposed to what some people are 

talking about concentrating populations in one particular area? 

 

As an example I would use is that perhaps they’re looking at 

ways that they can build in a parking lot, build a condo in a 

parking lot that has the water and sewer and power hookup. 

Some cities are going that route because it’s a concentration of 

services. It’s probably less costly as opposed to building on the 

outskirts of the city. These are some of the dynamics that the 

realtors’ association often witness. And I think what’s 

important here, Mr. Speaker, is that they are saying, can we at 

least have some kind of process, some kind of common effort 

between all the parties to figure out how we could possibly plan 

out our community logically, with a long-term view, but at the 

least cost possible? And the values continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now at the realtors’ association, Mr. Speaker, obviously I can’t 

speak for them, but from some of the information that I’ve 

received from them, community planning is a critical part of the 

work that they do. Now what I would hope happens, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the minister just simply doesn’t dabble in the 

Act and say, we’re going to change the name of a community 

planner to a registered community planner and not worry about 

the global issues that impact the growth of Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s the important part, Mr. Speaker, is that that’s the plan 

that we have under the smart growth strategy, Mr. Speaker. It 

all connects. It all connects. It all makes sense. And about the 

only group that doesn’t get it in Saskatchewan are those 49 

souls over there, Mr. Speaker, called the Saskatchewan Party. 

They are simply on this train wreck that’s going to happen 

fairly soon. And they simply don’t realize that there are people 

out there that have a very intelligent plan that could actually 

help facilitate that growth. And I would suggest that the 

realtors’ association is one of them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you look at some of the communities and 

some of the developers and some of the planners that are out 

there, you’re going to find a vast difference. Some of their 

training may be the same, Mr. Speaker, but a planner for 

Melfort may be radically different from the planner from 

Aberdeen or a planner from northern Saskatchewan. They have 

a totally different view of the world as a planner from 

Saskatoon. 

 

So you look at the different planners that are out there, and then 

you look at the different players, and you see the growth that is 

wanting to continue and build and strengthen. And then you see 

the Saskatchewan Party which is massively confused on this 

file, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the frustration is. 

 

So when you talk about a community planner’s role, the 

community planner’s role has some radical repercussions on the 

growth of Saskatchewan if they don’t do it right. And that’s 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

why, Mr. Speaker, it’s more important to provide the staff and 

the resources and I would even say the matrix of how some of 

these community planners will operate under, Mr. Speaker. If 

they had the right team, if they had the right team and they had 

the right partnerships and they had the right government to be 

able to put all of this neatly under one package, Mr. Speaker, 

then you can see evidence that smart growth does work. And 

that’s something that’s advocated by the NDP. But on that side, 

Mr. Speaker, all they get is massive confusion and a little 

adjustment here and a little adjustment there as the Minister of 

Highways was speaking about today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t do anything radically different. It 

doesn’t do anything earth-shattering. And that to me, Mr. 

Speaker, it reminds me of a party that’s bankrupt of ideas, a 

party that simply has survived this long on some of the NDP 

savings fund that we’ve left them, and quite frankly on the 

goodwill of the people of Saskatchewan. But both are running 

out, Mr. Speaker. The goodwill of the people of Saskatchewan 

are running out, and the NDP savings account is now running 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now we sit back and we say, okay, let’s see what these guys 

are made of, Mr. Speaker. And one by one on every file, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s university spending or highway spending 

or some of the health care challenges, Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party has failed miserably on all those fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why we pay special attention to Bill 67 because 

we’re hoping somewhere amongst the midst of the 49 of them 

that somebody out there can figure out what the smart growth 

strategy’s all about and start putting these pieces together, Mr. 

Speaker. And quite frankly they have not done any of that 

work, nor did they realize that work needs to be done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So the NDP’s smart growth plan is quite clear. There’s a lot of 

work that needs to be done on it to refine it for the next 

election, and that’s some of the work that we will do. We will 

do that work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

However, what’s important is that people of Saskatchewan will 

have the opportunity to put the NDP’s smart growth strategy 

versus the Premier’s — what’s that vision for the future 

document called? — the Premier’s vision plan there. And you 

can see, Mr. Speaker, that it lacks any kind of clarity. It’s really 

just a bunch of words and words that are spun out constantly by 

the government. And people of Saskatchewan are starting to 

yawn, and they’re starting to get bored with this tired, old, 

six-year government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s really important that the people of Saskatchewan 

know that there is a party and that there is a strategy called 

smart growth under the NDP that really capitalized on what we 

need to do as a province to go to the next level with our next 

leader to ensure that Saskatchewan is represented well, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the important thing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important as well, I wanted to 

add, is that as I mentioned earlier about the realtors’ role and 

the city leaders and the engineers and the community planners, 

these are people that we need to engage more and more, and to 

say, what can we do and what can we do right? We don’t need a 

band-aid. We need to take the time to do this properly. Because 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, if we can do it properly, then the plan 

here is to keep as many of the people that are moving here to 

stay here and make this their long-term home. 

 

And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, if we do this right, and we 

accommodate the growth right, and we do the growth smartly 

as a province, then and only then will the people of 

Saskatchewan realize that it is the NDP that ought to be given 

that opportunity, and that it is the NDP that is going to provide 

that opportunity to the people of Saskatchewan alongside the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s quite clear that this bill is 

something that we would want to pay very close attention to as 

a party, because it does have ramifications to our smart growth 

strategy because it’s something that’s really, really important 

that we pay attention to this. So that’s one of the reasons why I 

hope me and my colleagues will take the time to reach out to 

some of the groups that are out there — the realtors association, 

the community planners association, some of the architectural 

firms, and many other groups out there that may have some 

advice on this. 

 

So on that front, Mr. Speaker, I can go on for a number of hours 

on this particular bill because it all connects to our smart 

growth strategy. It all connects. It all makes sense. It all makes 

sense as we share this vision. And everything is really 

important that it relies on the central message that the 

government has to know what the role is, when they fulfill that 

role, and who fulfills that role, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately 

the Sask Party hasn’t even got that part figured out, Mr. 

Speaker. But certainly from our perspective on the NDP side, 

we have. We have it figured out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think we have a lot more work to do on that front, and 

we’re going to have a lot more debate on this particular bill. 

The community planners are a central, important, integral part 

of our smart growth plan, Mr. Speaker, and we want to make 

sure that we do this right. So if it’s just a little tinkering here 

and there by, you know, by the Sask Party government and by 

this minister, I say, shame on them. Because obviously there’s 

much more expectations out there of them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if they can’t provide that leadership, then I 

would suggest they step off the way and the NDP will certainly 

provide that leadership and make sure Saskatchewan continues 

being a growing, sustainable province, a province that attracts 

new people and keeps new people. That’s the key thing, Mr. 

Speaker. That is the key point I want to make. 

 

So on this note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill 67. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 67, The Community Planning Profession 

Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

[14:45] 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, thank you. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker, and thank you, my colleagues. It is my pleasure to 

rise today and move second reading of Bill No. 69, An Act 

respecting Information Services Corporation. Mr. Speaker, this 

bill describes an arrangement that will allow for the sale of 60 

per cent of shares of ISC. But what it is really about is opening 

up Saskatchewan for new opportunities and economic growth. 

 

ISC is a successful company that has made great strides over 

the past 12 years. As you know, its role is to provide for the 

operations of land titles, personal property, vital statistics, land 

survey, and corporate registries, but it has also developed some 

particular capacity and skills that could make its services 

attractive to other jurisdictions. ISC has experience that 

includes building registries from the ground up to modernizing 

outdated systems. These are skills that can be marketed not just 

within Canada but perhaps internationally as well. A number of 

these jurisdictions could use the kind of services that ISC 

provides. It’s a big market and there are few, if any, 

competitors today creating a window of opportunity. 

 

With the improvements ISC has made in its systems and the 

customer service in the past 10 years, we believe there is a great 

potential for this company. It has the technology, the 

know-how, and the employee expertise to become a strong, 

more successful private company. That could mean more jobs 

at home and a larger contribution to the economic growth the 

province now enjoys. The opportunity for this is now, and we 

believe ISC is uniquely positioned to use this advantage to 

grow. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, we indicated some time ago that the 

government has asked to have an evaluation or a valuation of 

the company complete. That evaluation is complete. It shows 

that the sale of 60 per cent of the company would yield a return 

between 90 million and 120 million. It’s also worth noting, Mr. 

Speaker, that RBC Capital Markets agrees with our view of the 

opportunities that exist. 

 

We have released a summary of the evaluation so that the 

public can better understand the issues involved. Let me just 

quote a bit from the report. It says that, and I quote: 

 

RBC believes that as a publicly traded company ISC will 

enhance its ability to grow its business and operations 

within the province of Saskatchewan as well as in other 

jurisdictions outside of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So they agree that there is an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for this 

company. It’s an opportunity that does not exist to the same 

degree for a Crown corporation. Governments tend not to want 

to buy from other governments, Mr. Speaker. We’re not alone 

in thinking this though, Mr. Speaker. RBC agrees with us on 

that point as well. In the report RBC says the following about 

that, and I quote: “As a business managed independently of the 

province, ISC may be perceived more valuable by the 

prospective customers.” 

 

There will be other benefits as well. RBC found that its share 

issue will provide ISC with increased access to capital to fund 

new growth initiatives and to support the ongoing future growth 

of the company. It will also give the company an increased 

public profile that will enhance its visibility in the marketplace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will provide authority for the sale 

of shares in the company next year. We envision selling 

approximately 60 per cent of the company through a share sale 

while government will retain the other 40 per cent. Both the 

employees and other Saskatchewan residents will have the 

opportunity to take part in this public offering. Five per cent of 

the shares sold will be allocated to employees if they choose to 

participate in the share sale. Another 45 per cent will be 

allocated to Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the contribution our employees 

have made to the success of ISC to date, and we want them to 

stay with the company. From the government’s perspective, we 

want to ensure that the province continues to benefit from ISC’s 

corporate presence, Mr. Speaker. This bill will grant a golden 

share in the company which will not only maintain the 

company’s head office in Saskatchewan but will also give the 

government the right to decide on any proposed change of 

control or corporate restructuring. These will be negotiated in a 

transparent process that is fair to both the customer and the 

company; however, they will also be linked to the consumer 

price index to ensure any increases remain reasonable. 

 

We are also mindful about the importance of the security of 

personal information, Mr. Speaker. That is why vital statistics 

will be transferred from the ISC back into executive 

government to ensure that the private information remains 

confidential. 

 

This legislation is just the first step in this process. 

Implementation legislation will also be required in the spring 

session of the legislature that will set out the relationship 

between the new company and the government and to deal with 

the mechanics of the transaction. An initial public offering, or 

IPO, of shares will be made sometime after that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that Information Services Corp is 

ready for the next step in its evolution. This initiative will give 

the opportunity to become a bigger, stronger company that will 

make an even larger contribution to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 69, An Act 

respecting Information Services Corporation. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 69, The Information Services Corporation Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the 

member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill 69, the first step of Saskatchewan Party’s 

many steps to privatize our Crowns right across the province, 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very sad day for the people of 

Saskatchewan and the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And 

let me tell you the people of Saskatchewan are absolutely upset 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

with this government on this file and on this front, Mr. Speaker, 

because quite frankly they felt that the Saskatchewan Party 

betrayed the trust of the people of Saskatchewan when they said 

they would not privatize any Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

And today marks their first step on that journey, Mr. Speaker, 

which makes no sense for the people of Saskatchewan, what 

makes no sense from the financial perspective, Mr. Speaker, 

and makes no sense whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All that we can say, from the NDP’s perspective, Mr. Speaker, 

is that they’re tied to their ideology that they should have less 

government, less Crown corporation; let the private sector own 

everything and have everything, Mr. Speaker, that’s of value in 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t make any sense, 

any common sense to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And right across the board, from Yorkton to Moose Jaw to 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, people are concerned and they are proud of 

their Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. Make no two bones 

about that because they are. They want to defend the Crown 

corporations and they’ll continue defending the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I tell the people of Saskatchewan that today the Sask Party 

said no to the people of Saskatchewan, that your values on the 

Crown corporations are not something we value. We are tied to 

our ideology, not to the people’s interest when it comes to the 

future of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, and this is 

evidenced under Bill 69 being proposed by that minister, the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that the people of 

Saskatchewan know that this Premier and this Saskatchewan 

Party are embarking on this journey, and the people of 

Saskatchewan have got to stand up and stand in their way by 

saying, no way did we vote for this in 2011, Mr. Speaker. No 

way did we vote for this in 2007. So why are you doing this 

now? The people of Saskatchewan want to know now, and they 

want to know why, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this bill that’s coming forward, we tell them from the NDP 

perspective is, why would they do this, Mr. Speaker? Where 

does it make sense? Why would you sell an asset that’s 

generating revenues for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker? Why would they do this? The big question is, why? 

And the people of Saskatchewan are asking, why are you doing 

this? What is the logic behind selling a Crown corporation like 

investment services, the corporation, or Information Services 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Why would they be doing that, Mr. Speaker? Why would they 

be doing that when this entity generates millions of dollars for 

the people of Saskatchewan? Those millions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, go to helping with some of the costs of operating 

government and helping the province prosper and build, Mr. 

Speaker. Why would they then turn around and sell it? It just 

doesn’t make any sense whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

what’s really important for the people of Saskatchewan to 

understand. 

 

Now I think one of the points that the people of the province are 

going to certainly come back and they’re going to argue with, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the Saskatchewan Party blindsided them on 

this one. They blindsided them tremendously. 

 

And I’ll give you another example of what the Sask Party is 

trying to do when it comes to the Crown corporations. Mr. 

Speaker, they are justifying as an example of most recently not 

just ISC, but the liquor board stores, Mr. Speaker. Across the 

way when we were talking about that issue, they were yelling 

across that you guys would rather build liquor stores than 

hospitals. Well, Mr. Speaker, the problem is they knew that 

that’s not the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority], the 

Saskatchewan liquor and gaming commission, they generate 

close to half a billion dollars a year from VLT [video lottery 

terminal] revenues and from liquor sales. And that half a billion 

dollars a year, guess where that goes? It goes to schools and 

goes to the hospitals. It goes to services, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

half a billion dollars a year, Mr. Speaker, that is generated 

through that entity. 

 

Now what these guys are saying, well, that’s way too much 

money for the people of Saskatchewan. So as opposed to us 

turning around and defending that particular industry that gives 

us good money, we’re going to give it to the private sector. So 

guess what happens, Mr. Speaker? Any new liquor store that is 

going to be built is going to be owned by the private sector. So 

who gets that profit, Mr. Speaker? The private sector. And 

that’s the weakness of their argument when they come along 

and they talk about why they wouldn’t, why they’re not going 

to build any more new liquor stores under SLGA, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course from our perspective, from the NDP perspective, if 

you’re going to have those particular activities in the province, 

then the people of Saskatchewan ought to derive a benefit from 

it, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we tax with what we call sin 

taxes. We tax liquor sales and we also tax alcohol sales and we 

tax cigarette sales, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s all throughout the province that this tax is put in place. 

And that tax being generated, guess what? It’s being used for 

the good of the people of Saskatchewan. So when you see the 

infantile argument from the Saskatchewan Party that this is not 

what the people of Saskatchewan want, they need to turn 

around and understand what half a billion dollars a year 

generates for the people of Saskatchewan through the SLGA 

operation, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why on this side of the 

Assembly, we as the NDP are telling people that it’s important 

that people know that some of these entities are generating 

revenues, a great amount of revenues, for the good of all the 

people. And then when you give away those revenues to the 

private Saskatchewan Party corporate friends, guess what, Mr. 

Speaker? That means less for you and I. It means less for the 

families, and it means less for the people of Saskatchewan 

overall. 

 

So once again, they’re at it again, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s the 

Information Services Corporation that we invested, time and 

time again, we invested some serious money as a party and as a 

government to build up this service. And there’s nobody out 

there that I’m aware of, Mr. Speaker, that is supporting this 

move. Why doesn’t the Sask Party go out there and solicit some 

views from some of the impacted communities, from some of 

the impacted organizations? No, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t even 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

do that. 

 

And the sad reality about how the Sask Party operates and this 

agenda of slowly and with some stealth try and privatize our 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker, is that they didn’t even bring it to the 

Assembly first. We heard this through a tweet of one of their 

Sask Party supporters. And, Mr. Speaker, how did he, how did 

this individual know? How did this individual know, Mr. 

Speaker? It’s because they share information with their private 

supporters, their close supporters, and they keep the Assembly 

in the dark and they keep the people of Saskatchewan in the 

dark till it’s too late. 

 

And once they sell ISC, then they bring it forward and they 

justify it by saying, well we’ll make sure they don’t charge any 

extra fees for the service that we’re enjoying now. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the problem is once you sell Information Services 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, once you sell ISC, guess what? The 

new owner ain’t going to listen to the Sask Party when they talk 

about their rates, Mr. Speaker. They ain’t going to listen to 

them about that, Mr. Speaker. And guess what? The Sask 

Party’s not going to have no control over this corporation that 

they sell Information Services to. They’re going to have no 

control whatsoever. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So when they use the word, we’ll negotiate softer fees; we’ll 

look at the long-term benefit; you know, you can take those 

words because they don’t mean anything to us nor the people of 

Saskatchewan because you already went back on your word 

that you’d protect the Crowns. And the people of Saskatchewan 

are absolutely upset over this one, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 

going to see some repercussions, not just to the front bench but 

to the backbench as well, Mr. Speaker. And I look at the 

backbench, you know, the caucus of the Sask Party and ask, 

why didn’t you guys speak up? Why didn’t the members from 

Moose Jaw speak up, you know, when Valley View was being 

threatened? 

 

And once again on ISC, they’re not speaking up, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re sitting there saying, well we hope, we hope, we hope 

they know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker, so we’ll blindly 

follow them. The members from P.A. don’t have a bridge, but 

Information Services Corp, well we hope they know what the 

front bench is doing so we will blindly follow them. Why don’t 

you guys stand up and speak up? Speak up for your 

constituents. You know, don’t just stand there and hope that the 

Premier and his front bench have it figured out because news 

flash: they don’t have it figured out. They don’t know what 

they’re doing. So why follow these folks? Blind faith doesn’t 

get you anywhere. You should have faith as a party member 

over there, but you shouldn’t have blind faith. You’ve got to 

figure it out because you’ve got to justify to the people in 

Moose Jaw how in the heck did you allow the Valley View 

closure to happen without a long-term and a good plan in place. 

Then you’ve got to justify to your P.A. members how come you 

have no bridge even though you campaigned on it. And you 

campaigned on beating up on the NDP when in reality you 

didn’t have no plan of your own. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, now they’re selling Crowns. Now they’re 

selling Crowns. And I can almost guarantee that 40 per cent of 

their backbench are probably tapping their hands on their desks 

saying, well I didn’t get involved for politics for this reason. I 

wanted to build bridges. I wanted to keep services open. I 

wanted to build hope. Now all you see, Mr. Speaker, is 

institutions being shut down with no plan to replace those 

services. You see no bridge being built in Prince Albert. You 

don’t see no highways being built in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Like my goodness, we need a backbench with a backbone to get 

up and tell the front bench, you guys don’t have this figured 

out. I think what they should do is they should move the entire 

front bench, put them in the back, put the backbench in the 

front. Then maybe we’ll have some semblance of sanity over 

there, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly, they don’t know 

what they’re doing. It’s almost bizarre what this front bench is 

doing, Mr. Speaker. So we turn around and we ask ourselves as 

an official opposition, how in the heck, how in the heck would 

those guys mess up all that great opportunity left to them by the 

NDP and the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they found a way. They found a way to 

squander that two a half billion dollars left in the bank. They 

have found a way to discourage people from moving to 

Saskatchewan. And now, and now they’re broke. And now 

they’re broke, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan 

understand they’re in . . . As much as the Minister of Finance 

stands up and, you know, it’s not every day you see the 

Minister of Finance stand up and turn red with embarrassment, 

Mr. Speaker, on how he’s bungling the finances of the 

province. But now we know why that they’re trying to sell 

Information Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker. Because 

they’re broke. Because they’re absolutely broke, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s a sad reality. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan stand up and they say, oh my 

goodness, now they’re selling assets. They’re selling assets to 

cover some of their mismanagement. And I dare anybody, I 

dare anybody over there to complain that they’re not broke, Mr. 

Speaker. Not one word from opposite. You know why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because how do you justify selling a Crown 

corporation that’s making money for you if you’re not broke? 

So they say, oh we’re not broke. Well don’t sell it. Well we’re 

broke. Well why don’t you say you’re broke instead of telling 

everybody you have this balanced budget and then you talk 

about this growth plan? 

 

We figured it out, Mr. Speaker. That’s why they’re not fixing 

roads. That’s why they’re shutting down Valley View with no 

plan in place. That’s why they’re not building a second bridge. 

That’s why they’re not doing anything to stimulate the forestry 

sector, Mr. Speaker. That’s why they’re firing people left, right, 

and centre. They’re cutting programs, Mr. Speaker. Their 

highways plan that they brag about is in shambles. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are going to 

quickly realize that the Sask Party messed up a great 

opportunity. And half their backbench is sitting on their hands, 

not saying a word to defend their constituents, and they should 

not forget that’s who brought them to the dance was the 

constituents of each of their particular ridings, Mr. Speaker. 

And they sit here and sit on their hands while great damage is 

being done to our economy and great damage is being done to 

their relevant constituencies. 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

So I think it’s really important. I think it’s really important that 

I instruct the caucus of the Sask Party to stand up, to get up and 

fight back on Bill 69 to privatize and sell off Information 

Services Corporation. Stand up and stand up and fight for what 

you think is right. Don’t sit on your hands and hope that the 

front bench have it figured out because they don’t have it 

figured it out. They don’t have it figured out. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the most important thing is that they 

yell and they laugh in the background right now, but why don’t 

they yell and speak loudly in caucus or in cabinet, Mr. Speaker? 

Why are they loud in the Assembly, but they’re pretty quiet, 

you can almost hear a pin drop in their caucus meetings? 

Because they’re told to be quiet, told about the party line, and 

just talk about this so-called growth plan. And we’ll get through 

this. We’ll get through this. 

 

I can tell them right now, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the attitude they 

take, there’ll be a lot of one-term wonders over there, one-term 

wonders, Mr. Speaker, because the people of Saskatchewan 

don’t want to see somebody come here to sit on their hands and 

get up every six weeks to make a member’s statement. They 

want to see contribution. They want to see contribution. They 

want you to protect their ideals, the people of Saskatchewan’s 

ideals. They want you to participate in this great hall of 

democracy, not simply follow a song sheet. 

 

And that’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. I think that the 

backbench over there need to stand up and tell the people of 

Saskatchewan why they haven’t spoken up, why they’re so glad 

to get to this Assembly and that’s it. If their aspiration is they 

come to this Assembly and sit here and be part of the Assembly 

and that’s it, Mr. Speaker, then not only they fool themselves, 

but they fool their constituency as well. Because you ought to 

come here and you ought to defend the people that send you 

here, first of all, and you ought to be able to defend their 

qualities and their values that the people send you here for. And 

you ought to stand up and speak your mind instead of being 

told what to say, when to say, and how to say it, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s not team, that’s not teamwork. That’s not teamwork. 

That’s manipulation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Within the NDP, we’ve had our arguments in caucus. There’s 

been some great debates and great fights. I can tell the people of 

Saskatchewan, from my experience, there’s been some great 

debates and great fights, Mr. Speaker. And there’s been some 

solid arguments and there’s been some concessions. There has 

been some build-out of other values that were incorporated in a 

plan that didn’t have them at first. But that debate and that 

argument took place in our caucus, Mr. Speaker, and we had 

those debates. And sometimes you won and sometimes you lost 

and sometimes you agreed and sometimes you didn’t agree, but 

the NDP didn’t squander the rights of anybody to express their 

free opinion on how certain things operate within the 

government. Nobody squandered the right to speak freely at 

some of these meetings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can see from the backbench today, the Sask Party, that all 

evidence are showing that they’re simply standing, they’re 

simply sitting on their hands, hoping that the people of 

Saskatchewan will forget about this selling of Information 

Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker. They have two and a half 

years to go before the next election. And, Mr. Speaker, people 

won’t forget. People will not forget this at all. They will not 

forget the war that they’ve organized against our working men 

and women, Mr. Speaker. They won’t forget about the debt that 

they’re going to put this province in. And they won’t forget 

about the P3s that they’re touting as the solution to paying off 

some of the bills that our grandchildren have to pay off. We 

don’t see the bills today, but we’ll see them down the road, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ve seen that kind of activity happening by the 

former Conservative government. 

 

The former Conservative government under Grant Devine, of 

whose bills we’re still paying today, 2012, Mr. Speaker, 2012, 

we’re still paying some of those debts, and that’s exactly what 

the people across the way want to do. They want to make sure 

that Saskatchewan’s saddled with debts for the next 20, 30, 40 

years, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a crying shame for a party that 

people trusted would bring their values, would bring their 

principles, would bring their beliefs here, and to make sure that 

they didn’t sell our Crowns. They manage their money well and 

they kept the economy going, Mr. Speaker. A big fat F on all 

three fronts for the Sask Party and the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. People are absolutely upset over 

this. They don’t like it. And the Sask Party’s 49 members over 

there that didn’t get the memo, that didn’t get the memo that the 

people of Saskatchewan didn’t want our Crown corporations 

privatized, they didn’t get the memo, Mr. Speaker. The people 

of Saskatchewan don’t like selling off assets that generate 

revenues for us. They don’t like selling off assets to 

corporations that live halfway across the world or in Eastern 

Canada or somewhere in the States, where we start paying those 

bills and sending that money out of the country or out of 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see evidence of that with Northland’s power deal in North 

Battleford. SaskPower could’ve built their own plants. But what 

did the Sask Party do, Mr. Speaker? They got a company out of 

Eastern Canada to come along and build a power station here in 

North Battleford, and we’ll guarantee you the same price for 

your gas rates for the next 20 years. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? Guess who’s paying those 

rates with no guarantees — the people of Saskatchewan, the 

power customers of the North Battleford and Saskatchewan 

areas, Mr. Speaker. They’re the ones that are going to pay the 

piper. And guess what? The Sask Party didn’t give them no 

guarantees on those rates. 

 

So the minister stands up and talks about Bill 69 and says, 

we’re going to talk to them about guaranteeing the rates, the 

Information Services Corporation. I say to him, good luck 

because that ain’t on. That ain’t on at all, because as soon as 

you give away ownership of a certain Crown corporation, 

whether it’s SaskPower or ISC, you do not control what the 

new owners do with that resource or with that company. They 

will tell you what rates they’re going to charge. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, everyone knows, everyone knows that if you 

have a company and you own it, you can set the rates exactly 

how you want them. And who’s going to stop you? It ain’t 

going to be the Sask Party. They’re not going to stand up for 

the people of Saskatchewan because they’re so bent on their 

ideology to sell anything that generates revenues, to give it 

away, Mr. Speaker. 



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

And in the future, what is Saskatchewan left with? With 

nothing. How could we rebuild? How could we rebuild our 

province if we do have a financial mess that’s created by the 

Sask Party in the future, if we don’t have assets — if we don’t 

have Information Services Corporation generating millions of 

dollars each year or if you don’t have SLGA generating half a 

billion dollars a year or if you don’t have working people 

paying taxes in their communities or buying goods in the 

community like the working men and women of our province? 

 

What the Sask Party’s doing is handcuffing the people of 

Saskatchewan for years to come through things like the P3 

partnership concepts, Mr. Speaker. The list goes on as to what 

they’re doing wrong. And the people of Saskatchewan, I’m 

urging them to stand up and tell the Sask Party to get it right or 

get out of office. 

 

That, I think, is the two most important lessons that they ought 

to learn, Mr. Speaker, because there’s no question in my mind, 

they know what they’re doing wrong. 

 

And the big question on our side is, why aren’t the backbench 

speaking up and telling the Premier and his front cabinet 

colleagues, why in the heck are you doing this or for what 

reason? What can I tell my constituents in P.A. or Melfort or 

Moose Jaw or Weyburn, what can I tell them to justify why 

we’re selling this Crown? What’s the logical answer? I can’t 

say we’re broke because that goes against our Minister of 

Finance’s plan that says we have a balanced budget. We know 

it’s not balanced. We know it’s not balanced, Mr. Speaker. 

Does he say, do they say, well we’re using the money to build a 

bridge in Prince Albert? He’s not building no bridge in Prince 

Albert. So the question you got to ask is why are you selling 

this asset? Why are you selling this asset? 

 

And I’ll tell you, when the NDP rebuilt the province . . . 

Because everybody knows the history of Grant Devine and the 

Conservatives. There are a lot of conservatives over there, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re pretty quiet now. They say, oh we’re not 

conservatives; we’re Sask Party. Okay, whatever — that’s what 

I say to them. The bottom line is that when Saskatchewan had 

to be rebuilt, the people of Saskatchewan took a lot of 

sacrifices. Yes, the NDP were in charge. And yes, the NDP had 

to make some very tough choices, very tough choices to slay 

the debt and the deficit left behind by the Conservatives over 

there. Okay, and a lot of them are pretty quiet now, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re pretty quiet. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you’re paying 2 or $3 million a day, 

between 2 and $3 million a day just to pay your interest and 

make a payment on your debt, that’s what the NDP had to do. 

Mr. Speaker, 2 to $3 million every single day. Mr. Speaker, 

every single day of the year — Christmas time, even Halloween 

— every single day we paid 2 to $3 million in debt or interest, 

Mr. Speaker, left behind by the conservatives. 

 

But you know the relevant point I’m trying to make, Mr. 

Speaker, is that a lot of young people don’t know that because 

many of them weren’t born at that time, and now they’re 

beginning to look and research the history. But the problem 

was, when the NDP took over, that huge, that huge hole, that 

huge hole of debt and interest, debt and interest. I can tell you 

that one of the tools that they used, one of the tools that they 

used to bring back Saskatchewan from the brink of bankruptcy, 

Mr. Speaker, was they used the Crown corporations to try and 

get some of the revenues back — SLGA, SaskPower, SaskTel, 

and the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They had to revamp absolutely every asset that they had to 

generate revenues to pay down the debt left by the 

Conservatives across the way, Mr. Speaker. And they had no 

choice. They had to tax the people more and they had to 

generate revenues through the Crowns. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now what happens now, Mr. Speaker? What happens now, if 

we move forward within the next three to five to seven years 

and Saskatchewan’s facing the same predicament that we have 

to find ways to generate revenues? The only source that we 

could go to, at the rate that the Saskatchewan Party is selling 

our Crowns, is they tax the people more because you don’t have 

those assets that generate revenues such as Information 

Services Corporation. We don’t have those assets anymore that 

could generate revenues to repay debt that may be left behind or 

to repay a P3 note, Mr. Speaker, or to repay some other bill that 

the Sask Party’s left the people of Saskatchewan. Well we don’t 

have these assets out there to help us pay down some of their 

bills. 

 

So what happens is they’re taking care of Saskatchewan by 

really handcuffing the future of Saskatchewan by selling these 

profitable Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And the answer is, for what? 

For what reason? For what reason are they selling our Crowns? 

Whether it’s a Northlands Power deal in North Battleford or 

whether it’s this Information Services Corporation today or 

some of the liquor outlets, as I mentioned at the outset, for what 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, are they selling these Crowns? I cannot 

understand nor can the people of Saskatchewan nor our entire 

caucus can understand why are you doing this? 

 

And the worst part of this all, Mr. Speaker, is the backbenchers 

who are new. They’re rookies. They’re fresh to this place. My 

message to them is, you’ve got to learn to speak up. You’ve got 

to learn to speak up, otherwise you don’t speak up and you 

don’t bring your values here, then you’re not going to get that 

bridge in P.A. You’re not going to have that process in place 

for Valley View residents. You’re not going to have support for 

your rural Saskatchewan. You’re not going to have the ability 

to defend some of the decisions of the government because you 

don’t know what’s going on and what you’re doing here. 

 

So my argument, you need to speak up and speak out and speak 

loud. And speak loud and tell the people in the front bench, 

you’re making a mistake. Don’t sell our Crowns. Don’t sell our 

Crowns. That’s what the people of Saskatchewan are saying — 

don’t sell the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the important 

message, Mr. Speaker, is that some people over there just don’t 

get it, just don’t get it. 

 

And when you start seeing the debt of Saskatchewan moving 

forward, the debt of Saskatchewan moving forward, Mr. 

Speaker, and getting bigger and bigger and we have less assets 

in the future to deal with these problems, Mr. Speaker, I want 

every one of those Saskatchewan Party members to stand up 

when they’re quite older than now and say, oh yeah, I was part 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2061 

of that. Mr. Speaker, they won’t stand up. They’d be 

embarrassed to admit that, Mr. Speaker. So don’t . . . Save 

yourself the embarrassment in your old age by speaking up 

today that some of these, some of these problems are very 

wrong. Some of these problems that we’re creating are very 

wrong for the future. They’re wrong for us. They’re wrong for 

my family. They’re wrong for my area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s the problem that the people of Saskatchewan, just 

asking the Sask Party to do is to admit that they made a 

mistake. And the problem: the people of Saskatchewan are not 

getting that honesty in terms of admitting that there’s a huge 

mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where is the push coming from from the Sask 

Party government to sell Information Services Corporation? We 

asked why? We don’t have an answer. Why are you selling it? 

 

Now the second point I want to make is who is actually asking 

for the sale of Information Services Corporation? Who is it? Is 

it the front bench or is it one of your corporate buddies in the 

backroom somewhere you don’t even know where they exist? 

Are they asking to buy this? Is there a buyer already lined up? 

Well I bet if you had interviewed any of the backbenchers 

they’d say, well we don’t know but if we sell this asset it’ll go 

down towards a bridge in P.A. Well that ain’t going to happen. 

You know, so the question I’ve got to ask is, why are you 

selling it and who is pushing the agenda to sell this Information 

Services Corporation? Can you give me a name or a couple of 

names of who is actually selling this? 

 

Now the minister is saying, well, I’m selling it. The Minister of 

Highways is saying, I’m selling it. Well, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that in reality somebody’s pushing their buttons from far away 

to try and get as many of our Crown corporations under private 

ownership as possible. And that’s why I say today, who is 

asking, who is asking to sell this? I know it’s not the 

backbench. 

 

You remember this, Mr. Speaker? It’s not the backbench, it’s 

not the backbench, Mr. Speaker. They don’t know who is 

actually advocating for the sale of this. And that’s the point that 

I would raise too, Mr. Speaker, is that in the bottom line is that 

they don’t know why they’re selling it and who wants to buy it. 

And that’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. That’s the huge problem. 

 

Now the member from — I don’t know what area he’s from — 

speaking about Saskoil, Mr. Speaker. You know when we 

talked about Saskoil . . . I don’t know, I think he worked for 

one of our Crown corporations. Now the problem we had is that 

when he came to work for, I think it was SaskPower, now when 

he came to work for SaskPower we were probably paying him 

triple figures. I don’t want to take a guess because I don’t want 

to be totally wrong, but we were probably paying him triple 

figures to get him back here. So once he came back here, then 

he decided to run for the Sask Party. So not only does he now 

take the benefits of the Crown by getting a salary from the 

Crown, a triple-figure salary from the Crown, then he jumps 

into politics. And now he’s part of the government that wants to 

sell the Crown. Now, Mr. Speaker, what the heck is all that 

about? 

 

How could you use the Crown to get back to Saskatchewan, 

join politics, and then try and sell the Crown? Because we 

know, we know that you’re not going to be . . . your long-term 

interest isn’t the benefit of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because 

I can almost guarantee you that half of them will head out of 

province as soon as they lose the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re going to go back to their comfort zone, wherever they 

come from. And the most important thing is that we stop them 

from doing as much damage to the province as they want to 

because, Mr. Speaker, they broke us in the ’90s, Mr. Speaker, 

and some of them come back to finish off the job. Some had 

come out to finish off the job. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker? I just don’t know. But all the evidence and 

all the activity would suggest as such, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

why Information Services Corporation . . . Our caucus, our 

group, our group of nine people are going to stand up for the 

people of Saskatchewan. We’re going to hold the Sask Party to 

account, and we’re going to take on the Sask Party on the 

record when it comes to the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And don’t worry about it. They can laugh at it now because 

they’ve got 49 members. Don’t worry about it, Mr. Speaker. 

They ain’t going to hold those numbers. We know that. But this 

is one mistake, this is one mistake that they know they’ve 

made. In the pit of their stomach and in their hearts, they know 

they made a mistake on this one. And half the backbench ought 

to stand up and say, yes, we made a mistake. We made a big 

mistake on this one because that’s not what the people of 

Saskatchewan wanted. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be a lot more fights on this 

front. And I know Christmas is coming, but we’ve got a session 

this spring. There’s going to be three months to be able to bring 

groups in and talk to people and keep the pressure on these 

guys. 

 

And we’re really curious right now, the opposition is, is who 

are the potential buyers? We’re going to pay a lot of attention to 

who the potential buyers are of Information Services 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to see which one of 

their friends get this corporation. And it’s a great amount of 

money, Mr. Speaker, that they generate, and we’re going to find 

out, we’re going to find out, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to find 

out where the money goes after they sold it. And then once we 

find who the buyer is, once we find who the buyer is, then, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ll be able to tell the people of Saskatchewan these 

are the people that push the buttons in the background to get the 

Information Services Corporation in their own private hands. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned very quickly the history of 

how the Saskatchewan Party actually stopped the debt from 

building, and they also started paying down debt. The Sask 

Party complain about 16 years, and we retort right back that it 

took us 14 of the 16 years to clean up your last mess. It took us 

14 of the 16 years to clean up that conservative mess left by 

those guys. 

 

So then they twist around and now they say, oh, you left us 

with the infrastructure deficit. Well guess what, you guys? You 

have no money because you have a financial crisis and a 

financial debt load of fifteen and a half billion dollars left by 

the conservatives. Guess what? We can’t fix our roads. And if 

you sold the Highways equipment to your buddies, guess what? 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

We don’t have Highways equipment to fix the roads. And if 

you squandered every bit of cash we had, guess what? We can’t 

repair water and sewer projects for some of these communities. 

So your infrastructure argument simply doesn’t work because 

the people of Saskatchewan know that that infrastructure 

challenge was created by the fact that we had a financial mess 

left to us by the conservatives across the way, Mr. Speaker. 

And that is the history lesson, very quickly, to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But you know, I watch very carefully what they do and say, Mr. 

Speaker. And the people of Saskatchewan, they insult, the Sask 

Party insults the people of Saskatchewan’s intelligence because 

people in Saskatchewan know. They know two things. They 

know about the Grant Devine problem that we had and we’re 

still paying for today. And they know the economy that’s 

building, what’s going to happen. And the Sask Party had 

absolutely nothing to do with it, and they’ll continue moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We all had a collective laugh here one day when the member 

from Kindersley, the minister for industry, when he said there 

was 70,000 people waiting at the borders of Saskatchewan, that 

as soon as we went, they all come flooding in. You know, and 

we sat in the caucus, and we couldn’t believe he said that. I 

said, my goodness, you guys actually believe that? 

 

So that’s why I go back to my point to the backbench: don’t 

listen to your front bench. My goodness, this guy’s . . . They’re 

not rocket scientists, you know; they’re politicians, Mr. 

Speaker. They are people that are going to do a thing that’ll 

help their friends, so that whole notion is that you’ve got to 

come here and you’ve got to speak up. You’ve got to speak up. 

 

I don’t want to be able to say . . . And I stand here today and 

tell some of these backbenchers, if you want to be a one-term 

wonder, continue doing what you’re doing. Sit on your hands. 

Sit on your hands, sit on your hands and hope it gets better. Or 

you can stand up, or you can stand up and be proud how you 

got here and all the commitments you made to your constituents 

back home. 

 

And the values you bought there, they’re not for sale. They’re 

not for negotiations. You’re going to stand close, you want to 

stand solid, and you’re going to tell them, you don’t want to sell 

Information Services Corporation. You don’t want to weaken 

our Crown corporations like SaskPower under the Northland 

Power deal. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s tons of other examples 

that we would share with you today, Mr. Speaker, and don’t 

forget that there are people watching very, very, very closely on 

the future of our Crowns. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s an organization called Save Our 

Saskatchewan Crowns. They have a website and I’m going to 

get that website for people to go onto the website of this group 

that’s organizing the information of what the Sask Party’s doing 

to hurt our Crown corporations. And I’m going to ask one of 

my colleagues to get that website. And I’m going to ask people 

to go on that website and see exactly what the Sask Party and 

the Premier is doing. 

 

And what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker? They’re going to get 

a bunch of billboards. They’re going to get a bunch of 

billboards. They’ll put all these billboards all over the place, 

and the billboards are not going to say why we sold it or who’s 

going to get it and where’s the money going. They’re going to 

say, oh, we want to continue building for the future. You know, 

and people of Saskatchewan are saying, enough with the 

billboards. We actually took a count between here and Blaine 

Lake. There’s about 30 billboards. And if you put them end to 

end, we figure you could probably put those billboards on some 

of the roads, on some of the roads, and you’d actually have 

smoother roads, Mr. Speaker. But instead of spending money 

on your billboards, you should actually spend it on actual 

highways. If you insist on bragging about the money you have 

spent in highways, then maybe you should take those billboards 

off the sign, lay them flat on the road surface, and maybe have 

some semblance of a highway. But all we see, Mr. Speaker, off 

these guys is spin, billboards, and confusing messages to the 

public. And that’s exactly what they want the public to be — 

confused as their backbench, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why I say today on this particular bill, the people of 

Saskatchewan are pretty, pretty upset at the fact that they are 

starting this first step towards privatizing a Crown corporation. 

They are not happy at all. They are not happy at all, and people 

are going to start expressing that opinion and expressing that 

opinion by way of votes very soon, Mr. Speaker. Because we 

know that their numbers of 49 that they cannot sustain and that 

those people sitting in the backbench today, that if ever comes a 

day where you look at the history of your role and you didn’t 

speak up, you didn’t speak up, you allowed it to happen, then I 

wish you have at least one sleepless night. Because I’m 

encouraging you today to go home with your conscience, go 

home with your heart and your beliefs intact and stand up and 

say to your front bench, we don’t think that’s a good idea to 

start selling our Crown corporations. 

 

And you’d think that this Information Services Corporation is a 

corporation that’s not making money. It’s making money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I want to share, I want to share with the people of 

Saskatchewan. There is a site, soscrowns.ca. So if you want to 

go onto Crowns to make sure, to make sure exactly what’s 

going on with the Crown corporations . . . Don’t take our word 

for it, Mr. Speaker. Don’t take our word for it. Go to this 

organization’s website and see exactly what they’re doing, Mr. 

Speaker. So again to the people of Saskatchewan: soscrowns.ca. 

Go on their website and you’ll see evidence galore of how the 

Sask Party’s privatizing the Crown. And here once again we 

have another example of what they’re doing. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that I want to point 

out to people is that during the last campaign, the minister 

alluded to section 44 of their booklet or the page, page 44. And 

we looked at it, and it didn’t say anything. So he thought, the 

minister thought he was going to be a rather dashing minister 

and get up and say, look on page 44, and then he sat down. 

Well we looked at page 44, and it didn’t say anything, like the 

rest of the document didn’t say anything, Mr. Speaker. So 

where is it on page 44 that said you weren’t going to sell the 

Crowns, or you were going to sell them? That was the 

argument. Well nothing on page 44 indicated that in any way, 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

Mr. Speaker. So then we looked through that book, and then we 

found one part where they say and I want to point out: “The 

Saskatchewan Party would divest non-core Crown investments, 

such as shares in meat packing plants, hog barns, movie 

company, and potato businesses, with all proceeds used to pay 

down the provincial debt.” That was in their booklet. 

 

So we’re trying to see where was Information Services 

Corporation? Was it a meat packing plant? No, it wasn’t that. 

Was it a hog barn? No, there’s a lot of manure around, but . . . 

[inaudible] . . . a hog barn. Was it a movie company? No, it 

wasn’t a movie company. Was it a potato business? I don’t 

think it grew potatoes. So, Mr. Speaker, where in this category 

would we put Information Services Corporation as a non-core 

Crown entity? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you see as admission of their own document 

that they never told the people of Saskatchewan that. They 

absolutely betrayed the trust of the people of Saskatchewan 

when they were told that you will not sell the Crowns. You will 

not sell the Crowns. 

 

And what I think happened, Mr. Speaker, is somebody along 

the line, and I don’t think it’s anybody in the backbench or 

anybody in cabinet, they told one of their . . . One of their 

connections told them, why don’t you guys put it up for sale 

and we’ll buy it. You know, and then all of a sudden this thing 

comes forward. And the poor backbench sitting there saying, 

what happened here? What’s going on? Well we’re going to 

sell Information Services Corporation. And the poor backbench 

sits there saying, well, you know, is that good for us or what? 

 

And the problem is, Mr. Speaker, is they never took the time, 

they never took the time to fill their backbench with the proper 

information and give their backbench the opportunity to vote 

nay or yea in favour of this. This came from three or four of 

their front bench and everybody in the backbench had no choice 

but to follow. And I say shame on that process, Mr. Speaker. I 

say shame on that process. That backbench has got to stand up, 

has got to stand up, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve got to tell the 

front bench, you guys ought to be a bit more respectful to us 

and our values and what we represent and what you told the 

people of Saskatchewan before the last election. That’s what 

you got to represent to your front bench, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So somewhere along the line somebody wanted Information 

Services Corporation, one of their buddies. I don’t know who. 

But we’ll find out as the sale proceeds, Mr. Speaker. It’ll 

become evident as soon as the sale proceeds, Mr. Speaker. So 

we’re going to pay very close attention to that process and that 

file.  

 

And I’ll say today again, Mr. Speaker, the backbench, I’ll tell 

you right now, I wouldn’t want your job because you simply 

cannot, you simply could not defend this nor could you explain 

it because you’re never given the information, and you weren’t 

given the mandate by the people that sent you here to sell it. So 

you’re in a tough spot — and, Mr. Speaker, from our 

perspective, we completely understand what you’re going 

through — but don’t say a word, otherwise you’ll be banished 

to the sideline and then you’ll never, ever have the opportunity 

to be in cabinet. But a news flash — some of you will never 

have the opportunity to be in cabinet, period. So I think you 

should stand up, stand up and talk and speak on behalf of your 

constituents and defend against the sale, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you look at the process that’s unfolding 

here, this is what really upset a lot of people as well. When the 

Sask Party insider or a supporter of theirs tweeted that the 

legislation was coming forward, that the legislation to sell 

Information Services Corporation was going to be proposed at 

the end of the week, Mr. Speaker, how did that person get that 

information? And yet and yet we come along here . . . They 

come along here and we are told, you cannot talk about that 

because we’re going to give you information that’s embargoed. 

 

So as legislators, Mr. Speaker, we sit here and we say, well if 

information is given to us in a process that we have to respect, 

it’s embargoed till after . . . Well, what time are we going to do 

this? It’s going to be after question period. Well that doesn’t 

give us any time to ask questions on the process. So you put it 

after question period, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the morning 

where we’d have ample opportunity to bring forward questions 

that day. But, Mr. Speaker, we simply followed what we think 

is important in the process here, and we followed the rule. And 

the rule is if you get embargoed information, then you don’t 

share it. You don’t speak about it. And above all else, you don’t 

tweet about it. So we followed that process. 

 

But guess what, Mr. Speaker? One of their insiders, one of their 

party supporters tweeted that this thing was coming forward. 

He shared with the world that this legislation was coming 

forward. The media didn’t know about it. We didn’t know 

about it. And I can guarantee you 99 per cent of the people of 

Saskatchewan didn’t know about it until that person tweeted. 

Now how did that person get that information, Mr. Speaker? 

How did he get that information? Well I’ll tell you how he got 

that information: he was told by other people in there. And I 

can almost guarantee you, I can almost guarantee you that the 

Information Services Corporation information was shared with 

that insider that tweeted the information before the backbench, 

Mr. Speaker. So I think there’s some significant problems over 

there, Mr. Speaker, with the lack of communication, the lack of 

respect to their backbench. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at all these different issues that are 

facing Saskatchewan people. And again about the only 

reference they made to any Crown corporation that they wanted 

to sell, they said they would divest non-core Crown investments 

such as shares in meat packing plants, and hog barns, movie 

companies, and potato businesses with all proceeds used to pay 

down the provincial debt. And it didn’t say anything about 

Information Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t say 

nothing about that, Mr. Speaker, at all. 

 

So when I sit here and I look at page 44 as the minister alluded 

to, you couldn’t see nothing there — more confusing than ever. 

And about the only reference that we can see from the Sask 

Party booklet, last election, was that section there. But these 

guys . . . I don’t think Information Services Corporation sells 

potatoes. They’re not in the movie business. They don’t get 

involved with the hog barns. So where does it fit in the scheme 

of things? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of things that are at play here, and 

there’s a lot of emotions out there. And the people of 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

Saskatchewan are not going to be happy with this. And I urge 

all them people that are listening to go on soscrowns.ca and, 

Mr. Speaker, the acronym simply means Save Our 

Saskatchewan Crowns. So soscrowns.ca and you will find 

evidence of how the Sask Party by stealth has been hiding a lot 

of their privatization agenda from the people of Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s simple things like the 411 services in SaskTel or 

major things like investment services, or Information Services 

Corporation. They are doing this on a regular, consistent basis. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, the people over there on the backbench 

simply are not speaking up. You know, and the sad reality is, is 

that they’re being taken advantage of. Because if you’re a 

first-time MLA, you want to be part of the team. You want to 

prove your value as an MLA. You want to prove your value as 

a team member. But boy, I’ll tell you, after a few of these 

shenanigans, you begin to wonder, are you a part of their team? 

Because obviously you don’t count when it comes to sharing 

information and confidential information. Obviously your 

opinion on the Crowns don’t count. So the question starts 

creeping in your mind as a backbencher: if my role is to defend 

everything that these guys are doing, then at the very least I 

should be an integral part of the decision-making process and 

that I should actually have a yea or nay say on whether I want 

some of these issues moving forward. 

 

And I can almost guarantee you that 90 per cent of the 

backbench didn’t even know this was happening, Mr. Speaker. 

And now they’ve got to go back home, and they’ve got to tell 

their constituents why they’re doing this to an asset that 

generates revenues, to a process that they said they wouldn’t 

do, and to the benefits as to where those benefits are going. And 

that’s a tough one, Mr. Speaker. We know. We know it’s a 

tough one. Because how did they decide who’s going to buy it, 

for how much, and where does the money go? And I can almost 

guarantee it’s not going to go to the bridge in Prince Albert 

because those members have been quiet long enough, and I 

doubt that if they spoke up now, if anybody will listen, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, is that if it’s not going to go to the 

Moose Jaw Valley View transition process, Mr. Speaker, 

because those members from Moose Jaw have sat on their 

hands long enough and are just content to be quiet, happy 

backbenchers, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not going towards working 

on some of the roads for some of the constituents out there, like 

SARM wanted, Mr. Speaker, because half the backbenchers are 

content to sit on their hands and not say or do anything. 

 

And I say to them that you should stand up. You should stand 

up, and you should speak out because if you keep doing this on 

something as important as the future of our Crown 

corporations, your future in politics will be limited. Because 

they have already got you under control, and they’ve also got 

you exactly where they want you — a little, small part of their 

team that they’ll engage now and then, that they will engage 

now and then, and not full engagement but they’ll engage now 

and then. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the sad reality that I see 

today. 

 

And in something as fundamental, something as fundamental as 

protecting the Crown corporations, I think, I think that every 

single Sask Party member should have had the opportunity to 

vote on whether they wanted to see this happening or not. And 

furthermore, I think they would have agreed that it should be a 

public process. It should be a public process, Mr. Speaker, that 

they should have asked the public, what do you think of this? 

And then the public would have given the information. But they 

were too arrogant to even ask the public for their input, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it falls upon us as the official opposition to expose the Sask 

Party for the betraying of the people’s trust on this file because 

it’s exactly what they’ve done. They betrayed the people of 

Saskatchewan’s trust when they entrusted them to take care of 

our Crowns. They entrusted them to take care of our Crowns, 

Mr. Speaker, and they simply failed miserably at that. And not 

only did they fail miserably, they actually advocated for the 

selling of more of our Crowns. And that’s the sad reality today, 

Mr. Speaker. That is the sad reality today. And the unfortunate 

thing is half the backbenchers are still sitting around on their 

hands wondering what happened and what do we say and where 

do we go from here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why, as opposition, 

we know we’ve got to stand up and talk to the people of 

Saskatchewan and explain how they’re doing the damage to our 

Crowns. And this is another example, another nail in the coffin 

of Saskatchewan Crowns, another nail in the coffin of our 

Saskatchewan Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And yet people out there 

are still not aware of what the Sask Party is doing. But I can tell 

you that as we proceed down the path of this particular bill, 

we’re going to let people know. We’re going to let people 

know, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to absolutely let them know. 

 

And I think the most important thing is that you sit here and 

listen to some of their catcalls, Mr. Speaker. There’s going to 

be catcalls in their own communities. Don’t worry, we see 

people coming forward. We see people coming forward that are 

going to start telling the Sask Party exactly what they think of 

their government, exactly what they think their actions are on 

the Crown front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think there’s an important lesson to learn here, Mr. 

Speaker, that if you look at the process that the Sask Party does, 

and I look at this from the perspective of sitting here for a bit, is 

that on the financial perspective when a minister said that some 

of his projections were off, well they blame the banks. They say 

the banks predicted this and that’s why we’re in this 

predicament. And then he turns around today and says, oh the 

banks said this is a good idea to sell investment services or 

Information Services Corporation. 

 

Well how could you blame the banks for your financial 

mismanagement and then praise the banks for your effort to try 

and sell the Crown? You can’t do one without the other, Mr. 

Speaker. You got to be able to decide whether you’re going to 

qualify the banks or condemn the banks when they hurt you on 

one front. And that’s why I go, Mr. Speaker, to my argument is, 

why are you using the banks to justify the sale of ISC? At the 

same time you criticize them and condemn them for being 

wrong on their predictions for your budget now is out of whack. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can’t do both. You can’t do both. And 

we’ve seen the Finance minister do that on numerous 

occasions. There’s not one person across the front bench there 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

across the way that’ll say, yes it was our fault. Not one Sask 

Party guy’s going to say, yes we made the mistake. Instead, Mr. 

Speaker, they blame the banks. They blame the universities. 

They blame some of the corporations out there. They blame 

some of the local leadership on some of these fronts. They 

blame absolutely everybody. And then if they really get stuck 

for an answer, they turn around and they blame the NDP. That’s 

exactly what they do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then all of a sudden we see they start sparking up again 

and they start clapping a bit louder. And to me, I sit there and 

say, oh these guys had better grow up pretty soon and start 

acting like a government. Because you can’t survive on 

blaming other people for your inability to govern. Mr. Speaker. 

You simply cannot survive that long blaming other people on 

your inability to govern. And when you start doing things that 

betray the trust of the people of Saskatchewan, like selling a 

really important Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker, that’s when 

you know; that’s exactly when you know that not only these 

guys are broke, but they’re willing to sell anything to stay in 

power. And that’s why, on this side of the Assembly, we keep 

telling people there’s a wall-to-wall sale. 

 

And I had a chance to watch a commercial on TV and I kind of 

found that absolutely amazing. There was so many similarities, 

Mr. Speaker. I sit here and I listen to how they justify selling 

Crowns and then I watched this. I think it was a carpet 

advertisement, and the guy said, wall-to-wall to sale on 

everything in the store, no money down, don’t pay for months 

event. And then you come here and you listen to some of their 

P3 answers or their financial answers or justifying why they’re 

selling our Crowns. It’s nothing but a slick sales job that the 

people of Saskatchewan will see right through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So we sit down and we say, yes, no money down. And that’s 

sort of when I started calling them the no money down, 

wall-to-wall, don’t pay a cent event party, Mr. Speaker, because 

that’s exactly what they’re doing. They’re selling the people of 

Saskatchewan short. They’re selling the people of 

Saskatchewan short, and they’re selling our Crowns at will — 

for what? For what purposes? And who wants the Crowns? 

Those are the two questions that fundamentally we still have 

not been able to figure out: for what reason are you selling 

them, and who you’re selling them to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’re going to find that information out, and then we can 

see whether the member from Melfort’s willing to stand up and 

chirp from his chair once he finds out the connection. Then 

we’re going to see whether the member from Melfort can stand 

up and say, yes, we got something from that sale and this is 

what we got, Mr. Speaker. Or I want to see if the member from 

Melfort will chirp up again and say, well we’re broke now, but 

we don’t have any ways of generating new revenues because 

we sold all our Crowns. And, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Melfort will be long gone from this Assembly before that day 

comes to answer those questions, and that’s exactly what he’s 

counting on. So he’s allowed to chirp today because he’s not 

going to be around, because he’s not going to be around to pay 

the price down the road, Mr. Speaker. And I understand that 

and I expect that of him, Mr. Speaker, because once a Tory, 

always a Tory, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that we have a lot, a lot to say on 

this bill. This bill in many ways, in many ways reinvigorated 

the NDP. People don’t realize across the way that this particular 

Bill 69 was actually a godsend to us because we’ve been saying 

this to the media all the time. We’ve been saying to the media 

that these guys are privatizing our Crowns by stealth, and the 

media just wasn’t buying it and neither was the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But now as we continue down this path, we’re seeing that they 

are doing that. And now we’re seeing, okay, here’s exhibit A. 

Here’s exhibit B, and here’s exhibit C. And now we’re all . . . 

we’ve got about 10 exhibits in front of the people of 

Saskatchewan to prove our case, to prove our case that the Sask 

Party is selling the Crowns. And their short-term gain, their 

short-term gain’s about all they’re after, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

what makes them a really weak government. Like the member 

from Melfort there, his short-term gain is, what do I care what 

happens 8, 10 years from now? I just want to do what’s 

important right now. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the point that I would make is 

the long-term pain created by that party and by those backbench 

members are something that the people of Saskatchewan have 

fixed up in the past. And I would warn them now today to stop 

these guys so that we don’t have to fix up any more of their 

financial messes in the future, Mr. Speaker. We can see it as 

plain as day because we’ve been there, done that, in the sense 

of seeing how these guys have really hurt, hurt the 

Saskatchewan people, hurt the Saskatchewan economy for 

years to come. And this whole notion of we created this 

economy; we got all the people moving here. The big message 

to you guys is, you inherited all that. The conservatives didn’t 

build any of that. You inherited all that. And all we asked you is 

one simple thing: don’t mess it up. That’s all we asked the 

member from Melfort, the member from Moose Jaw. Don’t 

mess it up because it’s really important to keep it going. 

 

We left you the money. We left you the booming economy. We 

left you the population growth. We left you optimism. We left 

you hope. And we said one simple thing that the NDP asked of 

the Sask Party: please don’t mess it up. One simple message. 

One simple message. 

 

So what did they do? They put a bunch of billboards all over 

the place instead of building highways. They put a bunch of 

radio ads instead of managing the economy right. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve become so good at spin that they’re blaming 

the banks for their mismanagement. The banks don’t manage. 

The Minister of Finance manages the finances, not some bank 

manager. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s all we asked. 

 

They sit here and they chirp from their chairs, from their right 

wing chairs, saying, oh everything’s going good because we 

built this. The bottom line is you didn’t build it. You didn’t 

build it, you guys. Get the message. You didn’t build it; you 

inherited it. You inherited money. You inherited a population 

growth. You inherited a lot of good things. And all we asked is 

don’t mess it up. That’s all we asked. Don’t mess it up. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what are they doing now? They’re messing it 

up. They’re selling the Crowns. They’re now going into deficit. 

They’re not fixing roads, and they’re messing with our 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

universities, and the list goes on. And you know, all they’ve got 

to do is just one simple thing. One simple thing is don’t mess it 

up. That’s all we asked them to do. 

 

Yes, you know, the NDP needed a break. We got our break, Mr. 

Speaker, after 16 years of building, 16 years of working, 16 

years of slaying that deficit, 16 years of doing what we can 

given the resources that we had. And the people of 

Saskatchewan decided the NDP needed to have a break. And 

the NDP will take their break, Mr. Speaker. The NDP will take 

their break, but they’ll be back in full force, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ll be back in full force in due time and they’ll have the 

smart growth technology. And then I’m going to see the chirps 

from across the way. It’ll be probably a couple little birds over 

there chirping. That’ll be about what’s left of the Sask Party by 

the time we’re done with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s important, what’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

next round, when the NDP don’t have this huge deficit to have 

hanging over their heads, and then, Mr. Speaker, then we can 

show the people of Saskatchewan the next phase of having a 

good NDP government, and that’s to make sure that there’s a 

smart growth strategy to everything we’re doing. And part of 

that smart growth and part of that insurance for the future is to 

protect the Crowns, to protect the Crowns like no other party 

can. Only the NDP can protect the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, not 

the Sask Party. 

 

So when I sit here, when I sit here and I say to myself, all they 

said they were going to do, they were going to get rid of their 

shares in meat packing plants . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

That’s not a meat packing plant? It’s not. Is it a hog barn? Is it a 

movie company, or is it a potato business? No. I don’t think 

Information Services Corporation fits in any of those 

categories, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now maybe Information Services Corporation may have 

plotted out a potato field, maybe somewhere. Maybe that’s the 

connection. Maybe that’s the connection, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t 

think about that. Or maybe they may have a process that’s titled 

to a hog barn. That might be the connection there, Mr. Speaker. 

Heaven forbid. 

 

I hope SaskPower didn’t provide power to any of these entities 

or they might sell SaskPower because they’re connected to 

these entities. You just never know, Mr. Speaker, how the Sask 

Party thinks. So soscrowns.ca, there’s some great information 

on that website about what these guys are doing. It’s a great 

exposé, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s really important that the people 

of Saskatchewan go on it. 

 

And let’s look at another example, SaskTel. SaskTel’s another 

example, Mr. Speaker, where they said they were going to take 

8,000 customers from rural Saskatchewan, get them off this 

broadband service where you are able to access the Internet, 

wireless Internet service. And they said, well we couldn’t get 

the frequencies from Industry Canada. We lost those 

frequencies is what SaskTel, well the minister, said at the time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they lost them because they didn’t defend 

them. They didn’t defend those frequencies that SaskTel used 

so people are able to access the Internet, the wireless Internet 

service. And they’re going to in fact impact 8,000 rural people 

— 8,000 customers were what was at risk. And what did the 

minister do? Well he said, Industry Canada didn’t help us out. 

Well there he goes again. He blames Industry Canada for their 

lack of performance. And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day 

we brought the issue up. We brought the issue up and we hit the 

media, and the media were the ones that really went after the 

government. And guess what happened, Mr. Speaker? Two or 

three days later, miraculously Industry Canada got the 

frequencies back. So the service was restored. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my point being is that they’re not protecting 

the Crowns, to a point where they’re simply making our 

Crowns less effective. They’re getting people angry at our 

Crowns and they’re hampering our Crowns from growth. 

 

So not only do they do that activity on one side, Mr. Speaker, 

they also do it by selling off the Crowns. Now whether it’s 

SaskTel’s wireless Internet services or whether it’s the 

Northland Power deal in North Battleford and now Information 

Services Corporation bill to sell off ISC and some of the other 

services that they’ve sold off, and SaskTel, SaskPower, the list 

goes on, Mr. Speaker, as to what the Sask Party’s doing. 

 

And you know, last election, if they had any integrity they 

should’ve got up and said, we are going to sell some Crowns 

because we need the money. We’ll make sure the money goes 

to this. And they never did. They skirted the issue. They didn’t 

talk about it. They didn’t make any commitments in their 

platform except for a potato business. They didn’t do any of 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So today I’m sitting here . . . I don’t think the people of 

Saskatchewan gave the Sask Party the mandate to sell any 

Crowns. I absolutely believe that 100 per cent because they 

didn’t campaign on it, nor did they get elected on that, Mr. 

Speaker. So before they do this I think they should go back to 

the people and ask for the people’s opinion and advice on 

selling this very important Crown. 

 

Information Services Corporation generates what — 17, $18 

million a year? That money goes to fund health care. It goes to 

highways. It goes to all kinds of different aspects of 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, that 17 or $18 million will be 

gone after they sell it. There’ll be a one-time purchase. We 

don’t know who’s going to buy it and for what. That remains to 

be seen. But that’s a one-time income for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Ten years from now, we won’t have that income 

and this whole notion of the minister saying, we will negotiate 

any fee hike . . . we had a collective laugh on this side. You’ll 

not negotiate anything. That corporation that buys that 

Information Services Corporation off the Sask Party will not 

listen to what the Sask Party has to say about rates. 

 

Guess what? You sell your company, you’re not going to 

dictate what they start charging people for fees. That’s 

absolutely not on. So this whole notion of them negotiating . . . 

why did they even mention that when we know that the people 

of Saskatchewan do a collective, yes, right. Whatever that 

company says and does for their profit line, they will do 

without Sask Party’s blessing, because once they sell that asset, 

they have no control over anything that company does. And I 

think they all understand that. So why say it? Why say it if you 

can’t do it? That’s the same principle, the same principle behind 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

why sell it? We never got the mandate to sell it from the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today, as long as I sit in this desk for however 

the good Lord allows me to sit on this desk and the constituents 

of Athabasca allow me to sit on this desk, I’m going to look 

across the way and I can say, those guys got government based 

on foolishness. They got government on not telling the people 

the truth about their Crown, their intentions behind the Crown, 

and sooner or later, it’s going to catch up to them. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the sooner the better because they absolutely have 

betrayed the trust the people of Saskatchewan have had in 

extending to them the opportunity to be government a second 

term, under the knowledge that they will not sell the Crowns. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re well on their way. And if the people 

of Saskatchewan find out, and there are not many that watch 

this channel, but eventually if they find out, there will be, there 

will be some great anger, Mr. Speaker, from a lot of places 

because Saskatchewan people value their Crowns. They value 

the roles of their Crowns, and the people of Saskatchewan, the 

people of Saskatchewan want to see their Crowns protected. 

 

And I was actually kind of amused today when my colleague, 

the member from Saskatoon Nutana, when she mentioned that 

the minister was trying to negotiate keeping many of the head 

office jobs here, was what the comment was, because that’s 

what the minister said. Then of course our critic gets up and 

says, well you can keep all the employees here if you don’t sell 

it. You can keep all the profits here if you don’t sell it, and you 

can keep all the shares under Saskatchewan people’s ownership 

if you don’t sell it. So don’t try and justify you’re trying to 

protect jobs downtown here when in fact you can guarantee 

them all by keeping ownership of Information Services 

Corporation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the logic is very simple. The logic is very 

simple. You never campaigned on selling the Crowns, and if 

you proceed with this plan to sell Information Services 

Corporation, we want to know why you’re doing this, and we 

want to know who is asking for it. Which one of your corporate 

buddies from some different place wants to buy that company? 

 

And don’t feed us the notion or the silliness that you’re 

portraying to the public that you can control what prices they 

charge after they buy it. They’re going to do what they want 

with their company, and no Saskatchewan Party government is 

going to tell them what rates to set. We know that. In the 

corporate world, no government’s going to go around telling 

anybody to set what rate for any privately held company. And 

those guys across the way should know it much more so than 

anybody else. And, Mr. Speaker, for them to even mention that 

was absolute silliness on the minister’s part. And on this side of 

the Assembly, we sincerely, we sincerely were quite shocked 

that he would offer that because he knows better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think quite frankly that there’s a lot of debate on this 

particular bill. People are going to be getting wind of this bill as 

time will permit us between the fall sitting and the spring 

sitting. 

 

And we know across the way that the conservatives are happier 

than anything because they’re getting rid of their Crowns. The 

liberals are confused, and the backbench is even more confused. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I can’t understand how the makeup of that 

party works and functions because you have those three 

dynamics, and then you have confusing, conflicting 

information, and then you have broken promises left, right, and 

centre. And they sit there and say, how could they continue to 

function? Their operations are bizarre, Mr. Speaker. Their 

operations are bizarre. I can’t understand the dynamic of the 

Sask Party. It’s just totally confusing to me. But we see, we see 

a lot of cracks over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But they continue to spend. They continue to spend, and the 

Premier continues trying to be a salesman, but sooner or later 

that sales pitch sounds hollow and the promises sound weak. 

And the actions, Mr. Speaker, is where we will get the 

Saskatchewan Party back where they should be, and that’s a 

small opposition in the future. But their actions, Mr. Speaker, of 

selling our Crowns is something that the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to take a huge issue with, and they’re 

going to make them pay a price for that, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

going to make them pay a political price. 

 

Now our only argument here today, Mr. Speaker, is that I want 

to make sure, I want to make sure that the people of 

Saskatchewan know we need to rally behind this bill to make 

sure that it doesn’t proceed. We need to have people writing 

letters. We need petitions. We need to see presentations in the 

Assembly. We need to see friendly demonstrations to tell the 

government that this is wrong. We need delegations. We need 

associations. We need people out there to speak up because the 

backbench won’t. And above all else, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 

to tell the people of Saskatchewan that the Sask Party is 

privatizing your Crowns. What’s next? Privatizing health care? 

The list can go on as to what we’re worried about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once you sell it, once you sell it then you can’t determine what 

the rates are. Because the minister alluded to that today, and 

we’re telling him in a really nice way, in the most 

parliamentary way possible, that’s not going to happen. That’s 

not going to happen at all. But, Mr. Speaker, once this company 

is sold, the chances of the people of Saskatchewan ever owning 

this company again is between remote and slim, and slim just 

rode out of town. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the most important thing is that this is 

a final deal, a final deal for Information Services Corporation. 

And these guys are making light of it. They’re making fun of it 

across the way. And the big problem we have, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan are going 

to know about it. We’re going to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that. 

 

And I have seen the future. They’re going to have trouble, a lot 

of trouble. And we sit here and say, it’s too bad that the 

Information Services Corporation is going to . . . We’re going 

to lose ownership of it. But that’s the price that these guys are 

willing to pay on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. Then I 

tell the people of Saskatchewan they should make them pay the 

price for making that silly choice. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we . . . There’s a lot of people that 

want to talk about this particular bill, and I move that we 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

adjourn debate on Bill 69. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 69, The Information 

Services Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 52 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 52 — The Public 

Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to wade into the debate on Bill No. 52, An Act respecting 

consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Public Inquiries Act, 2012. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this Act does, it actually follows Bill 

No. 51 which is The Public Inquiries Act which we’ll be 

speaking to later today. I’m not quite sure which one us, but it 

will be up later today for debate. But Bill 51, the previous Act, 

is about public inquiries commissions and actually repeals and 

institutes a new Act. And public inquiries commissions are 

temporary bodies that are created by order in council to review 

and investigate a specific incident or matter. 

 

And this Bill No. 52, the consequential amendments Act, what 

it does is it makes consequential amendments to 45 English 

Acts and one English regulation and adopts the powers given to 

a commissioner according to The Public Inquiries Act which is 

Bill 51. So the amendments make a change to refer to the 

provisions of the new Act that correspond with the powers 

under the current Act that has yet to be repealed. 

 

So of these 45 different English Acts, it’s interesting when you 

go through them. There’s a few that jump out at me that I just 

would like to chat a little bit about. Some of the changes will 

take place . . . 

 

Section 40 of The Amusement Ride Safety Act . . . [will 

be] amended by striking out “of commissioners 

appointed pursuant to The Public Inquiries Act” and 

substituting “conferred on a commission by sections 11, 

15 and 25 of The Public Inquiries Act, 2012”. 

 

So this is about The Amusement Ride Safety Act. 

 

One thing you might not know about me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is that I actually was a carny at one point in my life, so this is 

interesting to me. Yes. I don’t think too many people knew that. 

But following the completion of journalism school, I came 

home that summer and had yet to find a full-time reporting job, 

so a friend of mine actually had just purchased a food booth 

actually that she was going to be taking around to various 

carnivals and exhibitions in Saskatchewan and Alberta. So she 

asked me if I was interested in being her employee. So this 

woman, Bernie, and I hit the carnival circuit that summer, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, which is a very interesting experience — long 

hours, not dissimilar to this job actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the long hours, long days, on the road a lot. 

 

There are things that I never thought that I would do when I 

worked on the carnival circuit. I bungee jumped, which I never 

thought I would do. I have to say I didn’t do it alone. I had to 

have someone bungee jump with me. There was no way I was 

propelling myself off a platform over a little tub of water, 

basically. 

 

I got a tattoo which . . . much to my mother’s chagrin. That was 

not a popular decision in the Chartier household, but I was 22. 

And I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I do . . . With an 

almost 15-year-old child, I’m not encouraging her to get a 

tattoo. I have to say my tattoo . . . When you get a tattoo on the 

carnival circuit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not a good idea, not a 

good place to get a tattoo. Just if I would be advising my 

children, that would be the advice that I would give them. And 

unfortunately it’s on my ankle and it was a really painful place 

to get a tattoo. So it’s a painful place to have it repaired or 

changed or removed. So I have this lasting legacy of a really 

bad carnival tattoo on my ankle, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and can 

do nothing about it. 

 

But when it comes to amusement park rides, I think the one 

thing that I learned this summer or in the summer that I was on 

the road throughout Saskatchewan and Alberta was that — 

quite amazing — you tear down in one location one night and 

have to be set up sometimes the next day in the next location. 

So carnival safety and amusement park ride safety is something 

that I became very well aware of. 

 

I know that people are often . . . The people who are doing the 

work are very skilled and know what they’re doing, but 

sometimes you’re doing it under duress and tight timelines and 

not easy conditions. But I’m glad that there haven’t been 

incidents here in Saskatchewan, at least none that I can recall in 

recent history of accidents on the exhibition or carnival circuit. 

And this particular Act, The Amusement Ride Safety Act, and 

The Public Inquiries Act, if there’s something did happen, that 

is where that, if a complaint or a review was launched, that Bill 

No. 51 actually would be responsible for that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

You think about though, with amusement park rides in 

Edmonton, and I can’t remember what year that was but when 

the roller coaster in Edmonton, when some cars jumped the 

tracks and some people lost their lives. These are very . . . 

Amusement park rides are lots of fun. Actually I would 

disagree. I’m not an amusement park ride person myself, but I 

know many people find amusement park rides lots of fun. But 

it’s important that standards be maintained and that high 

standards be maintained and that we ensure that public safety is 

foremost when it comes to something like that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So you learned a little bit about me today that I bet 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

you never knew. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and flipping through 

some of . . . This is Bill No. 52, so it’s many consequential 

amendments. One of the other Acts that is mentioned in this is 

The Heritage Property Act. And it’s amended by striking out 

the words “that are conferred on commissioners pursuant to The 

Public Inquiries Act” and that’s substituting “conferred on a 

commission by sections 11, 15 and 25 of The Public Inquiries 

Act, 2012.” 

 

So it’s interesting when we think about The Heritage Property 

Act. Actually just a couple years ago with the botched merger 

with Carlton Trail Regional College and St. Peter’s College in 

Muenster, one of the consequences of that, aside from costing 

taxpayers a great deal of money, was the loss of St. Peter’s 

College as a heritage site. In that fiasco, we lost one of our 

heritage properties. The minister was asked to dedesignate St. 

Peter’s as a heritage property, and I believe — I could be 

mistaken about this — but I believe it was the 100th year of St. 

Peter’s Abbey that year. I could be mistaken, so I just want put 

that in the record that I’m not unequivocal about that, but I do 

believe it was the 100th year. 

 

So what had happened there is some of the renovations that 

were happening. And obviously when you have a heritage 

property, you have to be very mindful of and sensitive to any 

changes that you make to the building that is a heritage 

property. And I know that summer, the summer of 2009, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I know that the renovations . . . There’d been 

some advice given to St. Peter’s and to the people doing the 

work that in order to maintain the windows . . . and that there 

needed to be some special work done. But you know what had 

happened? By December of that year, when some of the 

heritage folks came back — so December of 2009 — there was 

an elevator added. And the elevator, I wouldn’t dispute that the 

elevator’s necessary, but I would argue that you can do heritage 

. . . You can do renovations and restorations in a sensitive 

fashion. We see it in many other places in Canada. 

Unfortunately here in Saskatchewan, that has not been our 

strength. 

 

So despite the fact, the board people had been told that you can 

do the renovations, but you need the support of people who 

know what you’re doing, or what they’re doing. And they went 

ahead and made some of these changes. So they are told in July 

not . . . or to be mindful of the changes and come back a few 

short months later and the building is . . . The work has 

proceeded and it wasn’t great. So just a few short months later 

in this whole Carlton Trail, St. Peter’s College merger fiasco, 

one of the things that had happened is the board of St. Peter’s, 

to make the merger easier and more smooth, had asked for the 

dedesignation of St. Peter’s as a heritage property. 

 

But the minister actually has in his powers under The Heritage 

Property Act the opportunity to sign off quickly on that, which 

is exactly what happened. So the request came in in March, I 

believe, of 2010 and by April of 2010 St. Peter’s College was 

dedesignated as a heritage site. So we lost a heritage property in 

Saskatchewan. And the minister though, at his disposal, his 

other tool was an opportunity to take this out to the public, to 

take this out to the community and find out how they felt about 

the dedesignation. But the option that was chosen was instead 

to quickly sign off on it, which was indicative of the haste and 

the poor way about which the minister of Culture in this case 

and the minister of Advanced Education had gone about this 

whole merger fiasco. 

 

So under this, under The Public Inquiries Act, what could 

happen here is perhaps someone from the area could have made 

a complaint or . . . And I don’t know if a commission would 

have been called, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that, from my 

understanding, that would have been in the realm of 

possibilities. 

 

I think when we think about that whole, the fiasco around the 

merger, we think about the Sask Party’s $1,000 Enterprise Club 

where you were buying access or people were buying access to 

some of the Sask Party ministers or Sask Party . . . the Premier 

for that matter. So I’m glad to see that that’s come to an end. 

But I know that at that point the CEO [chief executive officer], 

I believe, had purchased that membership, or the board had 

purchased that membership for the CEO, in hopes, I’m not 

quite sure in hopes of what. But clearly it was not a good 

example of accountability and transparency, something that this 

government has said that it will be stellar in that regard, and it 

has not. 

 

So I think it’s an incredible shame that we lost a heritage 

property in April of 2010, which did not have to happen. We 

had a building, a beautiful building, that lost some of its 

integrity with the addition of an elevator. And the elevator was 

necessary but could have been done in a heritage-sensitive 

manner. The windows were changed and the windows were . . . 

They chose to go a much more inexpensive route rather than the 

route of, rather than doing what should have been done, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So as we flip through here, some of different bills that are going 

to be, some of the 45 different bills that have been amended or 

that are going to be amended, one that we find here is The 

Police Act as well. Well and it’s interesting because The Police 

Act, we know that in recent years . . . Actually I believe it was 

in 2003, in 2003-2004, unfortunately there was a public 

commission called in the death of Neil Stonechild, a young 

Saskatoon man who had been . . . Neil Stonechild had lost his 

life, had frozen to death in Saskatoon. And there was some 

concerns. There was some concerns about how he met his end. 

And so there was an inquiry called in 2003, and I’m not 

actually sure that it was under The Police Act but it was a public 

inquiry, so I’m sure it’s one of these 45 Acts that are being 

amended. So we have an example of Neil Stonechild. We have 

an example of the Milgaard Commission into the death of . . . 

pardon me, into the wrongful conviction of David Milgaard. 

 

And the one thing, Mr. Speaker, I come from a policing family. 

My father was a police officer. My dad was a police officer for 

the city. He was a police officer for 30 years. My brother was a 

police officer for more than a decade. My daughter’s father is 

still a police officer, Mr. Speaker. And so policing is near and 

dear to my heart. 

 

I grew up in a household . . . You think about, you think about 

the Stonechild Inquiry and the thing that jumps into my mind is 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

in my household, my dad was one of the hugest proponents of 

community-based policing, that policing is all about the 

prevention of crime and about relationship building. So I grew 

up in a household where, for my dad, everything boils down to 

building relationships, fostering good, strong relationships. And 

he believed that that was very much what policing, that was 

very much what policing was about. 

 

He tells stories about wearing the big buffalo coats and walking 

down 20th Street in Saskatoon. And everybody knew . . . You 

knew everybody. You knew the good guys. You knew the 

people who had some struggles and challenges by name. You’d 

go into coffee shops and you fostered relationships with people 

and that was the best way to prevent crime, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Interesting too: my dad who is almost 80, who’s been retired 

for, well since 1988 . . . My dad retired in 1988 actually to run 

as mayor of Saskatoon. He was very interested in getting the 

issue of community policing on the agenda. And I think he did 

a very fine job at that. So my first election actually when I 

turned 18, I got to vote for my dad in the municipal election, 

which was pretty cool. 

 

But policing is very much about relationship building. And 

actually it’s interesting. I’m probably the only kid who grew up 

knowing what Sir Robert Peel’s nine principles of policing 

were. And you know, I’d actually like to read them into the 

record because I am still . . . As I said, I grew up in this 

household where policing is very much about building 

relationships and that’s the best way to prevent crime — 

making sure people have what they need and you know what’s 

going on in your community. 

 

So my dad had always argued that an ethical police service . . . 

And I’m just going back here to the Stonechild Inquiry and 

recognizing that there have been major changes in policing 

since that inquiry. But some of them, you take it back to Sir 

Robert Peel’s nine principles of policing. And so what should a 

modern police service look like? I don’t want to call it a force. I 

know so many people still call police services forces, but the 

reality is they are a service that serve the public. And names — 

what’s the difference between a service and a force, Mr. 

Speaker? Well I think words are important and names matter. 

And the city of Saskatoon Police Service changed its name 

probably more than a decade ago, actually probably closer to 

two decades ago, to reflect that notion that they are there to 

serve. 

 

But just for interest’s sake, Sir Robert Peel’s nine principles — 

and this is what policing should be about. And this came about 

from actually the former, I believe he was the prime minister in 

the UK [United Kingdom] in the 1800s. But what did Sir 

Robert Peel believe? And this I learned growing up. My dad 

actually had a little . . . My parents have very interesting little 

quotes and cards pinned up all over their house that my dad or 

my mom find interesting. So Sir Robert Peel’s nine principles 

of policing: 

 

1. The basic mission for which the police exist is to 

prevent crime and disorder. 

 

2. The ability of the police to perform their duties is 

dependent upon public approval of police actions. 

3. Police must secure the willing co-operation of the 

public in voluntary observance of the law to be able to 

secure and maintain the respect of the public. 

 

4. The degree of co-operation of the public that can be 

secured diminishes proportionately to the necessity of the 

use of physical force. 

 

5. Police seek and preserve public favour not by catering 

to public opinion, but by constantly demonstrating 

absolute impartial service to the law. 

 

6. Police use physical force to the extent necessary to 

secure observance of the law or to restore order only when 

the exercise of persuasion, advice, and warning is found to 

be insufficient. 

 

7. Police, at all times, should maintain a relationship with 

the public that gives reality to the historic tradition that the 

police are the public and the public are the police; the 

police being only members of the public who are paid to 

give full-time attention to duties which are incumbent on 

every citizen in the interests of community welfare and 

existence. 

 

8. Police should always direct their action strictly towards 

their functions and never appear to usurp the powers of the 

judiciary. 

 

9. The test of police efficiency is the absence of crime and 

disorder, not the visible evidence of police action in 

dealing with it. 

 

So that, Mr. Speaker, those are the Peel’s nine principles of 

policing, and that informs what we call today community 

policing or community-based policing. That is what it’s all 

about. Community policing is not something that appears on a 

flow chart that can be cut. Community policing is a philosophy 

of how you interact with the public and how you interact with 

each other as a police service and I think it’s . . . 

 

And I know our current chief in Saskatoon, Chief Weighill, 

actually ascribes to these principles, and since the Stonechild 

Inquiry there were many recommendations. What the 

Stonechild Inquiry found was . . . Well I’m going to tell you 

what the . . . It absolutely shook up policing in Saskatoon or in 

the province for that matter. And the conclusion was that this 

young man, Neil Stonechild, had been picked up by the police 

shortly before he died on the outskirts of the city. The report 

also concluded that relations between the police and First 

Nations were problematic. And that’s a bit of an 

understatement, Mr. Speaker. The inquiry also found at the time 

of Neil Stonechild’s death, the police investigation was not 

adequate to conclude what the circumstances were surrounding 

Neil Stonechild’s death. 

 

So that was a public commission here that happened here in 

Saskatchewan in 2003 and wrapped up in 2004. And I think one 

of the ways in which the police service in Saskatoon has tried to 

tackle some of the issues that arose out of that, and recognized 

that there is a huge disconnect between First Nations and Métis 

people in Saskatoon and the police service, and that there are 

some not positive perceptions that community-based policing 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

was a way to tackle this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I know the 

chief believes and has reaffirmed that commitment to 

community policing. But my dad, who is a bit of an idealist — 

and so I come by that fairly honestly — but for my dad, there is 

no middle ground. You need to pursue absolute ideals of 

community-based policing. So I know when I speak to Rusty 

that there is always more — not unlike this current government. 

There’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But actually the opposition just, we’re actually considering 

getting T-shirts made up for government members: there’s 

more work to do, Mr. Speaker. So I think maybe they can 

expect something like that under their Christmas tree this year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But with that, the Bill No. 52, An Act respecting consequential 

amendments resulting from the enactment of The Public 

Inquiries Act, 2012 — we will be speaking to Bill No. 51 a 

little bit later today, as I said, which sort of puts things out of 

order a bit, Mr. Speaker — but I know that my colleagues will 

have a few more things to add about Bill No. 52 at which time 

they have the opportunity to speak. But with that, I would like 

to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 53 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter into discussion here this afternoon and to 

debate as it relates to Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2). 

 

Looking through and observing the pieces of legislation that are 

being repealed or the statutes that are being repealed, I’ve read 

the minister’s comments on each of those and also done some 

reflection back to, reflected back to where they began and also 

where they ended. When you think and in thinking of where 

some of these would have been brought forward, what the 

purpose was, and I guess that would have been the beginning 

and then in many ways looking through as well to see the life of 

the Act, the purpose that it fulfilled, and the utilization, and 

then in this case here, the repealing which I guess would be the 

end, Mr. Speaker, of the Act or the purpose to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and those are being important. 

 

Now the one thing I will say is that it seems that it is a fair 

comment that most of the Acts that have been put forward are 

in fact no longer relevant to our province and haven’t been 

exercised or utilized for many years. Certainly there’s a lot of 

history that’s reflected in these Acts as well, whether we’re 

talking about the upgrader or the refinery, Mr. Speaker, whether 

we’re talking about the agricultural sector or we’re talking 

about the borrowing that occurred by way of some of these Acts 

that are being repealed that tell a very important story and an 

important part of our history here in Saskatchewan about how, 

in many ways, how we have overcome some of the challenges 

of our past and some of the mechanisms that were put in place 

to address some of those challenges. 

 

I guess I would speak first off to one of the pieces that’s being 

repealed, and this is The Crown Foundations Act. And this was, 

as I understand, a mechanism that was put in place that allowed 

universities to develop foundations to support their activities 

and provide them some strength and institutional strength and 

flexibility. And there’s changes that have been made, 

subsequent to this, that no longer is this legislation necessary. 

But I don’t believe the actual certainty has been provided to 

those autonomous organizations, to our universities, by way of 

providing them security and certainty by way of their finances. 

 

And I think of the current debates that are going on, on the floor 

of this Assembly and in our post-secondary institutions as we 

speak, where we have a government that’s acted in a deliberate 

sense to put and punt $100 million of debt that was supposed to 

be financed by the province of Saskatchewan and has placed 

that on to the books of universities. And now we’re squeezing 

their operations, squeezing their operations and are causing a 

harm on those institutions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So although when we look at The Crown Foundations Act, Mr. 

Speaker, we look at it through this historical lens of how it 

played some role in providing certainty and stability to those 

universities. It’s interesting in many ways how times may 

change but the problems don’t go away. And right now I know 

there’s a lot of stress and concern for students and faculty and 

administration at our universities at a time where they’ve been 

provided a budget that’s been less than adequate in allowing 

those institutions to do what they should in being able to enrich 

and support the next generation of workers, the next generation 

of students, and also allow some level of affordability to be 

addressed, something that has significantly deteriorated in this 

very province. 

 

So I’m listening here. I’ll stop. I’ll just listen here quickly to the 

minister’s comment . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, I’m 

glad the minister has verified a question that was had before by 

one of the reporters, Mr. Speaker, and well, we’ll follow up that 

discussion, we’ll follow up that discussion at another point. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But as I’m speaking right now about the challenges and 

pressures that our post-secondary institutions are facing, I just 

find it’s interesting. We’re repealing an Act that was there at 

one point that enabled our universities to go out and provide 

some stability to their financial circumstance. But here we are 

in 2012, with a government that boasts of growth and touts 

record prosperity but yet is actively putting debt onto 

universities and causing cuts and constraint for our 

post-secondary institutions all across this province. 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

I look at the next piece here and it gets into The Vegetable, 

Fruit and Honey Sales Act, Mr. Speaker. And this Act was 

brought forward in 1947. And what I find interesting on this 

front is in many ways that it tells some of the history of this 

province and speaks to what policy-makers were addressing at a 

different time, a different place, for a different economy. And at 

that point in time, The Vegetable, Fruit and Honey Sales Act 

had an important role in providing food safety and certainty in 

allowing our product here to be exported and to be consumed 

locally as well and to build a strong local economy for those 

producers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again, as I say, it’s interesting how as much as times 

change, things stay the same. Because here we’re just at a 

different time and a different place, and we still have questions 

around food security and food safety. 

 

And currently we’ve actually had a federal government that has 

reneged from responsibilities of providing Canadians the kind 

of protection and certainty that they deserve around the food 

that hits their table on a nightly basis but also providing 

producers in this province the kind of certainty and protection 

that they deserve. Producers, I’d say, that have worked through 

some pretty tough years, Mr. Speaker, and are now being 

limited on the kind of return that they should be able to realize 

by way of actions of a federal Conservative government that’s 

deregulated and made cuts and now has made all these other 

decisions by way of reducing the role of our Canadian Food 

Inspection Agency and specifically has reduced that role here in 

our province right now and has our provincial government in 

fact now scrambling to try to put together some pieces of 

protection and make sure that our number one priority of 

providing safe food and protection to people is in place, but 

also that we’re protecting our agricultural economy and our 

producers and making sure that we’re putting our product in an 

environment that will allow us to take it to the world with the 

kind of pride that I know our producers deserve. 

 

As well, this speaks to some of the more local agricultural food 

production, and certainly we still see some of that in this 

province, and it’s something we should be continually 

supporting and enhancing. And I know the great pride that 

exists from so many of those producers of local products all 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, and the pride of a region 

around those products. And certainly proper oversight, proper 

legislation, proper protection of that food is important for its 

own reputation as well. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But where does it end? But where does 

it end? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, and the question from the 

member from Nutana again is, you know, where does it start 

and where does it end? And I guess in this piece of legislation it 

started in 1947. And it now ends this year, Mr. Speaker, in 

2012, at a time where it was seen as no longer relevant, and it’s 

revealing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we’ll move along, Mr. Speaker, looking at some of the 

other changes that have been put forward. We see changes 

around repealing The Saskatchewan Development Fund Act and 

this gets into looking at some of the investments that were 

placed by a board of directors. I guess some of the questions 

that we may have is just making sure there is proper 

transparency, oversight, and protection of those dollars by 

looking for some of the public reporting that should be 

deserved to Saskatchewan people to make sure that the dollars 

that were in place have been dealt with in a proper way. 

 

I believe this also speaks to some of the dollars that flow in 

through the provinces by way of the federal government 

through immigrant investor funds, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

one of the pieces that I’ve been critical of the current 

government is in fact they’re utilizing these immigrant investor 

dollars right now to borrow money to developers, Mr. Speaker, 

to build houses that the majority can’t afford. Sort of 

questionable policy purposes of this government, and certainly 

not the best utilization of those dollars if our end goal is to try 

to make housing more affordable or bring housing options to 

the table that address the challenges and shortfalls that are there 

for so many families. 

 

And certainly I think this is an area we really do need to be 

aggressive on in making sure that we are making the 

improvements as it relates to housing, not just tinkering around 

with market affordability as the current government is and 

supplying loans to developers to build houses that very few can 

afford but actually going at it with a true social and affordable 

housing plan and also including the role of co-operatives, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I know as well that there’s a repeal of legislation, The Cut Knife 

Reference Act. This is very practical in the changes that the 

name before was one word. The community is two words and 

that’s been changed to reflect that. 

 

I recognize the changes that have been made to repeal The 

NewGrade Energy Inc Act and that of course reflects the fact 

that that’s no longer required, that Crown corporations has 

divested themself of that holding. But it does speak back to a 

different time where governments were interested in some 

value-add and in refining capacity — upgrading capacity and 

then refining capacity — in this province and in this country. 

And this is an important discussion for us to continue to have 

because far too often we continue simply to export our raw 

goods, as opposed to providing the discussion and the tools and 

the emphasis on adding value here in our country and in our 

province, and adding jobs and strength to our local economy in 

doing so. 

 

So that’s something that I urge, when we’re looking at this Act 

that’s being repealed, that it does reflect a time where 

governments were willing to be active in promoting the kinds 

of changes that it believes supports a stronger local economy 

and supports a resource economy to be stronger than just 

simply shipping that raw product in all cases. 

 

We look as well at some of the other pieces that have been 

repealed. And I see some of The Municipal Debentures 

Repayment Act and this takes us back, I believe, all the way 

back to 1915, Mr. Speaker. And in many ways it reflects the 

province’s history of how our municipalities were able to 

acquire the financing required to invest and build our province; 

if you will, build our municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in some ways, as I say, the more things change, the more 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

they stay the same is certainly true on this one as well. We’re 

going through a time where we have some growth. We have 

population growth that’s going on. And in fact we have 

demands that are placed upon our municipalities all across this 

province — smaller communities, small towns, smaller urban 

centres, and our larger cities alike. And yet we continue to hear 

in fact that the infrastructure and the support that they’re 

receiving is inadequate to be able to address that pressure, the 

pressures of some of that growth. 

 

So it’s interesting to look back and go back to see back in 1915, 

the tool that was brought into place was this Act here which 

allowed I guess municipalities to borrow, in essence. And it’s a 

current, it’s a current issue here in this province as well about 

how do our small communities, our towns, our cities, go out 

and secure the financing they require to provide the kinds of 

improvements to our infrastructure that we require. 

 

I know, I believe going back in that history there we have, I 

think it was Prince Albert at the time that had a bit of a notable 

distinction that it had gone bankrupt as a municipality, and I 

believe it was an investment in a dam that never ended up 

producing any power. I highlight that more as an anecdotal 

piece, but it’s part of our history. And in some ways we do need 

to continue to have that discussion with our municipal partners 

in making sure that we’re meeting their needs and making sure 

we’re able to meet the needs of Saskatchewan residents, where 

I believe many of our municipalities are really in a hard-pressed 

environment to address some of the infrastructure challenges 

that they’re facing — whether it be water and waste water, 

whether it’s our physical infrastructure by way of roads and 

sewers, and so much more recreational facilities, health 

facilities and schools. 

 

But if you go to so many communities across this province, 

you’re looking at some really dated infrastructure by way of 

waste water and water treatment facilities, all coming with 

capacity pressures as well around how much capacity they 

have. And it’s a challenge that government needs to be active 

and working with our municipal partners, small towns and 

larger cities alike, to bring forward the sort of solutions that will 

address this challenge for the next generation, recognizing that 

the Act that we’re repealing here today probably provides some 

of that, provided some of those tools to the generation prior and 

has built the infrastructure that we witness across this province 

and in many ways that we’re still relying upon across this 

province. 

 

A couple of the other Acts that have been put forward speak to 

municipalities as well and speak to that they’re programs that 

no longer being exercised, that they’re obsolete. But they do 

speak back to a time in our history where, in many ways I think, 

what I’ve taken out of it is that a time of active government, 

Mr. Speaker, where municipalities and provincial governments 

alike worked together to address some of the challenges that 

they were facing and certainly have built the modern province 

that we see here today, something that’s important to us all. 

 

So I guess as I look through this repeal, this Act that’s repealing 

many pieces of legislation that have become obsolete or are no 

longer relevant, as stated by the minister, it’s important for us to 

say that we’re going to be doing proper scrutiny with our 

stakeholders, with those that are impacted, those that 

understand the intricacies and the histories of these files very 

closely to make sure that when the minister suggests that, and 

in fact an Act is now obsolete or no longer required, that that is 

the sentiment and feel by the stakeholders who are impacted. 

But it also does give us a nice window back into our history as 

a province and how we came together and how communities 

formed and how we took on the challenges and opportunities of 

different times and places — whether it be the financial tools 

for universities, whether it be the financial tools that provided 

stability for our municipalities, whether it’s some of the food 

protection measures for our local food producers, Mr. Speaker, 

or whether it was the active role that government once took to 

actually add value to our local economy and to our resources 

here in this province. 

 

There’s many aspects that highlight this theme of that the more 

things change, the more they stay the same, and that we have 

challenges that we’re facing in many of these other areas, 

whether it’s food protection, as we speak, with the cuts that I’ve 

spoken of with the federal government, and the importance to 

our producers, the importance to consumers, to our kitchen 

tables all across this province, across our country, and around 

the world, Mr. Speaker. When I look at the importance of our 

strong, proud local food economies and products that we can 

share with the world with pride and distinction that not only 

allow commerce to flow, but also pride of place for many 

communities who have been renowned with certain food 

products that are developed at a local level. 

 

And then simply looking as well that, you know, as we look at, 

you know, this is changing some of the structures that had been 

put in place for universities. Now they may no longer be 

relevant and the tools that were in place, but what are the new 

sets of tools? What’s the new commitment? What’s the new 

partnerships with our universities, with our post-secondary 

institutions to make sure that they’re able to deliver an enriched 

education that allows us to address the challenges and 

opportunities of the next generation? And just the same be able 

to do so in providing and improving affordability, something so 

important to students all across this province. 

 

So it’s been my pleasure to enter into discussion as it relates to 

this bill. I know there’ll be many other members that will look 

forward to looking through, examining, having discussion and 

consultation with respective stakeholders on this bill, making 

sure that in fact the purpose and intended consequences put 

forward and suggested by the minister are in fact the reality for 

stakeholders, and also making sure that there’s not any 

unintended consequences by way of this legislation. 

 

[16:45] 

 

I also recognize that when I saw the repeal Act here — I know 

that my friend, the member from Saskatoon Centre, and I were 

looking right away to see it — we were hopeful that there’d be 

some labour legislation, Mr. Speaker included in this repeal 

Act. The kind of . . . You know, we’re thinking Bills 5, 6, 43, 

and 80, Mr. Speaker, would be sort of helpful ones. We didn’t 

see those bills in here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we thought maybe this government, after repealing 

those pieces of legislation, one of which has been found as an 

embarrassment to this province as unconstitutional, Mr. 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

Speaker, that in fact we then could seek to enter into a 

relationship with the working people of this province in a way 

that’s fair and balanced, that reflects true consultation, and 

derives legislation that’s truly necessary, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

not intended simply to take away the rights of working men and 

women in this province. 

 

So as I say, I’ve gone through the repeal Act here, Mr. Speaker. 

Many of these pieces were brought forward at different places 

and times, such as 1915 when we brought forward, there was 

mechanisms brought forward from municipalities. There’s other 

legislation that was being pulled away that was brought forward 

for the vegetable, fruit, and honey sales or honey producers of 

this province in 1947. We also see that there are some changes 

here to those tools for the universities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I can say to Saskatchewan people is that 

I recognize that it doesn’t have within this repeal legislation the 

pieces of damaging, destructive labour legislation that’s been 

brought forward by government opposite, something that would 

strengthen workers’ rights and something that would strengthen 

our local economy. 

 

So I guess in final closing, Mr. Speaker, this tells a little bit of 

the history of Saskatchewan. This shapes in many ways who we 

are. It reflects that some of the challenges we were facing in 

certain sectors are some of the similar challenges we’re facing 

now. But when I also look at these pieces of repealed 

legislation, it also gives me a sense of hope, Mr. Speaker. A 

sense of hope, Mr. Speaker, that, working together with 

Saskatchewan people and communities all across this province, 

that one day too we can put forward a repeal Act that will 

include that destructive labour legislation that’s been brought 

forward by the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker, 

and bring forward a level of fairness to Saskatchewan workers, 

something that they deserve. 

 

So that’s something that one day we’ll work towards. We’ll 

continue to urge this government to do the right thing, but 

certainly we look forward to being able to repeal legislation that 

has hurt our local economy, that has hurt workers and threatens 

our future, and that’ll be something we can all work together, at 

least on this side of the Assembly, and a growing team along 

with Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But at this point in time as it relates to Bill No. 53, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012, I move adjournment 

of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2012 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 54 — The Seizure 

of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to enter into the debate around Bill No. 54, An Act to 

amend The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009. And I know 

it’s been a few years since the original bill’s been introduced, 

but clearly there needed to be some more work done. And this 

is an important bill for the people of Saskatchewan when it 

comes to dealing with criminal property and how it’s been used 

in the commission of a crime or as a result of criminal activity. 

And I’m thinking this is one that we could spend some time on 

because clearly it’s an important bill that we get right. 

 

You know, when you have bills that come forward as this one 

did in 2009, and here we are in 2012, just a few years later, and 

they have learned a few things about how to be much more 

effective when it comes to this, I think it’s important that we 

take the time, and we take the time during debate and take the 

time during the committee to examine fully the implications of 

the bill so that there are no unintended consequences, that we 

get it right, and that we take a look around the world — and I 

will be talking about other experiences in Canada, in the States, 

in the United Kingdom — about some background on this 

because I think it’s important as MLAs that we are brought up 

to speed on what it means when we talk about the seizure and 

the forfeiture of criminal property. 

 

And so I think that that’s clearly our task ahead of us right now 

and perhaps into the evening as well. So Bill No. 54 just really 

talks about, it looks like essentially nine amendments, and 

while they seem to be relatively straightforward, I want to give 

some background on that. We look at the original Act, The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009. And that was passed 

and became effective July 1st, 2009. And it really has seven 

sections. One talks about the preliminary matters. The second 

one talks about the forfeiture of property, how, what they’re 

going to do in terms of how to apply this law, notice of 

applications about real property, about personal property, 

interim orders, forfeiture orders, protection orders, and that type 

of thing, and then how do you do the proceedings. 

 

The third section talks about the conduct of proceedings, 

standard of proof. And that’s a big one, Mr. Speaker, when we 

talk about the implications here, the amendments that are 

brought forward, and the proof of offences, disclosure of 

interests, presumption re proceeds of unlawful activity, 

presumption from members of criminal organization, 

presumption for instruments of unlawful activity, and 

presumption re criminal organization offences. 

 

So that’s straightforward. How you can appeal, because we 

want to make sure at the end of the day that we all have our 

basic civil rights, that we are protected by the courts of law. But 

at the same time, this is a difficult one so there has to be some 

sort of sense of how do we make sure that you can appeal the 

orders, and then the decision by Court of Appeal and then no 

further appeal. And so that’s very important. 

 

It talks about the administration, director appointed, so forth, 

that type of thing. It talks about establishing the Criminal 

Property Forfeiture Fund and how that’s working. And we 



November 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

probably will have some questions about how is that fund 

operating. How many applications to it have been made? How 

the funds, what are the uses of the fund and how that’s going. 

And then just general other aspects that need to be taken into 

account. 

 

So a very thorough, very thorough original bill but as it appears, 

some of the areas need to be taken a look at. For example, 

section 2 was looked at, section 3, section 6, and section 12, 

and so on and so forth. So we have some time to talk about 

these because it’s, as I said, one that’s very critical. 

 

I just want to take a minute or two to review what the minister 

had set out. Again, you know, Mr. Speaker, it would be helpful 

if the ministers did give us a little bit more information around 

the bills, because if we are to do our work here in the House 

effectively and to make sure that we understand fully and are 

able to scrutinize the legislation, we do really count on the 

ministers to have a full and complete speech in the second 

reading. And so with that, I think I need to just reflect on some 

of the points that he made in his speech so that we can 

understand what the intent of the bill is. 

 

So he talks about what the original Act: 

 

The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2009 provided the 

authority for the provincial government to take 

responsibility for the seizure of criminal property 

processed from the police services. 

 

And while he talks about while there’s been successful seizures 

under this legislation since the Act came into play, counsel and 

operation staff have identified a series of changes to make the 

seizure process more efficient and effective. 

 

So clearly there’s been lessons learned over the last two or 

three, two and a half years, that they think they need to make 

amendments for this legislation. So we understand that and 

quite often that’s the case where we want to, we have to get the 

bill out in front. We have to get the Act actually happening and 

then we see how the wheels are running. And clearly this is a 

case of where they want to make some amendments to make 

this bill work. 

 

So the bill will amend the definition of instrument of unlawful 

activity. He says: 

 

The change will make it clear that property used to 

engage in unlawful activity but that has not yet resulted in 

the acquisition or production of property may be still 

subject to forfeiture. 

 

So there you go. So that the property used to engage in 

unlawful activity, but that has not yet resulted in the acquisition 

or production of property, may be still subject to forfeiture. So I 

guess this must be something that they’re discovering that, I 

think that’s thinking ahead of the game here and I think that 

may be appropriate. Again these are kind of the questions that 

we’ll ask in committee. What does this really mean? 

 

Forfeiture could proceed if there is evidence of the 

likelihood that the activity will result in the acquisition or 

production of property or evidence of an intention on the 

part of the respondent to attain such property. 

 

You know, I need to, I need to reflect a little bit on what my 

colleague, the member from Athabasca says, that talking about 

that you really, this is really in many ways legal language. And 

myself not being a lawyer, we would’ve appreciated some plain 

English here. Because clearly while the minister is a lawyer as 

well and this is specific, anybody reading this may feel that it’s 

not really, they’re not getting the full gist of it. So this is why 

we have committee proceedings and we’ll be talking more 

about that in committee. But I think it’s important that we 

understand that really we’re talking about property that can be 

either used in the commission of a crime or as a result of a 

crime, and so when we have these kind of changes, I do think 

it’s important for the people at home to really particularly 

watch committee meetings, hearings, when we get into that 

because we’ll have specific questions about, what do you really 

mean by that? How does that play out in the legislation? That’s 

very important. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say the bill “will also 

specifically authorize the director to make an application to the 

courts by statement of claim in addition to the existing ability to 

proceed by notice of motion.” It deals with the challenges of 

proof of ownership. And I understand that is a challenge, 

because clearly you want to make sure that you have the right 

property, that it doesn’t belong to somebody else. But we know 

this is a grey area, especially when you have criminal issues at 

hand. What’s really happening and who really owns the 

property and what is the rightful process here and what should 

we be doing? 

 

So it talks about dealing with “the challenges of proof of 

ownership by removing the requirement to name the owner of 

the property as a party to an application in all cases and extend 

the period from 30 to 60 days during which time the director 

can request an order to prevent the sale, transfer of property 

prior to bringing a forfeiture application.” So I assume what 

that really means is, it extends the period of time that the 

director has so that they can make a solid case in terms of 

whose property it is before it gets sold or changes hands, and 

then you have a problem because it’s no longer the property 

that was acquired either through the crime, either as part of the 

crime or as a result of the crime. 

 

So this is, this is very important. And, “This change will also 

provide the authority for the court to extend a restraining order 

for any further period the courts view as appropriate.” So that’s 

very, very important. And so it’s really important. The bill also 

makes “. . . procedural changes to provide for a sealing order 

regarding the respondents’ affidavits, provided that evidence of 

a person that was not charged with an offense that is [relevant 

or] not relevant in making a finding of fact in an application 

under the Act.” 

 

So it’s important that we take a look at these very specific 

comments made by the minister, and what does it really mean 

in terms of ordinary people understanding this? Because people 

should have confidence in the justice system, and clearly more 

and more around the world, we’re seeing this as an important 

component of the justice system, the forfeiture or the seizure of 

criminal property. 

 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2012 

The Speaker: — It now being at the hour of 5 o’clock, this 

House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Transgender Day of Remembrance 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2043 

 National Child Day 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2044 

 Campbell Collegiate Students Win Debating Honours 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2044 

 Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2044 

 Reclaiming Our Community 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2044 

 Regina Coronation Park Arts and Crafts Sale 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2045 

 Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip Observe 65th Anniversary 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2045 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Information Services Corporation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2045 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2045 

 State of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2046 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2047 

 Provincial Roads and Prince Albert Bridge 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2048 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2048 

 Financial Support for Universities 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2049 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2049 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 70 — The Education Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2050 

 Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 modifiant la Loi de 

 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2050 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 67 — The Community Planning Profession Act, 2012 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2051 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2051 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 2052 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 2052 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2056 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2068 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2071 

 Bill No. 54 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Amendment Act, 2012 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2074 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


