




















































Hansard: May 15, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 46A  TUESDAY, MAY 15, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1513 

 May 15, 2012 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of this 

Assembly, I’d like to welcome members of various newcomer 

communities from right across the province. We understand the 

significant contribution that newcomers are making to the new 

Saskatchewan: making sure that our province is increasingly 

diverse, dynamic, and cosmopolitan; building more inclusive 

communities, more inclusive workplaces. And I just want to 

say, on behalf of the government, how pleased we are that so 

many have come to their Assembly. And so again, to you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members to join me in 

welcoming all of these newcomers to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to make an extended introduction 

please, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to make an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

colleagues. I would like to extend a very special welcome, a 

very warm hello to all of the guests who have joined us today, 

especially those who have come to the legislature today to 

express their concerns around the Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program and the family class. Thank you to everyone 

from the community who came to the rally that was outside 

and, Mr. Speaker, I know also that there are many outside of 

this Assembly who are unable to sit in here today since it is so 

full. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we have representatives from the Pakistani 

community, the Indian community, the Bangladeshi 

community, the Sikh community, the Hindu temple, as well as 

some from the Filipino community, Mr. Speaker, and these are 

individuals from Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

I would also, Mr. Speaker, at this time send across a letter to the 

minister from the Saskatoon Gujarati Cultural Association. It 

wasn’t in the correct format for a petition, but I will share this 

with the minister as they requested me to do so. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to members of the legislature, I’d like to introduce 32 grade 

6 students from St. Angela’s elementary school in Saskatoon. 

You can give us a wave. Where are they? There they are, sitting 

in your west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

St. Angela’s is in the heart of Saskatoon Northwest, so we sure 

wish them a good visit today. With them is their teacher, Curtis 

Wagner. They’re also accompanied by their chaperones, Karen 

Janzen, Bryan Best, Sharla Bertrand, Anita Kanak, Lisa 

Laskowski, and Michelle Wessner. So I would ask all the 

members of the legislature to welcome them to their legislature 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and to all members of the legislature, I’d like to extend a 

welcome to all the folks from the film and television industry 

who are here today. They’re in the east galley and throughout 

the building, actually in room 255, which is packed. The 

galleries are packed, which I think says a great deal, Mr. 

Speaker. So with that I would like, I ask my colleagues to join 

me in welcoming the folks from the film and television industry 

to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Mr. Speaker, to you, through you, and to all 

members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 21 grade 6 

students and their teacher, Patrick Brennan, and the chaperones, 

Trevor Perkins, Rosanna Perkins, Adine Sander, and Tracey 

Hendricks. They are from the St. Anne elementary school, 

seated in your west gallery. Can you give us a wave? 

 

Mr. Speaker, St. Anne School opened its doors in 1976. The 

school was named for St. Anne, who was the mother of the 

Virgin Mary. She is often considered the patron saint for 

mothers and grandmothers. Mr. Speaker, all of my daughters 

attended and completed elementary school as well at St. 

Anne’s. Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to welcome these 

students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to rise and 

introduce to you and through you, some very special guests 

today sitting in your gallery. And if they could wave, first I’d 

like to introduce John Parry, former Member of Parliament for 

Kenora-Rainy River under . . . He served with Ed Broadbent in 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] caucus at that time. John is a 

real fighter for social justice. He lives in my riding, and I’m 

glad that he could make it and visit the House today. 

 

As well we have two very special guests that I’ve been 

spending a lot of time with. We’ve been doing these midnight 

tours. I have Aaron Nagy — Aaron — and Darren Kaytor. 

Aaron of course has done a lot of work on Jimmy’s law, and 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2012 

he’s been introduced in the House before. Many of you have 

got to know him. 

 

Darren Kaytor though, this is his first time in the House, and I 

want to pay special recognition to Darren. He’s a late-night 

retail worker. In fact Darren is a survivor of two attacks at the 

Fas Gas that he worked. The first time he was held up with a 

shotgun, and the second time with a samurai sword. And so he 

has taken this cause of Jimmy’s law to heart because it really 

means a lot; he has survived the kind of working conditions 

we’re working to improve. So I would ask all members of the 

House to welcome Darren, Aaron, and John to their legislature. 

Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present another petition calling for greater protection 

for late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we 

know that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, 

Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot two times and died from his 

injuries. He was working at a gas station in Yorkton, 

Saskatchewan, alone and unprotected from intruders. 

 

We know that from positive statistics that show that 

convenience store and gas station robberies are down by 

one-third since 1999, largely due to increased safety practices 

including two people working together on late-night shifts. But 

we know provinces have taken action, including British 

Columbia, by introducing safety precautions including that 

workers cannot work alone during late-night, early morning 

hours. And if they are required to work, they must have 

protective barriers such as locked doors and protective glass. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Regina, Moose Jaw, Yorkton. In fact today I present the 

petition that Jimmy Wiebe’s mom signed, Annie. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices, and that 

is developed through consultation with the education 

sector, and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Weyburn, Carnduff, and Swift Current. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 

petition today signed by Saskatchewan residents who are 

calling for fair changes to the Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: 

 

The family class stream of the Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program has been very effective in allowing new 

residents to establish social and economic roots in our 

province; that many families relocated to Saskatchewan 

from other provinces based on the widely advertised and 

promoted parameters of the program; that families 

uprooted their lives, sold homes, and sold businesses in 

other provinces in order to move to Saskatchewan; that 

the vast majority of families applying to the program are 

hard-working, law-abiding, and taxpaying members of 

society; that the recent changes to the family class stream 

are unnecessarily extreme and occurred without notice 

and without consultation with the community; that many 

families who are planning and expecting to access the 

family class are feeling a sense of betrayal by the Sask 

Party government; that the Sask Party government has 

failed to properly defend and promote the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program in dealing with the federal 

government. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to hold meaningful consultations with 

community members affected by these extreme changes 

to the family class stream and work towards a solution 

that adequately recognizes the good faith and sacrifice 

demonstrated by the families who moved to 

Saskatchewan, based on the promises made through the 

Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind the guests in the 

gallery that while they are welcome here, they are not to 

participate in events on the floor, which includes applause. I 

recognize the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 



May 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

present a petition today on behalf of folks who would like the 

film and television industry here in Saskatchewan to continue to 

grow and thrive. They’re concerned about the cut to the 

employment tax credit and then the government’s unilateral 

introduction of a tax credit that will do absolutely nothing for 

this industry, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan continue to 

provide a tax incentive for film, video, and television 

employment to leverage investment, employment, and 

growth in the province’s film video and television sector. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by citizens of Moose Jaw. 

With that, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — Again I remind the guests in the gallery, they 

are not to be participating in events on the floor. You’re here as 

guests of the legislature, and please act as such. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

School Supports Shannen’s Dream 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud today to share a 

meaningful project taken on by St. Bernadette students and staff 

this year, and specifically the work of teacher Ms. Karen 

Goodon. I was pleased to join with Elder Mike Pinay, teachers, 

students, and the community to recognize Project of Heart on 

April 19th and to launch the next step in their initiative, 

working towards achieving Shannen’s Dream. 

 

This project encompasses several strategies and programs that 

acknowledge and remember the lives lost in residential schools 

across Canada. Sadly, residential schools oppressed and 

segregated First Nations people and led to thousands of children 

never returning to their families or communities. The students 

created memorial tiles that will be part of a permanent 

monument that will be displayed in the Canadian human rights 

museum in Winnipeg. Each tile will represent a child’s life that 

was lost at a residential school. 

 

Further to this event, the students and staff at St. Bernadette 

have taken on a social justice issue, Shannen’s Dream. This 

project highlights the inequities in education for First Nations 

students today. And these students are calling for equal 

opportunity and fair education funding for all students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that residential schools are a sad 

part of our history, I believe all Canadians need to become 

aware and educated on this history. It truly was an inspirational 

and touching day to witness the learning of these bright 

students and their commitment to a fair and just Saskatchewan. 

I ask all within the Assembly to join with me to commend Ms. 

Goodon and the students, teachers, and administration and the 

community of St. Bernadette for their leadership and work. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

Newspaper Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A hundred years ago in 

the community of Shellbrook, a young man embarked on a 

business venture and a dream. On May 11th, 1912, Ernest 

Pickup published the first edition of the Shellbrook Chronicle. 

On May 11th, 2012, at a community event honouring a century 

of service, Clark Pepper, the current publisher, discussed some 

of the changes that have occurred throughout the past 100 

years. 

 

During this time the newspaper’s incorporated new 

technologies such as using offset print methods in the 1960s 

and incorporating computers in the 1980s. At different points in 

time, the business also published the Canwood Times, the Shell 

Lake Eagle, the Meadow Lake Progress, the Loon Lake Star, 

the Glaslyn Chronicle, and the St. Walburg Enterprise. 

 

Current publications include the Shellbrook Chronicle and the 

Spiritwood Herald. Notwithstanding the amount of change in 

the industry over this time, one constant in the business has 

been family ownership. 

 

The founder, Ernest Pickup, was succeeded by his son-in-law, 

Frank Pepper, followed by his son, Alfred Pepper, and now 

Clark Pepper, the fourth generation publisher of the 

family-owned business. Small business is the core of the 

Saskatchewan economy whether it’s an agricultural producer, 

an auto dealer, a retail business owner, or one of 

Saskatchewan’s many weekly newspapers. 

 

As many of our Saskatchewan communities celebrate 100 years 

of existence, it was an honour to celebrate a rural, 

family-owned business with the same century of service. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Community Development Leadership Gala 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On May 

9th I had the pleasure of attending the YMCA [Young Men’s 

Christian Association] of Regina’s third annual Community 

Development Leadership Gala. Every year the YMCA 

recognizes the children, youth, and young adults in their 

programs whose story inspire others to work towards building 

healthy, inclusive communities. The leadership gala raises 

funds to support the people who access the Y’s programs, and 

the money goes a long way in supporting children, youth, and 

families in our community. 

 

Perhaps the YMCA’s best known community program is its 

employment training program which trains students to be cooks 

while teaching them life skills that will apply to all workplaces. 

Students in the program learn the basics of cooking and food 

preparation while running the YMCA Community Cafe in 

addition to gaining hands-on skills in an office environment. 

What a treat it was, Mr. Speaker, to dine on the delicious food 

prepared by those students. The food was fantastic. 

 

Other programs the YMCA supports are the tomorrow’s wise 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2012 

leader program to encourage Aboriginal leadership; the 

alternative suspension program which offers support for 

students who for different reasons are temporarily suspended 

from the school they attend; and the Virtual Y program, a 

literacy-based course focusing on academic support and social 

growth to build self confidence. These are just a few of the 

excellent leadership programs aimed at supporting youth at the 

Y [Young Men’s Christian Association]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an enjoyable and worthwhile event. I would 

like to take this opportunity to extend my warmest 

congratulations to the YMCA on a successful evening. And of 

course, a special mention goes out to the talented and 

outstanding participants who continue to inspire organizers and 

instructors to continue their hard work in shaping our future 

leaders. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May is 

MS [multiple sclerosis] Awareness Month in Canada. Across 

the country, the MS Society will work to inform the public 

about their services and mission and engage supporters in the 

fight to end MS. MS is an inflammatory disease that affects the 

ability of the nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord to 

communicate properly with each other. There is no known cure 

for MS. 

 

Saskatchewan has the highest per capita rate of multiple 

sclerosis in Canada. Our government is committed to helping 

find viable treatment options for MS patients. We have 

provided $2.2 million so that people from this province could 

have the opportunity to be directly involved in advancing 

research into the liberation therapy as a treatment option for 

MS. Mr. Speaker, we are now well into the process of 

identifying Saskatchewan patients who may participate in a 

liberation therapy clinical trial in Albany, New York. 

Eighty-six randomly selected people will have the opportunity 

to be involved in this clinical trial. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is proud to be taking action in this 

area. This is a big step for MS research, for patients and their 

families. We look forward to a successful research project, one 

that will provide answers that the MS patients need and 

deserve. In the meantime, Saskatchewan remains open to 

joining other provincial or federal MS research initiatives as 

they develop. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Saskatchewan Municipal Awards 2012 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 

speak about the 2012 Saskatchewan Municipal Awards which 

took place this past Friday in Regina. Since 2006 the annual 

Saskatchewan Municipal Awards has served as an opportunity 

to recognize excellence in Saskatchewan’s municipal 

governments. 

 

The municipal awards program is a great example of success 

through collaboration. SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities], SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], RMAAS [Rural Municipal 

Administrators’ Association of Saskatchewan], UMAAS 

[Urban Municipal Administrators’ Association of 

Saskatchewan], and New North partner with Municipal Affairs 

on this valuable initiative. 

 

I’d also like to thank the municipal awards selection committee 

of Jim Angus, Holly Hetherington, Bob Linner, Murray 

Mandryk, and Senator Pamela Wallin. 

 

The awards were handed out to communities across 

Saskatchewan that demonstrated several quality municipal 

practices such as good governance, sustainability, and 

innovation. Some of the notable awards presented include the 

Municipal Innovation and Service Excellence Award to the 

town of Carrot River and the RM [rural municipality] of Moose 

Range No. 486, the Economic Development Leadership Award 

to the town of Maple Creek, the Environmental Stewardship 

Award to the town of Unity, and the Heritage Conservation 

Leadership Award to the town of Maple Creek. 

 

I would like to acknowledge the organizers, partners, and 

attendees for once again making this event a success. On behalf 

of the province of Saskatchewan, I ask all members to 

congratulate the winners of the 2012 Saskatchewan Municipal 

Awards for demonstrating municipal excellence and innovation. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

University of Saskatchewan President Honoured 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to recognize Peter MacKinnon, president of the 

University of Saskatchewan. Recently President MacKinnon 

was honoured by the non-profit Canada Public Policy Forum as 

the inaugural Prime Ministers of Canada Fellow. The Prime 

Ministers of Canada Fellowship was created to engage 

Canadian thought leaders to help guide the policy forum’s 

public service and governance work as well as recognize the 

former prime ministers of Canada for their contribution to 

Canadian good governance. 

 

Originally from Prince Edward Island, President MacKinnon 

has called Saskatoon home since 1975. He was educated at the 

University of Saskatchewan, Queen’s, and Dalhousie; articled 

in Kingston; and was appointed Queen’s Counsel in 1990. He 

was a member of the Ontario and the Saskatchewan bar. He is 

currently the president and vice-chancellor of the University of 

Saskatchewan and has long contributed his expertise and 

knowledge as a public policy leader and legal scholar. 

Regrettably he will be retiring as president effective July 1st, 

2012 after 13 years of service. 

 

President MacKinnon has authored and edited many works and 

received extensive recognition by way of professional and 

service awards, including the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal 

and the Queen Elizabeth II Golden Jubilee Medal. In 2011 he 

was made an Officer of the Order of Canada for his 

contributions to education and for his commitment to 

innovation and research excellence. 



May 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

The people of Saskatchewan are proud of their accomplished 

residents, Mr. Speaker, and it’s truly special to speak about 

such a recognized contributor to our province and Canadian 

society. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Natural Resources Policy 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan NDP strategist Erin Weir has revealed that the 

Saskatchewan NDP supports federal NDP leader Thomas 

Mulcair’s assessment that the way to create manufacturing jobs 

in eastern Canada is to kill resource jobs in the West. 

 

In a column in the May 11th Saskatoon StarPhoenix, Weir 

called Mulcair’s now infamous Dutch disease comments a 

balanced approach and said the solution is to increase royalty 

rates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Erin Weir was responsible for costing out the 

NDPs platform — disastrous 2011 election platform — as 

noted in the October 21st, 2011, StarPhoenix column entitled, 

“NDP platform begins to resemble a wholesale shopping 

spree.” The NDP platform that Mr. Weir endorsed prescribed 

the same bad medicine — a massive increase in royalty rates 

that would have killed thousands of jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now instead of standing up to the federal NDP’s attack on our 

resource sector, the Saskatchewan NDP is now defending their 

federal leader from Quebec and agreeing with his assessment 

that the way to help job creation in the East is to kill jobs in the 

resource sector in the West. So has that NDP learned anything, 

Mr. Speaker? Absolutely not. Fortunately Saskatchewan voters 

remember how the NDP’s destructive economic policies have 

crippled our economy in the past, and they’re not going to let it 

happen again. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Immigration Policy 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Immigration has 

always been part of Saskatchewan’s story. While the sending 

countries have changed over time, Mr. Speaker, the desire for 

families to start a new life and to look out for one another and 

support one another has been constant. That’s why the NDP 

introduced the family class stream within the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program. Saskatchewan people understand 

that in order to have strong economic ties there needs to be 

strong social ties, and that means families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Sask Party recently gutted the family class stream of the 

immigrant nominee program, and the minister admitted in 

committee that this was at the urging of the federal 

Conservatives. My question to the minister: why was he so 

quick to follow the urging of the federal Conservatives and gut 

the family class stream of the immigrant nominee program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as we were first elected in 2007, one thing was 

obvious is that the NDP, for all the rhetoric, had put little 

attention into immigration. That was obvious from the numbers, 

Mr. Speaker. And so, Mr. Speaker, the track record of the 

members opposite when it comes to population was seeing 

people leave the province. That needed to change, Mr. Speaker, 

and we’ve made a number of changes along the way. Every one 

of those, Mr. Speaker, have been contemplated. Every one of 

those, Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken a lot of time to think about. 

 

We actually are defending the family category, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why what we’ve said with these recent changes is 

actually we’ll take a quarter of the provincial nominee program, 

the SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program], and 

we’ll actually continue to dedicate it to families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now there are some people, Mr. Speaker, that would have us 

change that. For example, The StarPhoenix has recently had an 

editorial on May 3rd where they’ve said, “Let feds decide 

family eligibility.” Mr. Speaker, this is not our approach. We’re 

actually focusing on protecting, sustaining, and securing the 

family class, Mr. Speaker, when it . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can try to spin these 

changes as improving the program, but families in 

Saskatchewan know that’s ridiculous. The families that came to 

the legislature today know that is ridiculous. People see, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Sask Party government is gutting the family 

class and essentially turning it into a work permit program and 

rendering it useless for reuniting loved ones here in 

Saskatchewan. Successful immigration requires social ties, Mr. 

Speaker, and that means families have to matter. 

 

My question to the minister: does he admit that his decision to 

follow the urging of the federal Conservatives is short-sighted 

and it will hurt hundreds of families here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue to 

focus on protecting the family class category. Mr. Speaker, 

there are some changes that we’ve had to make to improve the 

program. 

 

First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, we have had to ensure that 

there is greater connectivity between the labour market needs, 

where today there are more than 11,000 jobs open and available 

in Saskatchewan, and the provincial nominee program. And I’ll 

quote, Mr. Speaker, from the federal minister: “I believe it is 

important that non-labour market streams within your 

respective PNP’s be closed and phased out.” 

 

We actually disagree with this, Mr. Speaker. We disagree. What 

we’ve said is, let’s make sure we can protect this. Yes, there 

have to be greater connections to the labour market, but we also 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2012 

want to make sure it’s continually fair for Saskatchewan 

families. It’s one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve also 

come forward and we’ve said, let’s make sure that each family 

can, one at a time, continue to sponsor other family members. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the minister’s 

defence of gutting the program, he’s been talking about families 

that have been nominating too many people and using an 

example of 20 people as one instance. And perhaps that is true, 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps. But with my experience, most 

individuals that I have spoken to want to nominate two, three, 

or four people — a couple of siblings or a niece and a nephew, 

for example. 

 

The minister is using the typical Sask Party approach of taking 

an outlier, presenting it as the norm, and then using that as 

justification for taking extreme measures, Mr. Speaker, in this 

case gutting the program. If the minister was really concerned 

about the number of people, he could have taken a 

compromised position of two, three, or four concurrent 

applications. 

 

My question to the minister: why is he suggesting to the honest 

families who are here in Saskatchewan that they are looking to 

take advantage of the SINP simply as a means for him to justify 

his gutting of the program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we’re actually 

working to protect the family class program, Mr. Speaker. What 

I can report is that there are 560 families, most of them 

newcomer families, that have a range between 3 and 18 

nominations, not simply for individuals, Mr. Speaker, but in 

fact for other families. Mr. Speaker, given the other family class 

members that are sponsoring only one at a time, we thought it 

was fair for us to be able to focus on the same opportunities for 

all of those families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to recognize that we have a 

federally mandated cap of 4,000. The members opposite, well 

they were so poor at immigration, Mr. Speaker, the notion of 

having a cap imposed, they didn’t need it. For example in 2003, 

173 newcomers arrived, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this year 

alone we’ll have 12,500 people arrive through the provincial 

nominee program. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to sustain it. We’re 

going to make sure it continues to be credible, that it continues 

to be recognized among the best in Canada. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, people that are concerned about 

this process may actually agree that there needs to be some 

changes, some sort of cap. Their position, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the minister’s position has been too extreme and hurts families. 

 

The minister has also suggested that he has needed to gut the 

program because of immigration fraud, Mr. Speaker. I think 

this is an insult to the many families who have followed the 

rules and who have come here and have now established roots 

here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In my experience, the 

immigrants that I’ve met are among the hardest working and 

the most honest people that I have met among those people, Mr. 

Speaker . If the real problem is immigration fraud, Mr. Speaker, 

then why not crack down on the bad apples as opposed to 

gutting the program and causing harm for so many families? If 

people are cheating on taxes, Mr. Speaker, we go after the 

specific people cheating on taxes, not make onerous rules so 

that everyone suffers. 

 

My question to the minister: will he admit that the real reason 

for gutting the program is not immigration fraud, but it is once 

again the Sask Party’s inability to ever stand up to the federal 

Conservatives and defend Saskatchewan’s interests? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we are standing up for 

Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. We are continuing to 

focus on fairness for Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. We 

know how important immigration is today in the new 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that is a stark contrast to when 

the members opposite were in power, Mr. Speaker — the 

number of 173, Mr. Speaker. This year we’re going to see 

12,500. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do need to make sure, we do need to make 

sure that we recognize the contributions of all newcomers. That 

being said, we have put in place, because it wasn’t in place 

under the other folks, we put in place a program integrity unit to 

make sure that for the hard-working families, those newcomers, 

Mr. Speaker, that are the overwhelming majority, we can 

actually crack down on those bad apples, that we can identify 

them, Mr. Speaker, and we can make sure that there is integrity 

in the system. That way when we talk about to Ottawa 

increasing that cap from 4,000 to 6,000, Mr. Speaker, they 

know that it’s a credible voice right here in Saskatchewan on 

behalf of all the people in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve met hundreds of people who 

have moved here to Saskatchewan from places like Montreal, 

Vancouver, and Toronto because of their understanding, Mr. 

Speaker, that they could sponsor loved ones through the family 

class. These individuals in other cities, they sold businesses, 

they sold houses, they took children out of schools that they 

were comfortable in, Mr. Speaker, and came to Saskatchewan. 

Since coming, Mr. Speaker, they’ve started businesses, they’ve 

purchased houses, and they’re paying their taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

These individuals have lived up to their end of the bargain and 

they’re asking this minister to stay true to the promises made 

through the program so that they are able to sponsor their loved 

ones that come here to Saskatchewan. 

 



May 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

My question to the minister: what does he have to say to the 

hundreds of people that are here in the Assembly today, Mr. 

Speaker, and the hundreds throughout Saskatchewan that are 

concerned with these changes and are feeling betrayed by the 

Sask Party government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 

nominating family members — and we know how important 

that is, Mr. Speaker — what the member opposite either doesn’t 

know or isn’t talking about is that the provincial nominee 

program has a family referral class, Mr. Speaker. It’s still 

within the economic stream. It’s the federal government that 

has a family reunification class. And so what I would say 

directly to those, as I have over the course of five years of 

working with newcomers, Mr. Speaker, we are here to help. We 

are here to ensure that if it is about family reunification, then 

let’s work together through the federal stream that focuses on 

family reunification and ensure that more families have more 

opportunities to enjoy the benefits of being here in 

Saskatchewan — benefits, Mr. Speaker like having the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country, Mr. Speaker, benefits like 

having record employment, Mr. Speaker, and the only balanced 

budget among any Canadian province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if this is the minister’s idea of 

helping immigration and helping Saskatchewan families in 

Saskatchewan, he needs to rethink his course of action. Since 

he’s announced that he’s gutting the family class, Mr. Speaker, 

I’ve been contacted by scores of people who feel like their lives 

have been turned upside down. They’re now struggling with the 

task of telling an overseas relative, Mr. Speaker, whether they 

can or cannot come, recognizing that there were perhaps two, 

three, or four that were considering coming. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, are feeling betrayed, but they’re 

also being very reasonable and being very measured in their 

response I think, Mr. Speaker. Members that I’ve spoken to are 

asking for some sort of compromise from the Sask Party 

government to recognize the sacrifice and the goodwill that 

they have made in coming to Saskatchewan, in playing by the 

rules, and in wanting to sponsor their loved ones. They’re 

asking for some sort of grandfathering provision, some sort of 

allowance to recognize the people that came here under the 

existing rules. 

 

My question to the minister: will you sit down with 

representatives today, hammer out some sort of compromise 

that recognizes the important commitment these people have 

made to Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we have newcomers 

arriving from 180 different countries. They are settling in more 

than 320 Saskatchewan communities. And the answer is, 

including just today, of course we’ll continue to meet with the 

newcomer communities, Mr. Speaker. Of course we’re going to 

continue the dialogue, Mr. Speaker, the dialogue that has seen 

record immigration. Mr. Speaker, the only thing that the 

member opposite can have reference to are the tens of 

thousands of people that used to leave Saskatchewan. We have 

more newcomers in Saskatchewan today than we’ve had for 

decades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re intent on sustaining our provincial nominee 

program. We are intent on ensuring that we have secured and 

can sustain the family class category. We’re committed to 

having a quarter of our Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 

program, Mr. Speaker, committed to families. That’s fair for all 

families, Mr. Speaker. It’s connected to the labour market, Mr. 

Speaker, and it ensures that immigration will continue to be a 

key priority for Saskatchewan for years to come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, many new Canadians have 

chosen to build their lives in Saskatchewan. Many have joined 

us here today, providing a tremendous opportunity. But this 

requires support for English as an additional language 

education, something we’ve been calling for all session long. 

 

Unfortunately government has brushed off those concerns. It 

has gotten to the point, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatoon 

Catholic board has had to send a letter out to parents to call on 

the government to address this matter and as well to highlight a 

shortfall that exceeds $6 million and its reality — cuts and the 

impacts on students. Mr. Speaker, quite simply, English as an 

additional language education is underfunded. Mr. Minister, 

Mr. Speaker, how is this fair to students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have answered this 

question a number of times in this Assembly as well as in 

estimates in committee. And I guess I need to remind him again 

that the Government of Saskatchewan does not directly employ 

the employees within school divisions. That is decisions made 

by school divisions. They do the staffing and they are the 

employer. As such, the number of English as an additional 

languages has been increased quite considerably over the last 

few years. 

 

I know that the Saskatoon school divisions are struggling with 

their budget allocations even though the Saskatoon Catholic 

School Division has received just about a 6 per cent increase 

and the Saskatoon Public School Division has received a 7 per 

cent increase. Both school divisions are still not at the student 

enrolment levels that they were in 2001-2002. However they 

are seeing an increase in students each and every year and we’ll 

be working with them on how to address that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister represents a 

picture that’s different than the reality that boards are facing, 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2012 

that students are facing. Another one of those major challenges 

that school boards and students are facing is enrolment growth 

that is not funded by this government. Saskatoon Catholic 

expects an additional 500 students next year with no funding 

from the government to provide for their educational needs. For 

Saskatoon Public, it’s over 700 additional students. In Regina, 

it’s hundreds of students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead of listening to educators, educational leaders, and 

parents and students, the minister shamefully accused them of 

crying. Mr. Speaker, this is something that needs to be 

addressed this year. It’s about meeting the demands of growth 

by funding boards of education on the number of students in the 

actual year. Why can’t this government step up and make this 

commitment to students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as I’ve 

identified in these same questions in the past, in actuality the 

funding that the school divisions have received is more than, in 

the case of Saskatoon Public, and just 55 students less than, in 

the case of Saskatoon Catholic, than the enrolment that they 

have today. We used the numbers of September 1st. 

 

Yes, we’re having the conversation of how we address 

projected increases in enrolment and we said that our ministry 

will be working with the Advanced Education, Employment 

and Immigration in order to get those numbers. And we are 

going to be making adjustments to the funding formula when 

we have the discussion of things we can do to strengthen it in 

this fall. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all those conversations are taking place. I 

know that the members opposite like to stand up and have a lot 

of outrage over conversations that are taking place. What is not 

going to be tolerated is going back to the NDP, in which case 

the school divisions had to go to the taxpayer time and time and 

time again because the NDP underfunded education and the 

property tax payer picked up the tab. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Education minister 

tries to stand up and say that the budget’s a good deal for 

students. What we’re hearing from the school board Chair in 

Saskatoon is that it’s been the most challenging in recent 

memory. The government preaches growth, but fails to respond 

in a responsible fashion in education for students. All session 

we’ve been making education our priority. We put forward and 

championed solutions for English as an additional language and 

enrolment growth pressures. Instead of working with the 

education sector, students, and parents, the government has 

brushed off these concerns and belittled educational leaders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a dynamic time in Saskatchewan, a time that 

requires responsive government focused on responsible growth. 

When is this minister and that government going to make 

education a priority in our growing province to meet the needs 

of students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] . . . 

education, as I said in the last answer, we used to be heavily 

reliant on property tax funding and now it isn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve increased the provincial share of funding to school 

divisions by 62 per cent — more than the NDP. And now our 

government funds education by over 65 per cent through the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Property tax used to be increasing by an average of 5 per cent 

per year; now they’re not, Mr. Speaker. Our government now 

sets the property tax mill rate and we’ve reduced property tax 

burden by 165.7 million. We used to have tax revolts in our 

province, Mr. Speaker; now we don’t. We used to have 

crumbling schools around our province, Mr. Speaker. Now 

we’ve invested half a billion dollars in school capital projects. 

The school division debt used to be hidden, Mr. Speaker; now 

it’s open and it’s transparent. The development of child care 

space didn’t happen in our province, Mr. Speaker; now we’ve 

increased child care by 42 per cent and pre-K 

[pre-kindergarten] programs by 85 per cent. You know what, 

Mr. Speaker? We’ve done all that with a balanced budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is 

virtually the only provincial leader in Canada who doesn’t 

support his province’s film and television industry. From BC 

[British Columbia] to Newfoundland, these premiers get it. 

Even Republicans in the United States get it and support their 

film industries. Last week both Democrats and Republicans in 

Ohio supported that state’s film tax credit. The Bill’s 

Republican sponsor said, “Expanding the successful film tax 

credit program means more economic development, more jobs, 

and more opportunity for our state’s economy to grow and 

prosper.” 

 

Why is the Premier so bound by his ideology that he’s the only 

one in North America who refuses to get it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

been very clear that the old refundable tax credit which was just 

a grant would be withdrawn. We don’t give grants to 

businesses, and we can’t support a program that benefits 

companies that don’t even pay income taxes in Saskatchewan. 

It’s time for a new approach based on sustainable growth and 

tax fairness — one that benefits all film, video, and yes, digital 

companies too, that do pay income tax here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about ideology. Where will we get the 

money? Well we’re not going to get it by clawing back funding 

from farmers and municipalities like the provincial NDP leader 

would have us do. And we certainly won’t get it by destroying 

the energy industry like the federal NDP leader would have us 

do. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to get the money from existing 

revenues within our balanced budget, the only balanced budget 

in Canada. 

 



May 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The real choice the 

Premier is making is to lose the people and the companies who 

help pay for the services we all value like health care and 

education. The Premier refuses to get it. This is about arts and 

culture, but it’s also about business people and those they 

employ who pay corporate taxes, income taxes, sales taxes, fuel 

taxes, property taxes, and others. 

 

The Premier can make a choice. Will he do the right thing for 

the people of Saskatchewan, get back to the table with the film 

industry and find a solution that works for everybody? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we certainly recognize that in moving away from the 

old model of direct grants and the bidding war that goes along 

with it, we are in fact taking a different path than other 

provinces that have retained and in some cases even enhanced 

their old program: provinces like New Brunswick with its $200 

million deficit; provinces like Manitoba with a $600 million 

deficit; and how about Alberta with an almost $900 million 

deficit? 

 

That’s not to say that their film tax credit programs alone made 

balanced budgets impossible for them to achieve. Not at all. But 

it is true to say that continued fiscal prudence and discipline 

here in Saskatchewan by this government, including difficult 

choices like replacing the old FETC [film employment tax 

credit] program with something that is more sustainable, is 

what has allowed us to table a balanced budget, and again, the 

only one in the entire Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Protection for Night Shift Workers 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Time is 

running out on this session, but there’s still a major issue that 

needs to be dealt with and that’s the protection of late-night 

retail workers. 

 

Since introducing Jimmy’s Law, which would offer protection 

for late-night workers here in the province, I have toured retail 

outlets in the eight communities late at night to see what’s 

already in place. In places where there is protection, like people 

working together or a barrier, there’s a feeling people are much 

more safe, and they’re comfortable as opposed to those who are 

working alone without any protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a definite need for some form of 

protection for these workers. Will the minister agree to getting 

something done sooner rather than later? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I answered 

questions on this earlier and at that time I offered sympathy on 

behalf of all members to Jimmy Ray Wiebe’s family and 

friends. Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the opportunity to 

restate that our sympathy is very much with his family and his 

friends, and I very much want to commend the friends for their 

work and the support that they’ve given. And I think everything 

that the government does should be done in his memory and 

recognition of the contributions that were made by the family 

and friends in support of late-night workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite and advise the 

Assembly that our workers at OH & S [occupational health and 

safety] have ramped up inspections. They’ve worked with a 

number of employers that were not in compliance. Employers 

are required to have a plan in place to assess risk and provide 

some, a system of protection. We will be doing regulations that 

will go further, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And we 

know that in the last year, there’s been at least a dozen 

dangerous occurrences at late-night outlets including the 

shooting death of Yorkton’s Jimmy Ray Wiebe. And Sunday 

morning we heard about Sunday’s incident here in Regina. It’s 

just the latest episode of late-night workers in a dangerous 

situation. These are not the safest jobs, and if we can do more to 

protect them, then we definitely should. 

 

Now it is encouraging to hear that we have people going out 

and inspecting, but we need more than that. We need laws. We 

need regulations that really safeguard people late at night. What 

concrete plan of action does this minister have to bring in the 

changes that would provide greater protection to the province’s 

late-night retail workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. I’ve met with the member, and we’ve had discussions 

with him and with officials from the occupational health and 

safety unit. We know, Mr. Speaker, that we want to have 

regulations that will work well, that will include things such as 

physical barriers, notices to customers that cash is limited, good 

lighting, visible cameras, alarm buttons. We are not going to go 

out and do a knee-jerk reaction and mandate that two workers 

be provided at any given time. Mr. Speaker, having two 

workers on site does not guarantee that there’s any safer 

situation. We saw the situation in Kyle, Saskatchewan earlier 

where two workers were murdered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will have a careful, reasoned analysis, and that 

will be done soon, Mr. Speaker. And we will implement 

regulations that will work and will provide good safety for our 

workers. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we will continue with 

ramped-up enforcement. We are doing that now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2012 

Ministry Partners with First Nation to Provide 

Child and Family Services 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 

to rise in the House today to inform members about an 

important initiative under way to provide timely and culturally 

appropriate child and family services to children, youth, and 

families in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The Ministry of Social Services is working with the Lac la 

Ronge Indian Band and family services agency to begin the 

transition of child welfare services for children and families in 

La Ronge and area by December of this year. 

 

One of the key themes of the Saskatchewan child welfare 

review panel’s final report and of our government’s child 

welfare transformation strategy is the need to work differently 

with our First Nations and Métis partners. This partnership is an 

excellent example of what we’re doing right now. The Lac la 

Ronge agency provides quality culturally sensitive services to 

all clients in the La Ronge service area, and it is the first First 

Nations agency in all of Canada to be accredited by the 

Canadian Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation 

Facilities. 

 

In January of 2011, the ministry entered into a service 

agreement with the La Ronge agency to provide after-hours 

emergency child welfare services off-reserve in the La Ronge 

area. Under this new agreement, the agency would also assume 

child protection services, child services including foster care, 

extended family care, and other out-of-home care for children; 

also recruitment, retention, and support of foster families and 

other family givers; and service to 16- and 17-year-olds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under our current arrangement, confusion often 

arises due to the splitting of responsibilities on- and off-reserve 

between the ministry and the La Ronge agency. This new 

arrangement will reduce duplication of services and lessen the 

likelihood of clients falling through the cracks created by two 

service providers among a population that regularly moves on- 

and off-reserve. It also saves on time and resources, ultimately 

providing better services to the area residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the staff in our La Ronge office have done an 

excellent job of serving the people of La Ronge and area 

despite ongoing recruitment and retention challenges in the 

North, and I want to sincerely thank them for their hard work 

and their dedication. I look forward to a new and expanded 

relationship with the La Ronge agency as we continue to work 

together towards better outcomes for northern children, for 

families, and for youth. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few things 

to say here. I want to commend actually the La Ronge Indian 

Band and child and family services for doing the work that 

they’ve had to do in working with the ministry to take over 

child and family services, Mr. Speaker. There’s report after 

report that points to the need to right the wrongs that have taken 

place over the past, and one of the ways to do this is to make 

sure that First Nations and Métis people have some more 

control or autonomy over the services that are important to 

them and important to us as Saskatchewan citizens. So it’s been 

very good work on the part of the Lac La Ronge agency, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As well, looking at foster care numbers, we have seen in the 

last couple of years a slow decrease, but numbers are still 

higher than they were a few years ago, Mr. Speaker. And one of 

the things that the Children’s Advocate highlighted is social 

determinants of health being absolutely critical, whether it’s in 

a First Nations system or in the Saskatchewan ministry system 

of child welfare. The reality is social . . . The child welfare 

review panel found that poverty-related conditions are at the 

heart of the challenges affecting children, youth, and their 

families. So this goes to income and income distribution, 

education, unemployment and job security, early childhood 

development, food insecurity, housing. So until, Mr. Speaker, 

until we start to address some of those systemic issues and 

those social determinants of health, we will still have far too 

many children in care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I do want to congratulate once again the Lac La Ronge 

Indian Band child and family services for the work. And I think 

the ministry is definitely moving in the right direction, so I 

commend her for that work in that regard. But I think we would 

all, including the Children’s Advocate, be very happy to see the 

government look at a holistic approach when it comes to the 

social determinants of health and seeing what puts kids in care 

in the first place. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I 

had the opportunity at Regina’s Balfour Collegiate to officially 

launch our government’s latest investment in post-secondary 

students and post-secondary education. I’m delighted that I was 

in some very good company with some great friends and 

government MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] — 

the MLA from Regina Douglas Park, the MLA for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, the MLA for Regina Dewdney, the MLA 

for Regina Walsh Acres, and the MLA for Regina Northeast. It 

was a terrific morning to be with such good friends and good 

colleagues and most especially to be able to learn as much as 

we did with the students. 

 

This morning I was pleased on behalf of the Premier to 

announce the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, an 

investment of more than $4.5 million that will provide all new 

Saskatchewan grade 12 graduates who enrol at the 

Saskatchewan post-secondary institutions with up to $500 per 

year to a lifetime maximum of $2,000 over the course of their 

studies. The scholarship is going to actually help reduce tuition 

for students entering post-secondary programs after April 1st of 

this year. 

 

The new scholarship provides an incentive for all high school 

graduates to pursue a post-secondary education. This 

government understands the importance of post-secondary 

education. We are committed to making post-secondary 

education increasingly accessible and affordable for more 



May 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

students. We also understand how important it is to connect the 

endeavours of learning with those of earning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, overall our government invests almost $10 million 

a year in scholarships. Mr. Speaker, this is a record. We’re also 

committed to ensuring that there is a full continuum of support 

for students. The Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, Mr. 

Speaker, the new Saskatchewan opportunities and innovation 

scholarship, Mr. Speaker, for those already enrolled and, Mr. 

Speaker, the graduate retention program, Mr. Speaker, the most 

progressive and aggressive youth retention program across the 

country offering post-secondary graduates up to $20,000 back 

just to stay in Saskatchewan and succeed in their work and 

raising their families and helping to revitalize our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know how important it is for Saskatchewan 

students to have affordable and accessible linkages into 

post-secondary education. We also understand the significance 

of having that education and skills training and transferring 

from learning to earning, Mr. Speaker. Today in Saskatchewan 

there are more than 11,000 jobs open and available, and this 

scholarship, the Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, is going 

to allow more students to have more education. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thought 

you were going to get the egg timer into play there. But it’s a 

pleasure to stand and respond on behalf of the official 

opposition to the announcement made today. Of course any 

dollars that are brought forward from the members opposite in 

aid of more affordable post-secondary education, we think 

that’s a good thing. 

 

What we worry about — and the minister made the connection 

explicitly in his remarks and it’s certainly here in the written 

remarks that were provided to the official opposition before 

question period, and we thank the minister for that courtesy — 

we’re worried about what happens when you give on the one 

hand and then take on the other. So if we’re into an era where 

tuition increases are going back up, scholarship monies are 

given on the front end. Are they going to be eaten up by the 

tuition increases on the back end? And again, Mr. Speaker, this 

budget, we need to look no further in terms of that dynamic. 

 

So we’re glad to see the increased scholarship on the one hand. 

But on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, our concern remains about 

those gains, those advantages being eaten up by tuition 

increases on the other hand. So we’ll be watching how this 

plays out for the next gain in terms of affordability and 

accessibility for students. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Parent: — To make an introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Parent: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to all 

members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 21 grade 6 

students and their teacher, Patrick Brennan, and chaperones 

Trevor Perkins, Rosanna Perkins, Adine Sander, and Tracey 

Hendricks. They are from St. Anne Elementary School, seated 

in your west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, St. Anne School opened its doors in 1976. The 

school was named for St. Anne who was the mother of the 

Virgin Mary. She is often considered the patron saint for 

mothers and grandmothers. Mr. Speaker, all of my daughters 

attended and completed elementary school at St. Anne School. 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to welcome these students to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

[14:30] 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report that it has considered 

certain estimates and to present its first report. I move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on the Economy: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy now be concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Does the Assembly approve the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its first report. I 

move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services be now concurred in. 

 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2012 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Human Services: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services now be concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Vice-Chair of the 

Standing Committee on House Services. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on House Services to report that it has considered 

certain estimates and to report its second report. I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Vice-Chair of the 

Standing Committee on House Services: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to . . . No. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 399 through 402. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Deputy Whip has tabled 

answers to questions no. 399 to 402. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — I’ll call the committee to order. The business 

before the committee is resolutions for final supply. I recognize 

the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 

Chair, I’ll move to resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31 of 

2012, the sum of $284,624,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

for the public service for the fiscal year ending March 

31st, 2012, the sum of $284,624,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the committee agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Resolution no. 

2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2012, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

on March 31, 2013, the sum of $10,000,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2012, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

on March 31, 2013, the sum of $10,000,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the committee agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



May 15, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Resolution no. 

3: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 

2012, the sum of $130,987,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 3: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2012, that the sum of $130,987,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the committee agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Resolution no. 

4: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 

31st, 2013, the sum of $10,552,644,000 be granted out of 

the General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 4: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2013, the sum of $10,552,644,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the committee agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Resolution no. 

5: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2013, which to the extent that they remain unexpended 

for the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year 

ending on March 31, 2014, the sum of $275,300,000 be 

granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 5: 

 

Resolved that making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on the account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2013, which to the extent that they remain unexpended 

for the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year 

ending on March 31, 2014, the sum of $275,300,000 be 

granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the committee agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I 

move that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave 

to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved that the 

committee rise and that the committee has agreed to certain 

resolutions and asks for leave to sit again. Is the committee 

agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. The committee stands adjourned. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 

same, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I move that the resolutions be now read 

a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2012 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 44 — The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 1) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that 

Bill No. 44, The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 1), be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 44, The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 1), be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — By leave of the Assembly and under 

rule 72(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 44, The Appropriation Act, 2012, (No. 1) be now 

read a second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 

the meeting of the committee this afternoon, I move that this 

House be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — Before calling the question, I would like to 

remind all members that the CPA [Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association] annual meeting will be taking place 

immediately in the Chamber. And that meeting is for all 

members. 

 

The Government House Leader has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:44.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

  Parent ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1513, 1523 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 School Supports Shannen’s Dream 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 

 Newspaper Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 

 Community Development Leadership Gala 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 

 Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1516 

 Saskatchewan Municipal Awards 2012 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1516 

 University of Saskatchewan President Honoured 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1516 

 Natural Resources Policy 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1517 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Immigration Policy 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1517 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1517 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1519 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1519 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1520 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1520 

 Protection for Night Shift Workers 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1521 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1521 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Ministry Partners with First Nation to Provide Child and Family Services 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1522 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1522 

 Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1522 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1523 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1523 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1523 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1524 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1524 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1524 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1525 



  

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 44 — The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 1) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1526 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


