




















































Hansard: December 03, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 22A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 3, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2317 

 December 3, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would respectfully ask for 

leave to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to make an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a very 

special introduction to make to you and then through you to all 

members of the Assembly. Joining us in your gallery — and 

I’m going to ask for forgiveness on some pronunciations, if I 

get them wrong, ahead of time — but joining us in your gallery 

is Ms. Tahera Hussain Karimi. She is a 15-year-old student at 

Luther High School here in our capital city of Regina. 

 

She is accompanied by her grandmother, Fatemah Mohammadi. 

I understand that it’s her grandmother’s birthday today, and we 

have permission to acknowledge that as well on the floor of the 

Assembly. She’s also joined by her aunt, Zahra Karimi. Her 

host in Regina is Cameron Ulledal. He’s joined us, as well as 

the president of Luther College, Dr. Bryan Hillis. I had a chance 

to find out about our guest from Dr. Hillis when we recently 

met. We invite them to take their seat, and I’ll proceed with the 

introduction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tahira and her family are Afghan refugees who 

came to Saskatchewan in 2008. When they arrived, their first 

priority was to ensure that Tahira had surgery for her cerebral 

palsy. This was arranged thanks to the generosity of a surgeon 

who waived his fee at the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

which covered the health costs. I’m happy to report Tahira’s 

recovery has exceeded everyone’s expectations. She has been 

able to attend school, thanks to some good work by the former 

Education minister and the Ministry of Education in terms of 

her required status as a full-time student, as well as a special 

bursary offered by Luther High School. Tahera is an avid 

wheelchair basketball player but I understand, I think she’s 

taking a break this year to focus on her studies. As a young 

Afghan woman, she considers it a blessing to be able to attend 

school. 

 

When she first arrived — I think I have this right — she 

received a gift, an anonymous gift of about $200 and she 

thought that was pretty special. So in her spare time she’s been 

giving back, Mr. Speaker. She was touched by the generosity 

she received when she arrived in Saskatchewan so she’s now 

raising money to help refugees who come to this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very special guest indeed that we can 

welcome today to her Legislative Assembly and I ask that 

members would join me in doing that now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’ll join with the Premier and welcome this 

remarkable family, this remarkable young student that’s joined 

us here today along with President Hillis of Luther College. 

And certainly what I’ve observed, what I’ve heard, is a 

heartwarming story that reflects the compassion of our 

community, the compassion of our province, and then reflects 

the giving back of a very special young lady and a very special 

family. 

 

I’d like to thank her for her contributions. I’d like to thank their 

family for coming here today to support her as well. And I’d 

like to thank the host, Cameron, who’s here today as well, the 

host family for all the support. This in many ways reflects the 

caring province that we are. Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce someone that is very well 

known to everyone in this Assembly. That is Mr. John Hopkins, 

the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina & District 

Chamber of Commerce. John and team have made many 

contributions and have offered many accomplishments through 

the chamber of commerce. Most recently they’ve played a key 

leadership role in holding and hosting the All Nations Jobs 

Expo, and we’ll have more to say on that. 

 

I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming CEO John 

Hopkins to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too, on 

behalf of the official opposition, would like to join in 

welcoming the chamber of commerce, Regina and region, CEO 

John Hopkins to his Legislative Assembly. As we well know in 

this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, John Hopkins is a passionate 

individual who plays a very active role in the public policy 

discussions in Regina region and indeed in Saskatchewan and, 

when it comes to First Nations and Métis engagement in the 

economy and the labour force in particular, has played a 

standout role and something that we’re very grateful for, not 

just in Regina and region but right across this province. 

 

So I join with the member opposite in welcoming John Hopkins 

to his Legislative Assembly and say, keep up that great work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce some students from the great community of 

Gravelbourg, Collège Mathieu. And there’s three grade 10 

students in the west gallery, accompanied by their teacher, 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

Raymond Michaud. And the students are Sydney Auger, Wade 

Auger, and Jamie Otterson. Just give us a little wave. I’ll have a 

chance after question period to meet with these students and 

hopefully answer some of their questions, and have the normal 

photo. 

 

So I’d ask all members to please join me in welcoming them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan people 

from across our province as it relates to disappointment with 

our provincial finances. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Moose Jaw, Weyburn, Regina, and Buchanan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition by individuals concerned with better cellular 

telephone service in northern Saskatchewan, particularly in the 

Northwest, Mr. Speaker. The petition’s prayer reads as follows: 

 

Undertake as soon as possible to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cellular service to the Canoe Lake First Nation along with 

the adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation and the community of Turnor Lake, 

including the neighbour communities of each of these 

areas. 

 

These petitions are signed by good citizens from Patuanak and 

Turnor Lake. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

 

International Day of Persons With Disabilities 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 

this House to advise all members that today has been 

proclaimed International Day of Persons with Disabilities in 

Saskatchewan. This year’s theme, as chosen by the United 

Nations, is removing barriers to create an inclusive and 

accessible society for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this theme is relevant here in Saskatchewan where 

our government has recently committed to developing a 

comprehensive disability strategy. We will work with our 

partners in the disability community to focus on five main goals 

identified in the plan for growth in the 2012 Speech from the 

Throne. These goals are reducing barriers to accessible housing, 

making transportation more accessible, increasing employment 

and education opportunities, supporting community inclusion, 

and supporting caregivers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this day is an opportunity to promote increased 

awareness of disability issues in our province and to celebrate 

the important contributions that persons with disabilities make 

to the quality of life we enjoy in Saskatchewan. The first annual 

public service disability forum will be held this week in Regina. 

Employees from around the province will attend the forum to 

learn more about persons with disabilities in the workplace and 

ensure they are treated with respect and dignity. 

 

Working together, we will ensure Saskatchewan is the best 

place to live in Canada for people with disabilities. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the United Nations has 

declared today the International Day of Persons with 

Disabilities. As a person with a learning disability, I recognize 

the importance of thanking the many people who work to level 

the playing field for people with different disabilities. For 

example, in my community the Gary Tinker Federation works 

tirelessly to ensure that people with disabilities in northern 

communities are given opportunities to work and learn. They 

also give ongoing support for those individuals, their families, 

and their workplaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many incredible organizations like the 

Gary Tinker Federation all across the province that work to 

improve the lives of people with disabilities. In our school 

systems, we have amazing teachers and support staff that 

dedicate their lives to students. They ensure students learn how 

to work with their disabilities and to proudly achieve their 

goals. 

 

Throughout the years we have learned that by supporting and 

accepting those with disabilities, they can learn to work with 

their disabilities and become very successful. However, there 

are still many who struggle, and it is because of the good work 

of these organizations and individuals that we are reminded to 

embrace and accommodate all. I and others have learned how to 

overcome some of the challenges along the way. Many of us 

discover our strengths. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

organizations, schools, and the many dedicated individuals that 

work to support people with disabilities. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

All Nations Job Fair 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

week several MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], led 

by the Premier, had the pleasure of attending a very important 

event here in Regina, the All Nations Job Fair. This fair was 

organized by the Regina & District Chamber of Commerce and 

supported by the Ministry of the Economy. 

 

Its goal was simple: to help make Aboriginal people aware of 

the many opportunities available here within the Regina area 

regarding employment, and the skills training they may need to 

secure that employment. And it was a tremendous success, with 

more than 50 employers participating and about 1,000 people 

attending. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Regina chamber for 

its efforts. 

 

The Assembly should know the chamber’s outreach to the 

Aboriginal community goes beyond this one event. It has 

established an Aboriginal employment liaison position to better 

develop connections between employers and Aboriginal 

communities here in the province. This person of course will 

work to recruit Aboriginal workers for chamber members. He 

or she will also develop an ongoing relationship for the 

chamber with the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council, 

individual First Nations, and the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations]. 

 

Additionally, this liaison officer will help to develop a series of 

information sessions for chamber members on Aboriginal 

history and culture, sessions that will deal with the impact of 

residential schools, the importance of treaties, and provide 

greater understanding of Aboriginal ceremonies such as the 

sweat lodge and the pipe ceremony. Raising awareness in this 

manner is smart and progressive. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 

the Regina & District Chamber of Commerce for this initiative. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Publishing House Celebrates Anniversary 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This month Purich 

Publishing Ltd. in Saskatoon is celebrating its 20th anniversary 

in business. Purich Publishing specializes in books on 

Aboriginal and social justice issues, law, and Western Canadian 

history. It is a specialty publishing house that focuses on books 

of a multidisciplinary nature for audiences such as universities, 

colleges, and reference markets. It makes a concentrated effort 

to publish Saskatchewan authors and does so very successfully. 

And although it’s based out of Saskatchewan, 75 per cent of its 

sales are outside of the province, both nationally and 

internationally. 

 

The most well-known book Purich has published is Law, 

Agriculture, and the Farm Crisis by Donald Buckingham and 

Ken Norman. It has also published two books: Treaty Promises, 

Indian Reality by Harold LeRat and Linda Ungar; and the book 

Two Families, written by Harold Johnson. These books are used 

to explain treaties and First Nations issues in schools across the 

province. 

 

The owner of this unique business is Donald Purich who has 

been with the business from day one. Before opening up his 

own publishing house, he served as director for the University 

of Saskatchewan Native Law Centre and also practised and 

taught law. And I was fortunate enough to be his student in my 

first-year property law class which I really enjoyed. His partner, 

Karen Bolstad, joined in 1999 after practising law for 19 years. 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating Purich Publishing 

Ltd. on its 20th year anniversary. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Habitat for Humanity Writes Success Stories 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise in the House to speak about a Habitat for Humanity 

sod-turning ceremony. Now because of the weather, Mr. 

Speaker, it kind of turned into a snow turning ceremony that I 

was able to attend on November 30th. 

 

Our government is very proud to help Habitat write success 

stories across our province and to help make the home 

ownership dreams of Saskatchewan families come true. 

However some families need a helping hand to realize that 

dream. As a result of the partnership between Habitat and North 

Ridge Development Corporation and with the $50,000 

investment from the province through the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation, we’re going to help another family’s 

dream come true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is growing. Our economy is growing. 

And our government is committed to keeping that momentum 

going with our plan for growth. That includes making sure that 

there’s an adequate supply of safe and affordable housing 

across Saskatchewan. But we can’t possibly achieve that goal 

alone — no government can. What we can do, Mr. Speaker, is 

work with our valued partners like Habitat for Humanity to 

achieve real, tangible results like the one we celebrated on 

Friday. By all of us working together, we are making 

Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, and raise our 

families. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Nipawin Seniors’ Facility Observes Anniversary 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in the House to talk about the 30th anniversary of Pioneer 

House that I attended last Friday in Nipawin. 

 

Thirty years ago, a group of people saw the potential of this 

housing model. Today we can all be proud of the results of that 

caring and hard work. Pioneer House provides 61 homes for 

Nipawin and the area seniors so they can enjoy a good life in 

their community and have a safe, quality, and affordable place 



2320 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

to call home. 

 

Over the years, it has taken consistently strong leadership, 

commitment, energy, and enthusiasm on the part of the board 

members, tenants, and community to make Pioneer House what 

it is today. This is what it’s really all about, working together to 

find better ways of doing things and to help others. 

 

Collaboration between governments, community organizations, 

citizens, and the housing sector is necessary as we work to 

address the challenges of our province’s growth and economic 

momentum. Our goal is to continue to build on the quality of 

life as well as a sense of community and the pride that the 

people of our province have always had. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating Pioneer House 

on its remarkable achievement. You should be very proud of 

helping to make a real difference to the lives of seniors. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Celebration in Rider Nation 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I was 

pleased to be able to attend the official kickoff for the 2013 

Grey Cup, which will be hosted right here in Regina. Mr. 

Speaker, nearly 1,000 fans, the majority of which were dressed 

in the colours of the Rider nation, attended the kickoff at the 

Agribition building. The party brought the iconic Riderville 

venue back to Regina for the kickoff of the 101st Grey Cup, 

which treated fans to live music and draws throughout the night, 

with the best dressed two fans winning the first set of Grey Cup 

tickets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the logo and theme for the 2013 Grey Cup were 

both announced at the party, the theme being Celebration in 

Rider Nation. Mr. Speaker, regarding the theme, Roughriders’ 

CEO Jim Hopson really wanted to make sure it was about the 

whole province and the Rider fans. Mr. Speaker, more than 200 

volunteers on 20 subcommittees are currently planning the Grey 

Cup festivities and over more than 3,000 volunteers will be 

needed for the event. 

 

Saskatchewan has a strong history of hosting world-class events 

from the World Junior Hockey Championships to Canadian and 

world curling events and, Mr. Speaker, all of them have been 

hugely successful, and it’s because of the people of 

Saskatchewan. They’re what make our province great. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the province will once again rise to 

the occasion and put on a world-class event and that the 

Celebration in Rider Nation will be the benchmark for all Grey 

Cups to come. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Tuberculosis Prevention 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend, 

we learned of a confirmed case of a University of Saskatchewan 

student infected with tuberculosis. This of course is concerning 

to everyone in Saskatchewan, especially those who are working 

or studying on campus. 

 

My question to the minister: could he please provide an update 

to the House about what steps are being taken in order to ensure 

that TB [tuberculosis] is not spread on campus? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can confirm, as the 

member said, over the weekend the public learned about a case 

of tuberculosis at the University of Saskatchewan. Since that 

time, letters have gone out to students and faculty who may 

have come in contact with the individual that tested positive for 

tuberculosis. As well, testing clinics have been arranged for, on 

campus, for the dates of December 3rd and December 4th, and 

within 48 hours of those tests being taken, the status of that 

individual can be confirmed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would encourage all those who have been 

contacted by the Saskatoon Health Region, who maybe have 

come in contact with this individual, to take advantage of one of 

these two dates to get tested. And we can then go from there in 

terms of those individuals’ health care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the minister 

for that update. 

 

While many may view TB as an illness of past decades, it sadly 

continues to affect many people in Saskatchewan and, given its 

highly communicable nature and the mobility of Saskatchewan 

residents to travel throughout the province, its continued 

presence is certainly a serious concern to everyone. 

 

My question to the minister: could he please provide the House 

with the Saskatchewan infection rates of TB over the past 

recent years and outline where cases are most prevalent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, certainly I think that it 

would come as a surprise to many individuals in this province 

to know that tuberculosis is still a serious concern for a number 

of Saskatchewan residents, something that I certainly was 

surprised to be made aware of not long after becoming Minister 

of Health. 

 

We spend in this province $2 million annually on tuberculosis 

prevention and a control program, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we do know that rates in Saskatchewan are higher than 

the Canadian average. That is why, Mr. Speaker, we are 

working with a group made up of Health Canada, First Nations 

and Inuit health, the Northern Inter-Tribal Health Authority, the 

TB control portion of my ministry, as well as our regional 

health authorities to develop a comprehensive five-year 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

tuberculosis strategy. And I hope to have more to say about that 

in the new year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Evidence shows that 

TB disproportionately affects residents of northern 

Saskatchewan and Aboriginals. And while treatment and testing 

are vital and needed, what’s truly needed is an approach that 

addresses the social determinants of health, which determines 

who contracts TB. 

 

I applaud the steps that the health region has been taking as well 

as many of the initiatives that the minister just highlighted. But 

what’s really needed, Mr. Speaker, is a focus on improving the 

living conditions for many of Saskatchewan residents, some of 

the poorest residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the minister: does he recognize that the 

continued prevalence of TB is directly tied to the social 

determinants of health and, if so, what is he doing to address 

these root causes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, while I think it’s important 

to stress once again that we are working to implement, to 

develop and then announce and implement a five-year strategy 

for the control and reduction of tuberculosis in Saskatchewan, 

currently through largely the Saskatoon Health Region as well 

as our northern health regions and the Ministry of Health, we do 

have a TB control and prevention program in place. And a part 

of that, Mr. Speaker, is a combined clinical, population health, 

social, and community approach, which we believe is essential 

in addressing tuberculosis in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that being said, we know that not just through this 

case at the University of Saskatchewan but as well, Mr. 

Speaker, largely in northern Saskatchewan, this is an issue of 

great concern for this province. And as I said before in my 

previous answer, that’s why we’ll be addressing it through a 

five-year strategy to be released in the new year. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that goes beyond just the 

Ministry of Health. We’re going to be working with a number 

of partners. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, world leaders are meeting today 

in Qatar to talk about responses to climate change, but here in 

Saskatchewan the Sask Party is taking us backwards. They’ve 

drafted watered-down responses to climate change since day 

one. They haven’t even proclaimed their own legislation about 

managing greenhouse gases, meaning nothing is enforced, and 

so emissions have gone up every single year of the Sask Party 

government. Now Saskatchewan has the highest greenhouse gas 

emissions in the country. And instead of concrete actions, the 

Sask Party is tweaking the definitions of who will be regulated. 

 

Last week, the government released the concerns that have been 

raised about their code, and those concerns are many. In fact, 

whole industries are to be left out of the regulations. Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister: exactly how many emitters will be 

required to reduce their pollution and greenhouse gas emissions 

under this draft code? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you to the member for the question. That’s the 

second time that the topic of greenhouse gases has been brought 

up in the legislature. Certainly it’s something that we take very 

serious. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has a commitment to reduce 

greenhouse gases by 20 per cent from the 2006 level. It’s 

something that we are working on to reduce, in partnership with 

businesses in the province. Certainly we’re wanting to work 

together. The Environmental Code is one way to do it. The 

Environmental Code is an innovative way of ensuring that those 

goals can be reached together, that we continue to have the 

fastest growing economy in the country, but we do so in an 

environmentally sustainable way. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the code is weak and the 

regulations aren’t finished yet. But the question was how many 

emitters will be required, how many emitters will be required to 

reduce their pollution and greenhouse gas emissions? How 

many? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, 

the code is anything but weak. The code is leading the way. The 

code is looking at how Saskatchewan is being innovative. 

Recently, as I mentioned before in this House, I had an 

opportunity to meet with colleagues, ministers of the 

Environment from across the county. Those were very 

interested in the leadership that Saskatchewan is providing. 

 

Provinces such as Manitoba, provinces such as Nova Scotia 

have asked us for more information on how we’re doing it, on 

regulation-based results, Mr. Speaker. What we’re doing is 

ensuring that the resources that the Saskatchewan government 

does have, the Ministry of Environment does have, can be 

addressed towards those emitters. And we’re doing so in a way 

that’s leading the country, and we’re asked for more 

information. So we’re very proud of the work that has been 

done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps my 

microphone isn’t working well. I asked the minister twice now, 

how many emitters will be governed under the new code? 

 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. The code provides an equal and level playing field for 

all businesses in Saskatchewan, for all areas. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

something that again we take great pride in, that we’re leading 

the country in. Mr. Speaker, on Thursday last I had the 

opportunity to speak in front of a mining symposium where 

people from across the country were there. It was put on by the 

Canadian Institute and certainly they were very impressed with 

the work that’s been done. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, you know, as was the process under 

members opposite, the Premier gives out awards for those that 

go above and beyond. The people that worked on the 

Environmental Code should be very proud. They received the 

Premier’s Award this year, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I can put the minister 

out of his misery. The government’s code only includes about 

29 of the large emitters, based on the projections that they have. 

The province’s largest emitters do not, though, take up the bulk 

of the emissions coming into the province. Mr. Speaker, 

roughly two-thirds of the province’s greenhouse gases will now 

fly under the radar, based on this new code. Emissions are 

growing every year and yet the goalposts keep getting moved 

backwards. It’s a race to the bottom instead of aspiring to be 

green leaders for this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how on earth will the province meet any of its 

targets when the Sask Party has no plan for over two-thirds of 

the emitters? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it is a fact of life that 

in Saskatchewan we rely on coal for electrical generation. 

Provinces such as Manitoba are blessed with an abundance of 

hydro. In fact in the 1970s, when Manitoba was going forward 

with their hydro, we were buying up potash mines that we 

already owned, Mr. Speaker — something, something that was 

a big mistake by members opposite. 

 

What we’re doing in the area of coal is well-known, again 

across the country and should be well-known to members 

opposite. Clean coal technology is something that’s leading the 

way. We have the fastest growing economy in the country, Mr. 

Speaker, but we also have the responsibility to ensure that we’re 

innovative and leading the way. That’s indeed what we’re doing 

in clean coal. We’re doing other things in oil and gas and others 

if there’s more questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand the 

clean coal technology will reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 

1 per cent, and that’s simply not enough. The facts are that the 

Sask Party has done as little as possible on the environment. In 

a month where the province is experiencing freezing rain in 

December, this is unacceptable. 

 

The Sask Party has reduced its own targets, reduced its own 

targets from 32 per cent to 20 per cent in reductions. Fact. And 

they changed the threshold year from 2004 to 2006. Fact. The 

Sask Party hasn’t even proclaimed their own legislation yet. 

Fact. And the Sask Party is now excluding two-thirds of the 

province’s emissions from its own regulations. Fact. Mr. 

Speaker, emissions continue to grow. Fact. 

 

When will the Sask Party step up to the plate and deal with the 

province’s obligations to the world and reduce pollution in our 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, an 

interesting fact is that there has been freezing rain in 

Saskatchewan in December for many, many years certainly. 

 

What we’re doing is taking a responsible, balanced look at 

greenhouse gas emissions and how we can move forward and 

ensure that any regulations are done in a responsible way that 

ensures that we have a continued growing economy here in 

Saskatchewan as well as doing it in an environmentally 

sustainable way. 

 

I had an opportunity just last month, or two months ago, to talk 

to my colleagues, the ministers of Environment across the 

country. We had an opportunity to talk about what 

Saskatchewan is doing, the leadership that we were showing. 

And indeed that is recognized by those individuals across the 

country. It may not be enough for the members opposite. 

 

We’re working closely with the federal government. The 

federal minister was in Saskatchewan to announce the 

equivalency agreements on coal-fired electricity, Mr. Speaker, a 

fact that works well into the future. Members from all types of 

organizations were there, and indeed they conceded that the 

Saskatchewan government is leading the way . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question please. I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Immigration Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been seven 

months since the Sask Party government pulled the rug out 

from under many Saskatchewan families when it decided to gut 

the family class stream of the Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program. This left many families feeling betrayed in 

the province, families that moved here based on the promises 

made by the minister and the Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Betrayal was added to by confusion when the minister promised 

he would work for some sort of compromise, but then in reality 

didn’t even try. Mr. Speaker, some have suggested that the 

province essentially ended the family class stream in order to 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

buy favour with the federal government in hopes of increasing 

our SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program] 

allotment from 4,000 to 6,000. 

 

My question to the minister: is this true and, if so, what SINP 

increase is being given to the province this year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member’s 

question, no, it is not true. We have indicated to the federal 

government that we would like to see an increase in the 

provincial nominee program from 4,000 to 6,000. It’s a 

program that’s working extremely well here in Saskatchewan. 

We exceed the federal numbers in terms of the number of 

immigrants that have moved to Saskatchewan. We have a very 

good retention rate and we have a very good wage rate, all of 

which exceed federal standards. 

 

So what we indicated to the federal government is, is if you’re 

looking for a jurisdiction that has demonstrated very, very 

positive and good results, look to the province of Saskatchewan 

for that. We also have said that, in terms of immigrants, we 

welcome people from around the world. We’ll continue to do 

that. Much was done under the former administration. 

Unfortunately the results under the former administration were 

nowhere even close to what they are today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 

October, the Provincial Ombudsman agreed to review the 

changes that were made to the SINP, to evaluate them for 

fairness, giving an objective opinion. It’s my understanding, 

Mr. Speaker, that the investigation is still under way and a 

report won’t be provided during this fall sitting. It will be 

coming after, at some point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: if the Ombudsman rules that 

Saskatchewan families have been treated unfairly, and if he 

states, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial government has not 

acted responsibly in standing up for Saskatchewan families here 

in the province, will the minister pledge to follow 

recommendations that are provided by the Ombudsman? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I sat 

down with the Provincial Ombudsman with respect to this 

issue. We had a very good discussion about it. We indicated 

that the province is willing to look at flexibility within the rules. 

If an individual had started the process, actually had started 

down the road to an application, then we’d be prepared to look 

at it. He thought, I believe, that that was a reasonable position 

on behalf of the provincial government. We indicated that we 

would provide all of the information and be as co-operative as 

we could be in terms of the investigation that he’s conducting. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Immigration is most 

effective when the creation of strong social ties is taken into 

consideration along with our economic priorities as a province. 

After all, many of us can think of our own family experiences 

of our previous generations coming to the province, 

homesteading here in Saskatchewan, working together as 

families to start a new life. 

 

But sadly under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 

retreat from building strong social ties when it comes to 

immigration, preferring to view people only in economic terms. 

This does not serve our province well over the long run. 

 

Today the minister will give first reading of The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act. Can the 

minister please state how this legislation will respect the need 

for strong social ties along with our economic objectives? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the history around 

immigration in Saskatchewan is really quite interesting. From 

2001 to 2006 under the NDP [New Democratic Party], there 

were about 8,000 newcomers come to the province of 

Saskatchewan. Since 2007 there are 39,000 people that have 

immigrated to Saskatchewan, fully just under seven times the 

number of people who have immigrated to Saskatchewan under 

this administration compared to the last number of years under 

the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we indeed are putting legislation forward with 

respect to immigrants. We want to ensure that they are not 

taken advantage of in any way here in Saskatchewan by what I 

would call unscrupulous activities. This is legislation and I 

think, I’m hoping that the NDP will support. We want to ensure 

that immigrants come to Saskatchewan are here in a manner 

that meets with their expectations of a good place to be. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important for those working 

in the field of immigration that they act honourably, Mr. 

Speaker, and that they live up to their commitments. It is 

equally important, Mr. Speaker, for provincial government to 

live up to the commitments that it makes to Saskatchewan 

families to move here to the province. 

 

We have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where many, many people 

move to this province based on their understanding of the 

widely advertised parameters. Parameters, Mr. Speaker, that 

this government changed without notice, that left a sense of 

betrayal with those individuals, Mr. Speaker. And then 

confusion was added when the minister said he would work for 

a compromise, but it turns out he didn’t really do anything. 

 

My question to the minister: does he think it’s fair for the 

people that moved here to the province under an existing set of 

rules to have the rules changed in the middle of the game and to 

be left with a sense of betrayal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 



2324 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting the member’s, 

the premise of his question is, is basically that if he were in 

charge he would do better. The facts of the matter are not the 

same. He is suggesting that if the NDP were in government that 

they could do better. But yet when the federal immigration 

minister sat a few, Justice minister sat a few feet away him, 

well he missed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he wants to be the Leader of the Opposition and 

the premier of the province of Saskatchewan. When he had 

opportunity to lead, when he had opportunity to demonstrate his 

vast persuasive skills, what did he do? He did absolutely not a 

thing on behalf of the people that he now claims he represents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

State of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has used 

plenty of spin as it relates to its budget. However an editorial in 

The Star Phoenix sums it up this morning that it is “. . . thanks 

more to good luck than sound fiscal management . . .” that they 

claim a balance. After cutting through the spin, it is evident that 

this government is adding more than $1 billion to our provincial 

debt this year alone. An online commentary states, “I like Brad 

Wall. I voted Sask Party last election. But I don’t like when the 

numbers are played around with. Tell us the truth.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to his increasing debt, why won’t 

that minister simply be straight with Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan 

has the only balanced budget in all of Canada. This is the result 

of the fact that we have a growing economy here in 

Saskatchewan, an economy that’s getting more diversified all of 

the time. When one area of the economy is underperforming a 

little bit, we see other areas, the economy picking up the slack 

and demonstrating a continued balanced budget here in 

Saskatchewan. We will make that and continue to make that a 

priority of this government now and well into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Late last year 

the Sask Party raided more than $120 million from SaskPower 

after they had promised they wouldn’t take any money, Mr. 

Speaker. Now at mid-year that government is causing 

SaskPower to borrow an additional $149 million more than they 

had budgeted. That’s a pretty direct line, Mr. Speaker. And the 

consequences and the impacts on people are also pretty direct, 

for example, a rate hike of almost $100 million being forced 

onto ratepayers, families, and businesses.  

 

How can the minister pretend that this rate hike that he’s 

bringing forward and the SaskPower debt increases are 

anything but a direct increase of his reckless cash grab? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan following 

the NDP administration, there were many, many areas of 

infrastructure deficit here in our province. SaskPower is now 

backfilling all of that infrastructure deficit left by the previous 

members. We have $9.8 billion of capital infrastructure now 

taking place in Saskatchewan and will be playing out over the 

next number of years. In the similar period of time under the 

NDP, they invested about 3.2 billion. So we are investing today, 

Mr. Speaker, over three times what the NDP did in terms of 

infrastructure with respect to SaskPower. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that government is 

increasing debt by more than $1 billion this year alone. But not 

only that, they’re also draining our rainy day fund. A 

StarPhoenix editorial criticizes their plan of drawing down the 

rainy day fund in “. . . what are the great times won’t be enough 

to carry us very long when times get tougher.” It goes on to say, 

“Counting on good luck alone isn’t enough.” 

 

This is a government, Mr. Speaker, that in its short tenure has 

drained more than $2 billion from our rainy day fund, that has 

drained more than $2 billion from our Crown corporations. 

When will that minister recognize that good luck just simply 

isn’t enough? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The good luck that the people of 

Saskatchewan have is frankly the fact that in the past provincial 

election they did not support the $5 billion plan that the NDP 

would’ve put us in deficit, Mr. Speaker. That’s the good luck 

that the people of Saskatchewan have. 

 

We are blessed with a very, very strong economy here in 

Saskatchewan: the highest per cent increase in investment in 

new housing construction, investment on non-residential 

building construction; the second highest percentage increase in 

average weekly earnings, manufactured sales, international 

exports, retail sales, housing starts. The list goes on and on and 

on, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the positive news that there is 

about the economy of Saskatchewan. And it’s high time that the 

members opposite got on the same page with the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, public debt impacts all of 

us, whether it’s the more than $1 billion that’s being added to 

our provincial books this year alone, whether it’s the forced rate 

hike on the power bills of Saskatchewan people and families, 

whether it’s the huge debt being pushed onto universities and 

onto the backs of students, or whether it’s the skyrocketing debt 

of municipalities, our cities and towns all across our province. 

In one way or another, Saskatchewan people are impacted and 

on the hook for debt, whether it’s through hikes in our property 

taxes, hikes in our power bills, or hikes in tuition fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why does this minister dismiss his role in all of 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2325 

these increases and the real and direct impacts on Saskatchewan 

people all across our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

have a choice. They can believe the critic opposite or they can 

believe the credit rating agencies that take a look at provinces 

from all across Canada. They’ve indicated to the province of 

Saskatchewan, they’ve given us an upgrade to a AAA rating in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One would wonder if the member opposite put his finances of 

his personal finances related to his campaign at that same kind 

of scrutiny, whether or not you’d have the same AAA rating. 

 

[14:15] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Community Rink Affordability Grant  

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

is my pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to inform the 

members about a new program my ministry has delivered this 

fall. 

 

One of the advantages of our growing province is our ability to 

invest further in our communities. This fall our government 

kept an election promise and announced the community rink 

affordability grant. This grant program provides $2,500 per 

eligible ice surface to help fund operating costs and minor 

capital upgrades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say the response has been 

fantastic. Already we have paid out more $1.5 million to 

community rinks all across the province, and I am very pleased 

to announce as well that we have recently expanded the 

program to include land under federal jurisdiction, including 

indoor rinks on First Nations as well as the ice surface at 15 

Wing Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard directly from First Nations communities 

that this type of grant program can help increase activity levels 

for residents and improve their overall quality of life. That is 

exactly what the community rink affordability grant strives to 

do, improve our quality of life, so we are happy to extend this 

program to First Nations rinks. We have extended the 

application deadline to December 21st, Mr. Speaker, so that 

these additional communities have time to apply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the grant is administered by one of our partners, 

the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association, and I 

would like to thank them for their help in delivering this 

program. Our government has committed $1.9 million to this 

program. As our province continues to grow, our government 

will continue to ensure Saskatchewan people benefit from that 

growth. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and first of all thank 

you to the minister for the remarks. And I want to start by 

addressing here the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation 

Association who administers the community rink affordability 

grant. The Parks and Recreation Association is a big part of 

keeping our province healthier and active and connected to 

community. 

 

I know personally in my travels around Saskatchewan and 

visiting some of the rinks in Saskatchewan, the huge heating 

costs, sometimes upward of $10,000 a month, Mr. Speaker, in a 

couple of rinks as well as some of the capital issues that you 

experience in very old rinks are the melting . . . You’ve got 

overhead heaters in some of these old rinks that melt the ice 

along the edge, Mr. Speaker. So I know that there’s no doubt 

that communities and those who operate rinks are appreciative 

of this. 

 

And I know from my own years growing up . . . Actually I grew 

up a block away from the Kinsmen rink in Saskatoon. Two of 

my brothers were hockey players. It’s about hockey. It’s about 

ringette. It’s about figure skating. But it’s also about those 

opportunities for families to come together and skate and 

connect and enjoy spending time together being physically 

active. 

 

So this is, I think, a very good start. The community rink 

affordability grant is a really great start but, as this government 

likes to say, that there is more work to do. And that is a bit of an 

understatement when you talk to some of those in the 

community who have some serious issues in infrastructure in 

their communities. But with that, again I’d like to commend the 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association for all the 

good work that they do. Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment 

and Immigration Services Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 

No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration 

Services Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 84 — The Common Business Identifiers Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 84, The 

Common Business Identifiers Act be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister, first 

reading of Bill No. 84, The Common Business Identifiers Act. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to move second reading of Bill No. 80, An Act to amend The 

Power Corporation Act, henceforth known as The Power 

Corporation Act. I’m somewhat amused by my colleagues’ 

thoughts that as we introduced this, the lights dimmed slightly. 

It has nothing to do with the introduction of this whatsoever. It 

has everything to do with the careful management of resources 

of SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has a responsibility to provide safe, 

clean, and reliable power to the people of Saskatchewan and 

industry here in the province, and the amendments to the Act 

will enhance SaskPower’s ability to do so. No substantive 

amendments have been made to the Act since 2004, and the 

power industry in the province have undergone considerable 

change in the past eight years. As Saskatchewan’s primary 

supplier of electricity, SaskPower is committed to supporting 

economic growth and enhance the quality of life in the 

province. Because of this growth, SaskPower is facing 

unprecedented growth in the years going forward. Its current 

infrastructure is aging and inefficient to meet the province’s 

growing demand for electricity. 

They are entering a new era of building and renewing the 

province’s electrical system. This brings a once-in-a-generation 

challenge: balancing the incredible growth and change, and 

maintaining positive customer relations in providing an 

affordable, reliable product to the people of Saskatchewan. To 

address this, SaskPower is making a multi-year capital 

investment of over 10 to $13 billion to renew and develop 

necessary infrastructure. As SaskPower plans and builds for the 

future, they must also ensure meeting increasingly stringent 

environmental regulations. The corporation has a 

comprehensive 40-year outlook in place that will help 

determine the best options to power our province today and into 

the decades ahead. 

 

Key projects for the corporation include the continuation of 

world-leading carbon capture project at Boundary dam in 

Estevan, outside of Estevan, construction of a carbon capture 

test facility at the Shand power station that will allow 

international developers to evaluate the full performance of 

their systems, and the automated metering infrastructure or 

smart meter project. This is an exciting time to be a part of the 

power industry here in Saskatchewan. 

 

In order for SaskPower to make the most of this opportunity, 

changes to this Act are required. SaskPower’s borrowing limits 

have remained unchanged since 1987 and it must increase if 

SaskPower is to make the substantial capital expenditures 

required in the coming years to meet the province’s growing 

energy requirements and continue to support the province’s 

growth. 

 

SaskPower seeks the power to enforce North America wide 

standards for the reliability of electrical power transmission. 

SaskPower has the power to adopt or implement reliability 

standards but requires the tools to ensure that standards are met 

throughout all of Saskatchewan’s power system. 

 

SaskPower seeks protection from nuisance claims to give it the 

same protection that cities and municipalities in Saskatchewan 

currently have. The proposed exemption from a nuisance 

liability will protect SaskPower where it carries out its activities 

safely and responsibly and will allow it to avoid the high costs 

associated with even a successful defence of nuisance claims. 

 

Several of the proposed amendments are intended to clarify that 

SaskPower’s current power, ability to access newer technology 

such as fibre optic lines to ensure SaskPower continues to be 

able to operate efficiently in a changing technological context. 

Of the remaining amendments, some are intended to simply 

clarify existing powers and others are housekeeping 

amendments. 

 

The proposed amendments are intended to allow SaskPower to 

continue to operate efficiently in the best interests of all 

Saskatchewan residents. They are intended to strike a balance 

between the needs of the corporation and the people of 

Saskatchewan as a whole for efficient, reliable, and safe 

electrical power system for those individuals with whom 

SaskPower interacts with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move the second reading of The 

Power Corporation Act, 2012. 

 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 80, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of . . . I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into this debate on Bill No. 80, An Act to 

amend The Power Corporation Act. And of course as the 

minister alluded in his comments, SaskPower is entering into 

some very interesting times. If there was ever a time for 

challenges for a power corporation in the world, North 

America, in our province, today is it. And so it’s an important 

one and we need to make sure we take the time to reflect on this 

bill and all that it means because clearly as the minister referred 

to, that we’ve come to really trust and believe and we hold that 

Sask Power Corp. or SaskPower, as many of us will obviously 

know it from, they provide safe, stable, predictable, and 

affordable electricity to both our homes and to our workplaces, 

our schools, our hospitals. 

 

And so clearly it’s very, very important. And so as we go 

through this and we come to understand it better and more 

details . . . You know, this is what we do as an opposition. So if 

it seems the right thing, then we will support it. But clearly the 

questions will be making sure we strike a balance between the 

consumer and the corporation, and is this suitable and is this an 

appropriate balance in the legislation? And of course this is 

something that I think that it will be an interesting debate and I 

know as many of us will want to get into this discussion, that 

there is a lot to be said about SaskPower and how do we 

modernize it; how do we get it ready for the new millennium? 

 

Essentially what we hear is an awful lot around the investment 

aspect. The minister referenced the number 10 to $13 billion 

that will be needed over the next few years to make sure the 

investment, that we can see a renewal of the SaskPower 

portfolio. And this is critical as we draw new people and as we 

draw new investments to Saskatchewan, and new industry, that 

we want to make sure that we can do it in the most affordable 

way possible. 

 

Of course there are challenges, and we have . . . And I don’t 

know what the numbers will be, and I can only just imagine 

what they are in terms of the number of power lines that we 

have per capita. And it’s a tough province. It’s a very tough 

province. I know when they took the new power line up to La 

Ronge what an issue that was, and its not an easy thing to do. 

 

And so we need to make sure we get it right, that we take the 

time to examine this and we talk to the stakeholders who will 

advise us about making sure that there is the appropriate 

balance between accountability and making sure our Crown 

corporation is sustainable and it can do the work that it needs to 

do, but that it’s not gone overboard and we’ve given them too 

much, too many protections — that it becomes then when 

people have concerns that there is a way to get redress from the 

change. 

 

So there is that whole renewal aspect. But again today, as we’ve 

talked about, and there was some very, very good questions 

around climate change and what we’re doing about climate 

change. And the minister alluded to it a bit, but clearly we need 

to do much more. And while SaskPower in many ways is taking 

a leadership role, it can do much more. 

 

And I think that when we talk about the many characteristics — 

we think about SaskPower being safe, stable, predictable, and 

affordable — we also should be adding sustainable. That in fact 

in this province we’ve been known to be leaders when it comes 

to integrating the whole idea of good social policy and also 

economic policy. And if we can link those two together and 

strengthen them, particularly with SaskPower, this would be a 

great thing and it would show real leadership in the world. And 

so I think that while we can congratulate SaskPower in a lot that 

it’s done to date, I think that it could even do much more. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And so I really want to think about (a) the whole issue around 

climate change and that we need to really step that up and 

whatever it takes. And I know that there’s a cost involved, but I 

think that people are willing to say that the power they purchase 

is one that’s ethically appropriate in terms of sustainability. You 

know, I know that SaskPower a while ago had Green Power 

initiatives, and whether they’re still going, you know, I’m not 

sure. I’d like to know more about it. And we talk about the net 

metering, but we’ve also heard that there’s challenges around 

the net metering program because people are not finding it easy 

to do. 

 

And while we think, boy, in a world where Saskatchewan in 

many ways is so blessed with sunshine generally and with wind 

and all those renewable energy sources, that we could be doing 

much more, we have come a long way. And I’m pretty proud of 

the fact that I was part of a government that took wind energy 

and made it a real component, a real critical part of the 

SaskPower portfolio. But I do think that there’s so much more 

that we can do, and I think we should not rest until we have 

done all that we can to make sure SaskPower’s portfolio is a 

strong, sustainable, green portfolio, one that will take us not just 

a few decades down the road but into the next millennium. 

 

You know, we see that people often talk about peak oil and the 

concerns around coal and how can we make sure we’re doing 

the very best that we can, that we transition to a green, 

sustainable power regime. And of course it’s important as well, 

and SaskPower’s done some work in this area. But it’s also the 

demand side of the area that we need to make sure that we can, 

that we don’t just pay to the production side. I think that in this 

new world way of thinking about energy, that we also see a 

demand side. But how do we manage the demand side of the 

portfolio? How can we help people be a better consumer? 

 

And in many ways I think about SaskEnergy and how they’re 

the manager of the pipes and what they’ve done, such good 

work in terms of energy conservation and helping people 

understand vis-à-vis their bill how much energy they’re also 

consuming. I’m not sure I can say the same with SaskPower. 

But it is good. It is very good. 

 

I don’t want to necessarily be overly negative or overly critical, 

but this is our challenge around the world in terms of 

sustainability, and this is our opportunity here in Saskatchewan 

to show real leadership. So I’m thinking more about 

opportunities and missed opportunities, and I would hate to see 

that. But I would also want to underline that it’s not just a 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

boutique type of idea, that actually it’s a critical piece. It’s a 

very important piece, and really there’s an urgency to it. 

 

So I know, and we can see for example the hurricane that hit 

New York and the coast just a few weeks ago and how critical it 

was — power, the production — and actually after the 

hurricane how the power companies went in to put the power 

back on. And I’m not even sure if today all the power is back on 

in New York City because of the hurricane. I know that a few 

weeks afterwards it was not the case. It was taking them a long 

time. 

 

But we have such an outstanding power corporation and the 

people who work there that we take power outages . . . it’s a 

real rare occasion when it does happen. And when it does 

happen, boy, SaskPower seems to be right on the spot. And we 

don’t seem to see the challenges they have in many of the states 

where in fact the power corporation is a privately held 

corporation. Either we’re talking about the hurricane . . . But I 

was thinking about what was happening in Washington this 

summer, Washington, DC [District of Columbia] where they 

were having power outages. And the company that was 

providing the electricity just couldn’t meet the demands that 

were put upon it in terms of the repair and maintenance and just 

the regular delivery of electricity. 

 

So I think that this is an important one. And of course the 

minister has talked about that in fact this will increase, the bill 

allows SaskPower to increase its borrowing limits. And as he 

said, it hasn’t happened for nearly a decade. I think he said 

eight years. Clearly we need to talk more about this and 

understand this. We have seen this government raid or take a 

special dividend from SaskPower last year. And now we see a 

situation where it’s ironic that SaskPower customers will see a 

potential rate increase of up to 4.9 per cent to essentially replace 

the money that this government took from that special dividend. 

 

And we are alarmed when we see that kind of thing because on 

one hand you have a government pleading poverty and saying, 

we have to make sure we get every dollar and every penny and 

every dime from whatever corner we can get, and then on the 

other hand the next day it will be complaining about the fact 

that its hands are tied and it wants to do more and it needs to be 

able to borrow money. And here’s a perfect example of that. So 

it’s that inconsistency, I think, that people have that they would 

like to have straightened out. 

 

I mean if they’re taking money from SaskPower to make their 

budgets work, then we have a problem. People are concerned 

about that. But if we’re raising rates and we can see a direct line 

and it’s very accountable and very transparent that this is 

helping SaskPower become a company that is, that they’re 

investing in, that they believe in, then I think this is appropriate. 

But that’s not what people see. They wonder, why are my rates 

going up? And yet the government’s taking 100 million-plus 

from SaskPower to make its budget work. 

 

So we have questions about that when it comes to the financing 

part. Of course though we realize these are big numbers when 

you’re talking about a 10 to $13 billion investment, and the 

renewal of their portfolio. 

 

Now we talked about the standards, North American energy 

regulation standard. I believe that’s the NERC [North American 

Electric Reliability Corporation] that he was talking about. And 

that seems appropriate because, as I said, it is very interesting I 

think that in many ways Saskatchewan is seen as a leader when 

it comes to how to organize economic activity around our basic 

resources such as SaskPower, and then you also have 

SaskEnergy or SaskTel. And so I think that’s appropriate that it 

makes that connection. 

 

Now this is one that I do want to spend some time on, this 

protection from nuisance claims and the protection from . . . 

And he used the examples of municipalities and other places. 

And I think, on one hand we think, well that’s a reasonable, 

very reasonable suggestion, and we can see a lot of value on 

that. But we can also see that we’ve got to have some way, 

some way of when concerns are raised about SaskPower and its 

activities, what powers, what do customers have as a way to 

make, to get some redress, make a point about service or 

something that they feel is untoward? And when SaskPower is 

such a major player, major player in many ways, some people 

would argue — and it does in certain ways, a monopoly — that 

if this could be taken advantage of. And so I just think that this 

section where it talks about: 

 

The following subsections are added after subsection 

3(2.1): 

 

“(2.2) The corporation is not liable in an action based on 

nuisance, or on any other tort that does not require a 

finding of intention or negligence, for any loss or 

damage, arising directly or indirectly, from: 

 

(a) its land, buildings, machinery, plant or other 

works, including any of its transmission and 

distribution lines, apparatus, equipment or other 

facilities; or 

 

(b) its operation or non-operation as a public utility. 

 

And then (2.3) goes on to say: 

 

“No action or proceeding lies or shall be commenced 

against the minister, any member of the corporation, any 

officer or employee of the corporation or any [other] 

person authorized by the corporation, if that person is 

acting pursuant to the authority of this Act or the 

regulations, for anything in good faith done, attempted 

to be done or omitted to be done by that person or by 

any of those persons pursuant to or in the exercise or 

supposed exercise of any power conferred by this Act or 

the regulations or in the carrying out or supposed 

carrying out of any order made pursuant to this Act or 

the regulations or any duty imposed by this Act or the 

regulations”. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty wide, pretty wide umbrella or 

shield that’s protecting SaskPower. And in many ways, I 

understand that if that’s against nuisance charges. But I think — 

or an action based on nuisance — this is something we need to 

find out more. Because if this can be a shield that’s gone too 

far, that will be, that has the potential to be abused, then I think 

that there needs to be questions raised on this, and we will 

definitely do that. So that part there, we understand that. 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

And as the explanatory notes said, this is becoming a big thing 

in other jurisdictions. We see this in the United States. And it’s 

a tough thing when you’re dealing, spending a lot of time in the 

corporation fighting off these nuisance claims, and I do 

understand that. But I do think there’s that balance, that critical 

balance, that we must have to make sure that there’s some way 

that this doesn’t close off all avenues of ways to get some issues 

addressed by the corporation. And so I think there needs to be a 

balance there, and we’ll be asking a lot of questions about that. 

 

And so I think that, Mr. Speaker, I think that we could have 

many more examples of different things that we have questions 

on. And I know members will want to get up and speak. But as 

I said, that this is an important time for SaskPower. There are 

challenges ahead in the next years and decades. And it’s a real 

opportunity to put itself in a place of real leadership when it 

comes to maintaining — as we’ve agreed — safe, stable, 

predictable, affordable electricity. 

 

But I think that people really want to see it actually move even 

further in terms of sustainability, in terms of leadership around 

the environment, that in fact environmental regulations are not 

seen as something that’s bogging them down but opportunities 

to do much more so. The people of Saskatchewan say, boy, we 

think that SaskPower is actually the best company when it 

comes to electricity in Canada. And it should be. 

 

And I think the way to do that is to do what it traditionally has 

done but to move into its next area of expertise, and that is 

dealing with climate change. And we’ve talked a bit about that, 

how to make sure because we know that the production, 

particularly around Estevan, depends so much on coal. We have 

to get that right, get that right whether it’s with carbon capture 

or whatever, make sure that that’s done and it’s working well 

but also just in the environmental day-to-day things of doing its 

business in the most appropriate way. 

 

So it’s a real time for opportunity. I would not think the 

minister should take the dimming of the lights when he got up 

to speak as an omen. I think that’s just something that happens. 

I thought it was unusual though. But I think that this is a real 

opportunity. It got all our attention to the issue at hand. It got 

our attention to the issue at hand. And I think that we can do 

more. This company, SaskPower, is something that we’re all so 

proud of. It’s a real cornerstone of who we are in Saskatchewan, 

and so we want to see it thrive and we want to see it do well. 

But it is a new time, and it’s a new opportunity to get things 

done right. And we don’t want to see them miss its opportunity. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that many people here will want to be 

able to address this issue. I think that it’s an important one, and 

we’ll be looking forward to finding out more from people who 

are interested about this issue over the winter months. And 

we’ll be talking more about it in the days and months ahead. So 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

80, an Act to amend the power corporation. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 80, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 

2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 81, an 

Act respecting the Global Transportation Hub Authority and to 

make consequential amendments to The Municipal Board Act. 

 

The new Global Transportation Hub authority Act establishes 

the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] as a statutory 

corporation, as an agency of the Crown. The GTH was 

established as a Treasury Board Crown corporation in June of 

2009, to be known as the GTH Authority. The original order in 

council was interim in nature and focused on the need to 

quickly establish an entity to manage various immediate issues 

of the new provincial development. 

 

The GTH was to return to government with recommended 

adjustments after initial pre-development activities were 

completed. In essence, Mr. Speaker, this is what is occurring 

through this Act. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s extraordinary 

economic success has been largely due to exports. The 

Saskatchewan plan for growth recognizes this fact and sets out 

a road map to address the infrastructure challenges going 

forward. Specifically it notes the government will invest in the 

province’s transportation system to meet the needs of a growing 

economy, including transitioning the Global Transportation 

Hub into a full inland port operation to grow Saskatchewan’s 

warehousing and logistics sectors. This arrangement is similar 

to the agreement between a municipality and a regional park 

authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the purposes of the land use and planning and 

regulation, the GTH becomes the regulatory body for its master 

land use plan, inclusive of all the GTH land planning, zoning, 

and bylaws, infrastructure design and development standards, 

and subdivision approvals and building permits. Mr. Speaker, 

Bill No. 81 will provide the GTH and the provincial 

government with the appropriate oversight and control of 

planning and regulatory matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding infrastructure asset ownership, the GTH 

will assume jurisdiction and responsibility for the infrastructure 

operations and maintenance, including several provisions within 

the GTH boundaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding taxation, we are in discussions with the 

city to establish what is the grant in lieu of taxation going to be 

of all the municipal tax collected on land inside the GTH. We 

will be negotiating the best deal for the GTH, but we are also 

going to be negotiating from a sense of fairness. 

 

The ownership of the infrastructure, combined with the property 

tax revenue, will ensure sustainable client service levels and 

maintenance of infrastructure standards. The property tax 

revenue will pay for common amenities, infrastructure 

operations and maintenance, and services provided to the 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

clients. Examples are such things as snow removal, annual road 

maintenance and repair, maintenance of the drainage systems, 

etc. 

 

The city of Regina will continue to have the responsibility for 

regional municipal services, for example, water chlorination 

station, sewer lift station, and the main sewer line exiting the 

sewer lift station. Mr. Speaker, the new Act will provide the 

powers and authorities which will enable the GTH to respond 

quickly to the new opportunities and will allow the GTH to 

offer highly customized solutions for clients. 

 

From the beginning of the GTH project, the city of Regina has 

worked together with the province to assist in the development 

of what has become one of the most important economic 

development projects in Saskatchewan. I have met with the 

former mayor and now the current mayor as well, of the city of 

Regina, and his officials are aware of the move to an authority 

model. Discussions with the city of Regina to facilitate the 

long-term operating relationship between the province and city 

are ongoing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new legislation, Bill No. 81, moves the control 

and development and operations for the GTH from the 

municipal to provincial jurisdiction to increase management 

ability to operate on a commercial basis to further ensure the 

business success of the GTH clients. The GTH has secured the 

necessary zoning bylaw amendments and have signed an 

interim agreement with the city that allows our infrastructure 

construction to continue until a new Act is proclaimed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan plan for growth: vision 2020 

and beyond concentrates in part on enhancing exports and 

transportation infrastructure. Making the GTH a more efficient 

authority will help contribute to building the Saskatchewan 

advantage through increased investment, job creation, and 

building of Saskatchewan’s export capacity. We are ensuring 

success for generations to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that the GTH is up and fully 

functioning, a story of rapid and remarkable success. What we 

are doing with this legislation is ensuring that success for 

generations to come in the future. Positioning the GTH as a 

more effective authority will further contribute to the level of 

success of the GTH than it has achieved to date. Right now over 

425 acres of serviced land is being offered, complete with over 

4 kilometres of roadways, asphalt paving, site grading, water, 

sanitary sewage lines, and storm channel construction — in all, 

a $32.8 million capital investment program for this year alone, 

making the GTH the most significant, most exciting 

distributions and logistics hub in the country. Currently about 

3,600 truck movements are coming and going from the GTH 

footprint every week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in total the GTH is a 2,000-acre development on 

the west side of Regina adjacent to our major highway 

networks. No. 1 Highway and No. 11 will be connected by a 

new four-lane, high-speed west Regina bypass which is just 

minutes from the Regina International Airport. Our anchor 

client is Loblaw, which they have invested $250 million in its 1 

million-square-foot warehouse which is operated by Canadian 

Logistics Services, employing well over 800 people now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Canadian Pacific, the railway, is near completion of phase 1 of 

its 300-acre intermodal facility at the GTH, a $50 million 

investment that offers mainline rail access to all major Canadian 

ports, gulf coast ports, and Midwestern US [United States] 

transshipment points. Major transportation clients, Yanke 

Group of Companies and Consolidated Fastfrate, have also 

announced their arrival at the GTH. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 81 will advance the unique position of the 

GTH and the transportation logistics industry. It will allow the 

GTH to be fast and efficient and will further the GTH’s ability 

to offer fully customized solutions for clients and facilitate 

regulatory and approval processes. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

offer into second reading Bill No. 81, The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority Act. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 81, The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 

the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

very pleased to rise to speak to the second reading of this bill in 

the House today. 

 

I had an opportunity to drive by the Global Transportation Hub 

a couple of weeks ago I guess when I was heading over to 

Moose Jaw, down to my parents’ farm. And indeed I could only 

see it from the No. 1 Highway, and it was my first sort of 

sighting of the Global Transportation Hub, which I wasn’t very 

familiar with. And it’s certainly an impressive undertaking that 

this government is working on. Certainly we know that there’s a 

need for this kind of economic promise and the way it speaks to 

economic development and diversification that, you know, this 

certainly we support as the official opposition. These are areas 

that need government support, and we’re happy to see that 

that’s occurring here at the Global Transportation Hub. 

 

Just in contrast to that, Mr. Speaker, I also was driving north of 

Saskatoon to North Battleford on Highway 16, the Yellowhead, 

not too long ago and I was completely amazed at the industrial 

development out there as well. And I don’t know if there is 

anything like a transportation hub that’s occurring in Saskatoon. 

I certainly haven’t heard anything about that. I understand this 

is a pilot project at this point in time but certainly we see 

industry taking matters into their hands in Saskatoon as well, 

and obviously the needs of both centres are growing, based on 

the economy as it’s growing. 

 

And I just wonder what the connection is between the two 

major cities and the transportation needs of Saskatoon as well, 

and whether industry is just picking that up on their own, and 

that the need for government intervention in Regina was 

greater. So those are the kinds of questions I have about this 

kind of authority. And as I’m new to this game, I’m just 

learning as we go. So those are the kinds of things I will want to 

examine and explore as we debate this bill and move it through 

the process. 

 

It seems like this project is moving along fairly quickly, and I 

think the minister made comments to that effect when he said 

that in 2009 they had to quickly act under an order in council 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

just to establish the authority. So obviously this thing has 

wheels and this government is doing its best to keep up. 

However it appears there is a bit of scrambling that’s going on, 

and we’ve seen that in the need for the minister to rush off and 

meet with some clients just a couple of weeks ago, and for this 

bill to appear as quickly as it has. 

 

It appears there’s some rush going on here and perhaps the 

government isn’t able to keep up as best as they can to make 

sure that the legislative authority and the things like payment in 

lieu of taxes, all those things, are being dealt with properly. So 

hopefully the minister has enough resources in his ministry, 

despite the 15 per cent cut to the public service, where he can 

have enough people to make sure that this is dealt with properly 

and fairly, not only to the people that are using the authority but 

certainly the taxpayers who are paying for much of the 

infrastructure that’s out there. 

 

It seems that when this government has a habit of sort of 

making it up as they go . . . And this isn’t the only example for 

that we’ve seen in this session, Mr. Speaker. We’ve also seen 

the quick introduction of Bill 69 to convert yet another Crown 

corporation to a privately held corporation, a privatized 

corporation. And just last week again we had the minister make 

a bit of a surprise announcement which wasn’t mentioned 

before in the Chamber that now it appears that the registrar and 

the controller of surveys are no longer going to be part of ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan]. And they 

are an integral part of ISC at this point in time. And now we’re 

going to have to see legislative changes to The Land Titles Act 

and The Land Surveys Act. 

 

So the homework isn’t done on that side of the House, and 

unfortunately we don’t see a minister prepared to sort of present 

the whole suite of legislation all at once for consideration here 

in the House. It seems to be rolling along very quickly and the 

minister’s just trying to keep up, introduces Bill 69. But 

certainly that cannot be the total legislative suite that’s 

necessary for him to effect the changes that he dropped in the 

House last week regarding the registrar and controller of 

surveys. So we have some questions about their ability to keep 

up, particularly with again, as I mentioned, the intent to reduce 

public service by 15 per cent. This is putting more and more 

work on the people in the ministries that are trying to keep up 

with all these changes and then an agenda that’s moving along 

fairly quickly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And another example we saw today is the management of, the 

management of greenhouse gases. The legislation was 

introduced and passed in 2010, but it’s not in force yet. That’s 

almost three years ago and we’re still seeing changes. We’re 

seeing an amendment here in this session to that bill to bring 

into effect some minor changes, so obviously the homework 

wasn’t done when it was introduced. 

 

And then we see the development of the code, and the 

comments coming back from the code last week were 

significant. There’s a number of concerns in that code. And as 

well again the regulations are in draft form so we have no idea 

where this is going to end up. People are being asked to 

comment, and I think several people, you know, were 

commenting and also provided papers. But the amount of 

questions that come out of comments seem to be as significant 

as the actual drafting of the draft code, and the draft regulations, 

and the amended bill. So it just seems to be a rolling out of an 

ongoing process that should have actually been wrapped up and 

dealt with a long time ago. 

 

Perhaps the Global Transportation Hub is another example of 

that where we have the minister scrambling to ensure that 

people don’t walk away because of interjurisdictional 

squabbles. We see him hurriedly introducing legislation and 

removing . . . It appears there’s some problem with the 

leadership. There was some instability in the leadership and 

they yanked the leader, in June, of the organization. Now they 

have interim leadership and there’s all kinds of things that seem 

to be driving this authority, the creation of this authority other 

than careful planning and good stewardship of the resources of 

the people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a lot of questions about this and obviously we’re 

watching this very carefully. But first of all I guess we’re 

wondering what is motivating these changes. What is it that’s 

driving the minister to change the agency to an authority? And 

obviously in his comments he indicated that he wasn’t, that it 

was prepared very quickly in 2009 as an interim measure and 

that now he’s moving forward. And we’ve seen a number of 

news stories where various clients are concerned about the 

regulatory instability of the area, and the minister’s scrambling 

to make sure that he doesn’t lose major clients for the Global 

Transportation Hub. 

 

[15:00] 

 

We want to make sure that there’s a lot, that the minister is 

being thoughtful in dealing with this issue because the issues 

are very costly and the taxpayers have invested a huge, huge 

amount of money into this hub. And it’s a significant 

investment. And I guess our obligation as the members of the 

opposition is to ensure that taxpayers are receiving value for 

their dollar. 

 

We know that this hub is currently subject to a lawsuit because 

of the expropriation that happened. So there’s obviously some 

discontent out there in the public, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 

we want to make sure that it’s proceeding appropriately. Is that 

discontent a factor in what’s going on now with the lawsuits 

that we see happening? And are these types of lawsuits a 

liability for the success of the hub? We’re not sure. And we 

want to ensure that this minister and his staff have done their 

due diligence to make sure that there isn’t liability for the 

taxpayer dollar, and that it’s being done properly. 

 

We’re not sure about the relationship with the city. It doesn’t 

appear to be totally cosy at this point. And we can see, although 

the area was, the city limits were expanded to include the area 

of the authority within city limits for reasons, now we see the 

authority being created to remove it out of the authority of the 

city. So for example, some of the things that were cited as 

issues were the turning lanes for the very large trucks. And 

apparently the city doesn’t have a bylaw that accommodates 

that or the green spaces that are required, and because of the 

size of this transportation hub, those things are deemed to be 

inappropriate. 

 

But it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, this is something that’s 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

entirely within the purview of a city municipality, urban 

municipality to make bylaws respecting those types of changes. 

So it’s not clear to me why this needs to be removed from the 

regulatory authority of the municipal government, either the 

RM [rural municipality], the rural municipality of Sherwood, or 

the urban municipality of Regina. And indeed what we see now 

is just another layer of government intervening into the ordinary 

processes of what happens in municipal areas in terms of 

industry and transportation. And we haven’t seen this kind of 

extraordinary intervention on the part of government ever in 

this type of thing. 

 

I know the minister gave an example of, you know, an example 

comparable, he said, would be a regional park authority and a 

municipality. Well I’m not sure that this is the same kind of 

scale that you could make a proper comparison to that type of 

regional park authority within a municipality. Where I grew up, 

the regional park, basically they built a swimming pool, and 

there was a marina that was built and some campgrounds. 

 

But that’s not quite the same as what this Global Transportation 

Hub is doing. I think first of all it’s costing the taxpayers a 

whole lot more than any regional park authority has ever cost in 

a municipality. And certainly we don’t see taxpayers’ dollars 

going into the regional park authority in the same way that we 

see money being poured into this Global Transportation Hub. 

And also we don’t see in regional park authorities where the 

government has regulatory control over the regulatory 

development of the area. So it’s maybe an apt comparison at 

some levels, Mr. Speaker, but I think the size of the project and 

certainly the cost to the taxpayers is certainly not comparable to 

a regional park authority within an urban or rural municipality. 

 

Also one of the things that we want to look at is, what are the 

conflicts of interest with the city? Why is it that we see this 

reluctance on the part of certain investors? We know that 

certain people are bypassing the GTH, and they’re choosing to 

locate outside of the GTH. So one has to question why that is 

happening and what the concerns are with those particular 

patrons or businesses and industries that see some advantage 

being nearby but are hesitant to actually enter into the authority. 

 

And I know one of my experiences working with an authority is 

the Regina Airport Authority and some of the difficulties that 

arise because the land is still owned by the federal government 

and it’s within the city limits of the city of Regina. So when that 

authority was established, the same with the Saskatoon Airport 

Authority, because of all the layers of regulation and the layers 

of government, it makes it more difficult to administer. And is 

this something that’s going to be a factor with the GTH? We 

don’t know. And we’re going to certainly want to take a close 

look at that and monitor that very closely. 

 

We see some concern from commercial realtors about the GTH, 

and they have indicated there’s some confusion about how their 

clients are going to be treated. So those are questions that we 

want to also look at when we’re exploring this bill and its 

impact on commercial realtors and their significant clients that 

they’re representing. And we want to make sure that their 

concerns are being heard and that they’re being treated properly 

within the new legislation that this government is introducing. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, we saw in June that the head of the 

Global Transportation Hub Authority had been removed 

unceremoniously. And the comment that the minister made at 

the time was that it was because the hub was going in a 

different direction. They wanted another person in the top job. 

So there wasn’t any comment from the previous civil servant 

who was removed. But there’s some questions there about the 

stability in leadership and why this move was made right now. 

 

I believe the interim CEO is a former senior official from 

Premier Grant Devine’s office in the 1980s. So one has to 

question what his connections are. Politically, certainly they’re 

quite obvious. And we’re not sure that that’s the reason why he 

was chosen as interim director or whether the skill set was also 

there to properly lead this group into the future in the Global 

Transportation Hub. 

 

The minister indicated that there were unique needs and that’s 

why this legislation was introduced so quickly on Wednesday. I 

think if you want to read into that a little bit, Mr. Speaker, it 

may be there are unique concerns on the part of the government 

in terms of how this agency is going to succeed. And we see a 

very direct intervention here by a Conservative government into 

a business arrangement, which is quite contrary I think to what 

we see in some of their other statements and policies, Mr. 

Speaker. And so it’s of concern again when you see an 

interventionist government in a free market when they profess 

to be supportive of free market. So it seems inconsistent in 

some ways to some of the policies that we’ve seen come out of 

this particular government. 

 

Again the minister indicated to the press that these unique needs 

or, as I say, unique concerns are things like the free flow of long 

combination vehicles or LCVs. And certainly driving on the 

winter highways as I have been in the last little while, I’ve seen 

some of these long vehicles and had to pass them in the passing 

lane. And it’s quite a sight to behold, especially when your 

knuckles are white holding on to the steering wheel, but they 

are more and more a feature I think of our highways. I fact I 

have a friend from Nova Scotia who is very surprised to see 

these being allowed in Saskatchewan, and they’re not allowed 

in Nova Scotia. But I think, Mr. Speaker, our highways tend to 

be a little straighter and longer, and we have more access to 

those kinds of facilities where we can load those kinds of 

vehicles. But they do need wider roads for turning, and the 

other thing that they needed was, as I mentioned earlier, was the 

green space that was required in the new development. 

 

Again I’m not certain why the city of Regina couldn’t make 

changes to their bylaws to facilitate these needs. And the 

Premier has indicated to the press that the authority would have 

the authority in terms of the types of municipal bylaws within 

their property footprint. It seems extraordinary intervention on 

the part of a provincial government in these types of ordinary 

business enterprises. But we understand that, you know, the 

goal, and we’re hoping they do meet their goal of the economic 

promise. 

 

The minister indicated in his comments just now that they want 

to ensure business success. And again I think we see some 

inconsistency on this part from the government. And you know, 

if we look at what’s happened with the film industry in this 

province, we certainly haven’t seen a government that’s 

wanting to ensure business success. In fact it’s almost the 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

opposite. We’ve seen significant investment on the part of the 

government in this transportation hub, but we do not see that 

same kind of commitment to the many hundreds of jobs in the 

film industry that are now lost because of their haste to get rid 

of the film employment tax credit which is basically an industry 

standard across North America for the film industry. And 

they’re of course ignoring the benefits that are reaped as a result 

of that type of government intervention in an industry. So here 

we have government intervention in the transportation industry 

that is to the many millions of dollars, and yet we don’t see any 

sort reciprocal support for another industry like the film 

industry. 

 

He mentioned that they’re working on negotiating the best deal 

for grants in lieu of taxes. And this is another thing I think that 

really this government . . . And we will be watching for this to 

ensure that that negotiation is totally fair to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan and not just to the businesses, that this isn’t a big 

advantage for these businesses operating out of the 

transportation hub. He said it needs to reflect Saskatchewan 

investment. And we want to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that this 

reflects our return on investment here, that it’s not just fair to 

the companies. 

 

And what does that mean when we talk about fairness in 

taxation? There’s more than snow removal involved here. 

There’s more than all the considerable infrastructure that needs 

to be built to support these very thriving businesses who are 

making a lot of money out of being able to use this 

transportation hub on the taxpayers’ dollar. So we want to make 

sure that the taxes, the grants in lieu of taxes are at least 

comparable to what they would be within the city framework, 

or the rural municipal framework as far as that goes, and that 

this isn’t some sort of advantage that’s being given to these 

businesses just for locating within the transportation hub. So 

we’ll be watching those kinds of negotiations very carefully, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think I’ve covered almost all of my comments at this point. So 

I know my colleagues are going to want to follow up with some 

of these, and we’re certainly going to want to talk to the people 

and make sure that they’re comfortable with this approach and 

certainly if there’s any concerns in terms of the questions that 

are being raised about liability, about due diligence, about 

what’s motivating these changes on such a rushed basis, why 

the minister wasn’t able to be more prepared in terms of how 

this is rolling out. And not only in this one but, as I said, in 

other areas like Information Services Corporation and 

greenhouse gases where we see our government rushing to keep 

up and not fully implementing the whole suite of legislation in 

an orderly fashion. 

 

So I would like to move at this point that we adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 81. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 81, The Global Transportation Hub 

Authority Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 66 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 66 — The 

Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 

(SAGES) Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join in on the discussion with respect to Bill No. 

66, An Act respecting a Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 

Education Savings. This is in follow-up, Mr. Speaker, to the 

second reading speech that was provided by the Minister of 

Advanced Education on November 19th, 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is something that has been 

talked about for a little while. It was an issue that was covered 

in the previous provincial election, Mr. Speaker, as an item that 

was proposed by members opposite. So it’s not a huge surprise 

to see it coming up in legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The timing of the matter perhaps is a little bit of a surprise. I 

know I was approached by the minister recently about the 

possibility of the opposition allowing this to pass before 

Christmas. And I will say at the conclusion of my remarks I will 

be sending this to committee in order to facilitate that process. 

But given that this was something that was talked about for 

some time, there may be some opportunities, Mr. Speaker, that 

it could have been presented at an earlier time and not have had 

to rush the process, so to speak. 

 

The piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is essentially an RESP 

[registered education savings plan] top-up allowing families 

who are already contributing to an RESP to receive a provincial 

benefit to add to the funds that are being saved for a child’s 

education. The notion, Mr. Speaker, of allowing families to help 

save for a child’s education in principle is a thing that I support, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s good when families are in a position that 

they’re able to save in order to provide for the future with 

respect to education. 

 

There is, Mr. Speaker, I think some comments that are 

important to make with respect to how the RESP fits into the 

larger issue of affordability for post-secondary education in the 

province, as well as how post-secondary institutions are being 

treated currently under the current administration. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So as I said, Mr. Speaker, helping families is a thing that most 

people support. That’s a good thing. But we need to look at 

what the costs are that are being faced by families in the present 

as well as down the road. Many people want to open up and 

start RESPs when a child is small. It’s perhaps one of the first 

things that is done after getting a birth certificate and doing the 

legal paperwork and getting a social insurance number for a 

child. And as I said, it’s a good thing when families are able to 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

save and prepare for the future. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it does not address the proposed legislation 

here with respect to providing a top-up of benefit to families for 

their RESPs. It doesn’t address the issue of reducing barriers for 

current students and as well as ensuring that education is 

affordable for everyone down the road. And we need to ensure 

that any benefit being given now, Mr. Speaker, through this 

proposed legislation, that it would not be outstripped by 

increased costs for families and for students down the road. And 

we know, Mr. Speaker, with provincial universities having one 

of the highest tuition levels within the country, we know this is 

a concern for many Saskatchewan families.  

 

And then when we also look at current actions that provincial 

institutions such as the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] are 

facing, it is a concern, especially, Mr. Speaker, when we look at 

the University of Saskatchewan. I will use this example because 

I’ve talked about it a bit through question period and on a few 

occasions, as have other colleagues and on different occasions, 

because what we see is a financial picture on campus that is 

tight and is causing the university administration to take a 

number of steps. And it ties back to the turning away from a 

earlier promise, Mr. Speaker, to fully fund the Health Sciences 

Building. When we saw when the Sask Party promised to do 

that but then decided not to provide the funding upfront instead 

forcing that amount of debt onto the university’s books, we saw 

a tightening of the financial picture on campus. The government 

forced the University of Saskatchewan to basically take on 

about $100 million of debt. And by the university’s own 

documents, they have stated clearly that this has maxed out 

their borrowing capacity and has also put them at the very top, 

beyond other institutions within its class, with respect to the 

debt load per FTE [full-time equivalent] student. 

 

So that is a concern and we’ve seen the university take some 

steps with respect to cuts. I mean the one example that stands 

out is the Kenderdine Campus as just one example. But we also 

know that there are significant layoffs occurring on campus, 

and that’s concerning as well. And then we also know, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that this will have an effect on tuition down 

the road, in the very near future down the road. 

 

So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to say that while it could be 

viewed as a positive thing in providing the support to families 

to allow them to save at these early stages, we also need to keep 

our eye on the ball, be aware of the other side of the coin. And 

that is the financial picture on campus, and how that will 

influence and determine the affordability of education in the 

near future and in the long run. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, some comments with respect to how we will 

be allowing this legislation to carry through the House. The 

minister identified in discussions that we had that it would 

cause some complications with respect to retroactivity in 

dealing with financial institutions and the work that needs to 

happen within the bureaucracy in order to allow this program to 

happen. And he suggested to me that this would be a problem in 

passing it in the spring. So we are willing to accommodate that. 

We do not have a desire to be obstructionist in that way, though 

I would say there has been opportunity to raise this at an earlier 

point in order to prevent the fast-tracking requirement. 

 

And I think any time that we can allow and provide for proper 

review and proper discussion about any proposed piece of 

legislation, I think that’s a better thing for democracy and it’s a 

better thing for the quality of legislation that we receive in the 

House, as well as the awareness within the broader community 

in the province with respect to what’s being accomplished with 

a particular bill. So we’re willing to co-operate in this instance, 

do not have a desire to be obstructionist on this, but we would 

ask that things be handled in a faster or earlier manner in other 

instances. 

 

And as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, some steps here in the legislation 

that I would support, but we can’t lose focus of current barriers 

for post-secondary education that students are experiencing, as 

well as long-term issues of affordability. And, Mr. Speaker, an 

RESP top-up . . . I mean it does help families. It helps families 

who are already saving. There are instances where families may 

not be able to save or are not in a position at the time currently 

to do that. So we also need to be aware of having the proper 

programs and services in place in order to ensure the 

post-secondary education is accessible to all and that all people 

in Saskatchewan are able to reach their full potential through 

receiving the type of education that they hope to receive and 

complete. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker. having made those remarks and having 

reached the end of my conclusions, I will state that to enable 

further progress of this bill through the process, I conclude my 

remarks on Bill 66. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Advanced Education that Bill 

No. 66, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education 

Savings (SAGES) Act be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

committed? I recognize the Minister of Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 

66, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 

(SAGES) Act be committed to the Committee of the Whole and 

that the said bill be considered in Committee of the Whole 

immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 

of the Whole. I do now leave the Chair for the House to go into 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant 

for Education Savings (SAGES) Act 
 

Clause 1 

 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

The Chair: — The item of business before this committee is 

Bill No. 66, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education 

Savings (SAGES) Act. Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Clause 1 agreed to.] 

 

[Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 

follows: Bill No. 66, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 

Education Savings (SAGES) Act. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I move the 

committee report the bill without amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 

No. 66 without amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I move that the 

committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 

leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 

report Bill No. 66, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 

Education Savings (SAGES) Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a third time? I 

recognize the Minister of Advanced Education. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant 

for Education Savings (SAGES) Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move that this 

bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for Bill No. 

66, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 

(SAGES) Act be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the Minister of 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 66, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education 

Savings (SAGES) Act be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[15:30] 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m being 

tormented by the member from Moosomin right off the bat 

here. But I’ll have to compose myself and get to the debate at 

hand here on Bill No. 69, a bill that, in comparison to the 

exercise we’ve just gone through in the House here, Mr. 

Speaker, should be held up in this House as long as possible 

because, Mr. Speaker, it comes to this Legislative Assembly in 

some pretty illegitimate ways. 

 

And again it draws a good comparison with the last piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. It’s not the whole story on what just 

happened right now. But one of the things that that particular 

bill has the advantage of, Mr. Speaker, is that it was a measure 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

that was contested in the election last year. It was put before the 

people. It was weighed and assayed by the voters of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And you know, the government 

got a mandate and that’s the way it goes: you get to bring new 

legislation forward, having gotten the mandate at election time. 

And certainly the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 

savings, Mr. Speaker, that was something that was put before 

the people and that is as it should be. 

 

Something that was not put before the people, Mr. Speaker, was 

the sale of 60 per cent of the Information Services Corporation. 

And I guess, you know, it provides a good starting point, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of some of the ways that we can agree in this 

Legislative Chamber and some of the things that we’ll disagree 

upon, Mr. Speaker. And one of the things that we’ll disagree 

upon is whether or not the members opposite have been straight 

with the people of Saskatchewan when it comes to how they’re 

approaching the Crown corporations generally, and how they’re 

approaching this particular Crown corporation especially. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you go back to the way that Crowns 

have played a role not just in the last decade, Mr. Speaker, but 

certainly through the ’90s, through the ’80s, Mr. Speaker, one 

of the things that I often remember and that was part of a family 

that got to live through it, Mr. Speaker, was the way that the 

government of the day, between 1986 and 1991, having not 

gone to the people to get a mandate for this action, Mr. Speaker. 

But in my family I grew up, we were very lucky to have my 

mom as a homemaker who stayed, was a very active 

community volunteer. But we as the four McCall kids benefited 

mightily from the way that she was able to make sure that we 

took her up on her love of reading, the way that she was able to 

teach us how to ride bikes, Mr. Speaker, and the way that she in 

so many ways helped us along in becoming the people that we 

were. 

 

And alongside that though, Mr. Speaker, was the work that my 

father did — and again a very active person in the community 

— but the work that my father did as a journeyman gas fitter 

with SaskPower in the gas division. And then of course after 

1987, Mr. Speaker, the way that SaskEnergy was hived off from 

SaskPower and became its own entity, and then there was a sale 

attempted of that corporation. And I guess you’ll forgive me, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that you can sometimes see 

history repeating itself in terms of certain of the initiatives taken 

in this Chamber, the way that certain issues play out in the 

public policy discussions of this province. 

 

The way that Crown corporations have been sometimes 

attacked in this province, Mr. Speaker, is oftentimes not talked 

about at election. And certainly that was the case in 1986, Mr. 

Speaker, where there’d been some initial forays made into 

different of the Crown endeavours of the province at the time, 

to either in many cases hobble those corporations, Mr. Speaker, 

and then the way that they were lined up for sale. And up until 

the post-’86 election period, Mr. Speaker, a lot of that was 

skirmishing around the edges. For the most part, people in 

Saskatchewan have been well served by their Crown 

corporations, the mixed economy that we enjoy here in 

Saskatchewan, not just meant for good service but for a return 

to the people in terms of particularly areas where there’s a 

natural monopoly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So after the ’86 election when suddenly the bottom fell out of 

the finances and when it became apparent that there was not . . . 

there was a government that was less than forthright with the 

people of Saskatchewan in terms of how they’d approached that 

’86 election, the things that they campaigned on, and the reality 

when it came to the finances of the province, Mr. Speaker, there 

came a time of reckoning. And of course, you know, the sky 

was falling, Mr. Speaker. It turns out that projected deficits 

were much greater than had been earlier let on. And of course 

right after the election all these things came to light, and the 

people of Saskatchewan looked at that and said, you know, how 

the heck does this work? 

 

And one of the ways that, you know, certainly there was an 

ideological groundswell on the part of members opposite in 

terms of the way that they identified with the new conservative 

revolution, but again, Mr. Speaker, this being the latest sort of 

expression of a much older debate and discussion in not just 

places like Saskatchewan but in many quarters of the world. 

 

When neo-conservatism came to Saskatchewan purely writ, Mr. 

Speaker, and it coincided with a period of economic decline and 

the way that the finances had been disastrously managed by the 

Grant Devine government, after ’86 of course they went 

looking pillar to post to find ways to contend with this situation. 

And one of the measures seized upon by the government was 

privatization, writ large. 

 

And there’s a fair amount of scholarly work that has been done 

in terms of that period of this province’s history, and the way 

that that was handled or mishandled, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly SaskEnergy provided for a fairly intense period of 

debate in the history of this province and a fairly interesting 

example of just where the government of the day was at and 

where they were going to be come 1991, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the things that people bore witness to and that they 

did not forgive that government, Mr. Speaker, was the way that 

things like the privatization of SaskEnergy — which again had 

provided good revenues for the people of Saskatchewan, good 

service for the people of Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan 

headquarters for Saskatchewan economic activity, Mr. Speaker 

— that was not talked about in the 1986 election. And when the 

government came forward with it, it was a significant fight in 

the history of this province’s political life, and it was a 

significant fight as regarded the path that that government was 

on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the McCall family household, it was a 

fairly significant time of course because we’d taken what was 

my . . . I should say, Mr. Speaker, my father was a 35-year 

employee with SaskPower and then SaskEnergy, of course. 

When he and my grandmother came in off the farm and he got 

in a trade, he’d gone to work for SaskPower and worked very 

hard, Mr. Speaker, but was active in community, active in his 

union, and I think put in a good day’s work for a good day’s 

dollar. 

 

And in terms of what the decision of the government of the day 

meant to what happens now for we as a family sitting there 

saying, this is your father’s paycheque; this is how this 

household is afloat, Mr. Speaker, and this is how you’re able to 

make a living and send kids to school. And my older brother 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

was in university at the time, and my sister and my brother and 

I were in high school, Mr. Speaker. In terms of the kind of 

uncertainty that that action that . . . You know, for me it’s 

never, it’s never been just a sort of historical debate or the 

philosophical debate. But I have some recollection, Mr. 

Speaker, of what it meant to the McCall family at our kitchen 

table in terms of the kind of uncertainty that had been injected 

into our lives by a government of the day, and again, Mr. 

Speaker, a government of the day that hadn’t run on this at 

election time, hadn’t said, you know, people of Saskatchewan, 

here’s an idea: what do you think of this? But rather said 

something very different, Mr. Speaker, and of course acted very 

differently, having not received the majority of the popular vote 

but having received the majority of the seats in 1986. 

 

And you know, you think about what happened with 

SaskEnergy and the debates around that and the ringing of the 

bells and the way that that debate played out on the floor of this 

House, Mr. Speaker. You think about that, but you also think 

about, particularly in conjunction with the debate around 

Information Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker. The 

privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has 

been brought up by the Minister Responsible for ISC in 

conjunction with this proposed privatization. And it’s 

interesting that what is brought around Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan is that it will somehow free the corporation to 

pursue opportunities in the global economy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard other things about 

opportunities that were there for Information Services 

Corporation as recently as with the Government of the Yukon, 

to provide an additional revenue stream for the corporation and 

again enabling the corporation to add to that last year $17 

million dividend payment to the Crown Investments 

Corporation and then again, Mr. Speaker, the way that benefits 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The minister also said that, you know, so we can’t compete 

globally; we’ve got to free Information Services Corporation to 

go beyond our borders and go global and all of these good 

things. And one of the things that’ll be very interesting to see, 

Mr. Speaker, because one of the hallmarks of what happened 

with the actual sale of PCS [Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.] shares initially in the mid-’80s, Mr. 

Speaker, is the way that those shares were in the initial public 

offering devalued. So you know, lo and behold, mere days and 

weeks later, there was a rise in the value of the stock and there 

were a lot of people made some very quick money, Mr. 

Speaker, on what had previously been an asset belonging to the 

people of Saskatchewan, what had previously been making a 

return to the coffers of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again the way that that defrayed the need for higher taxes, 

the way that that underwrote and helped to support the 

provision of public services and education and health care, and 

again the way that that has seen somebody like David 

Dombowsky as the CEO of Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan — a Saskatchewan person and somebody doing 

very good work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan — but 

with the privatization of PCS, you saw a lot of those things go 

out the window. And you saw the corporation get put on a track 

where again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, there’s still some 

debate as to whether it was design or blundering that saw the 

way that the financial circumstances evolved into the early ’90s. 

But once something like PCS was put on a privatization track, 

and again where that initial public offering was devalued and 

saw an automatic buoyancy in the stock value, and again the 

way that that was pointed to as somehow a success by the 

government of the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to be watching very closely to see what happens 

with the initial offering out of ISC and whether or not that stock 

comes on market at a fair market value and whether or not 

that’s reflective of the different sort of valuations that have 

taken place at the corporation or whether or not in fact that’s 

lowballed, Mr. Speaker, and then there’ll be an attendant rise in 

the value of the stock. And we’ll see where it goes. 

 

Or it could go another way, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what has 

been the experience with Facebook and the way that we see 

different IT [information technology] stocks having rid up and 

down through peaks and valleys in terms of the market, and the 

tech boom of the earlier part of the last decade and the way just 

initially the stock value for Facebook went to great heights and 

then crashed down. 

 

How these demands play out, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be very 

interesting to see. But I guess the problem of it is the 60 per 

cent stake that is being put on the chopping block by members 

opposite is expected to bring about $120 million in revenue, 

one-time revenue, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan, 

and again cutting into the ability of the corporation to provide 

what has been an increasingly better, an improving public 

service for the people of Saskatchewan up to and to the point 

where ISC is now quite well ranked, not just in terms of the 

corporate scorecard, Mr. Speaker, but in terms of the health of 

the corporation in terms of the way that it’s able to play a role 

out there in the broader community and the way that it is able to 

return dividends to the people of Saskatchewan, again defraying 

either increased taxes on the one hand, Mr. Speaker, or helping 

to support the provision of public services on the other. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So how this plays out, Mr. Speaker, in a technical sense and 

how the value of that asset is recouped for the people of 

Saskatchewan, you know we’ve seen a few different movies on 

this theme from members opposite over the history of this 

province and we’ll be watching very closely to see how that 

plays out. 

 

But what it comes back to, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

parallels to other sort of circumstance in the not too distant 

history of this province is that this was something that was 

forsworn by members opposite, not just in the 2007 election, 

but again was absent from the 2011 election. And now you get a 

number of tricks being played or, you know, sort of caveats. Or 

you know, if you’d be unkind to them in the legal profession, 

Mr. Speaker, some people would say, well it sort of sounds like 

a lawyer’s trick where, you know, because you didn’t 

specifically outlaw or rule out a particular action . . . Of course 

we’re getting interest from the legal profession members in the 

House here, Mr. Speaker. But I think they know of what I 

speak. I think they know of what I speak in terms of people that 

are overly legalistic and say, well you know you should have 

read the fine print, or well there was an asterisk that said, you 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

know, up to, including, but not this. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, there have been some fairly categorical 

statements made by members opposite when it comes to this 

file in terms of the protection of the Crown corporations, you 

know. And no amount of manoeuvring or hopping from one 

foot to the other or trying to dodge what has been a very clear 

statement on the part of the government, you know, if you’d 

have that kind of lawyering of the situation at election time, Mr. 

Speaker, I think people would have been very interested in that. 

I think people would have said, okay, well how does a partial 

privatization of Information Services Corporation work? And 

what does that say about your managerial acumen and the kind 

of care that you’re going to take of the finances of the province? 

And how in turn does that square with the fact that historically 

you’re coming from a party that has been, has done some pretty 

dangerous things with the finances of the province and some 

pretty reckless things in terms of taking public assets and 

turning them over into private hands, and taking that benefit for 

the many and putting it in the hands of the few, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I think people would have been real interested in the 

conversation about that at election time because of course that’s 

been contentious. And again the trajectory that you’ve seen 

members opposite on since the 2003 election, which as we’ll all 

recall, Mr. Speaker, the balloons were up in the arena at 

Rosetown ready to come down, and the win in that election was 

money in the bank for members opposite. They thought, you 

know, it was all over and done. 

 

But the leader of the opposition at the time, Elwin Hermanson, 

had I think the . . . He was straightforward enough with the 

people of Saskatchewan to say, yes, this is not just a historical 

thing. Or you know, you can look at the remarks from the 

member from Melfort at the time or the member from 

Kindersley or the member from Wood River or, you know, pick 

your Sask Party member at the time that was on record as 

saying, this should be sold or that should be sold or this should 

be sold. You know, the leader at the time was forthright enough 

to say, of course we’d be a fool not to sell the Crown 

corporations if you made the right offer. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again if that is the way it lined up with their 

history — and again there’s a pretty clear historical record when 

it comes to the way that members opposite and that party 

opposite have approached the Crowns and the kind of reckless 

and dangerous privatizations that have gone on in the history of 

this province — if they’d said something that lined up with that 

record, Mr. Speaker, I think people would’ve been very 

interested in that. And certainly in 2003 folks were very 

interested in what the then leader of the opposition, Elwin 

Hermanson, had to say about entertaining options around 

privatization. 

 

And I’ll hand it to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. He’s a smart guy. 

He recognized that the privatization of the Crown corporations 

was not something that people were interested in. And so you 

know, you get into things like the promise of Saskatchewan in 

2004 and the different sort of pronunciations by the new Leader 

of the Sask Party at the time, the member from Swift Current, 

the now Premier of the province. We got to see a lot of, you 

know, trust us. And, you know, we’re not interested in that. 

We’ve been selling, but the people of Saskatchewan ain’t 

buying, so we’re going to forgo all that, Mr. Speaker. And you 

get into some fairly categorical statements about what happens 

with the Crown corporations in this province. 

 

And I guess one of the things that’s interesting about that, Mr. 

Speaker, is that, you know, if it was just a listening to the 

broader sort of public sentiment and realizing that for the 

mainstream, the Saskatchewan electorate, that this business, this 

ideological fixation on trying to sell off various of our Crown 

corporations and to put into the hands of the few these assets 

that generate benefit for the many, if that was all there was to it, 

Mr. Speaker, then, you know, if that had answered the question, 

then on we would go. We wouldn’t be here debating this 

particular piece of legislation. But that Premier’s got a base in 

that party that used to be fond of saying things like, you know, 

he could sell off SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority] before breakfast, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what 

happens when you’re a big, tough right wing government. 

 

And you know, again I’ll give the Premier credit in this regard, 

Mr. Speaker. The Premier has counselled moderation and 

incremental change to his members and said, you know, we 

can’t go at these things straight on. And so that’s where you get 

into these gymnastics, Mr. Speaker, these sort of contortions 

where to square themselves with what the record is around, 

you’re not going to sell off public corporations. You see this 

business coming forward with all new liquor stores for SLGA 

will be developed by the private sector. And again, you know, I 

cast my mind back to the different Sask Party supporters that 

said, you know, right wing governments should be able to 

privatize SLGA before breakfast. 

 

And, you know, so how do you square that kind of sentiment 

out of your base, Mr. Speaker? Well you counsel moderation 

and you counsel incremental change. And so that’s where you 

see something like, you know, all the new liquor stores are 

going to go to the private sector. And you see that in no small 

way in this particular operation, Mr. Speaker. You see it in the 

way that they’re bringing forward 60 per cent, which different 

of the commentators of The StarPhoenix editorial board said in 

terms of the public policy initiative, “It was the worst of both 

worlds.” 

 

And why is it the worst of both worlds? Well because, Mr. 

Speaker, if you’re going to continue on with the corporation 

gaining revenue and providing a valuable service for the people 

of Saskatchewan and having a head office located here in 

Saskatchewan and having all these things for certain — and 

again, the different undertakings that have been made in the 

press release that have failed to find expression in the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker — if you’re going to get around all 

those things, you wouldn’t be selling off. Why would you be 

selling off Information Services Corporation? How does that 

make sense? 

 

And if you’re going to gain that maximum value of the assets, 

you know, you’d have to, again the commentators say you’d 

have to sell off the entire asset. But to square the circle, Mr. 

Speaker, to make these seemingly competing objectives work in 

concert, Mr. Speaker, that’s where you see these contortions, 

these gymnastic routines that are things like, you know, all new 

SLGA liquor stores will be developed by the private sector, 

and, you know, we’re going to jam our fingers into the 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

operations of the corporation. And you see it in this business of 

selling off 60 per cent of the corporation, which again, Mr. 

Speaker, last year returned $17 million to the people of 

Saskatchewan, which is in so many different ways a natural 

monopoly in this province. 

 

And, you know, how does that make sense? Well the only way 

this makes sense, Mr. Speaker, is because that Premier is trying 

to serve two masters. He’s trying to serve the ideological base 

of his party, and he’s trying to also square his public record 

with what the ideological demands of that base are. 

 

And I think there’s also a third sort of objective into the 

situation, Mr. Speaker. How do they get into these sort of 

operations to begin with? Again there’s a similarity to the 

mid-’80s, Mr. Speaker, where well, we need the money. We 

need the quick money, and you know, we’ll punt the costs off to 

future generations. And you see that in different initiatives 

being brought forward by this government, Mr. Speaker. You 

see it in the piece of legislation around SaskTel where now 

we’re going to be moving to bonds that have a 30-year limit, 

Mr. Speaker, the kind of practices that after the Gass 

Commission did its work in the early ’90s and took the full 

measure of the different sort of disastrous practices that have 

been going on in this province around the management of the 

finances said, you know, you shouldn’t be doing these things. It 

punts these problems off to future generations. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I often think of, you know, how in the 

early ’90s, coming to terms with what had happened in the ’80s 

and the way that you had to pay and pay and pay for decisions 

that had been taken in the ’80s. And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

this confluence of, you know, on the one hand sort of 

ideological drive, ideological desire on the part of members 

opposite, but it also has the added advantage of quick-term cash 

injection into the finances. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on so many fronts with this piece of 

legislation we see writ large the kind of motivation behind 

actions on the part of members opposite. You see admittedly — 

you know, again the Premier’s a gifted communicator and he is 

a canny political operator — and in this, I think you see the 

kind of contortions that the people of Saskatchewan get brought 

along for the ride with in terms of something that doesn’t make 

sense, something that has been deemed to be the worst of both 

worlds. 

 

But so why would they go ahead with doing it, Mr. Speaker? 

Again, it’s that Premier taking an incremental approach and 

saying, you know, look we’ll get to the right wing nirvana — to 

his conservative base — and here’s a sign of good faith. We’re 

going to chop off a portion of the Information Services 

Corporation for sale. And to the public who say, well what 

about all this, you know, we’re not going to sell off the Crowns, 

undertakings that you’ve made; it gets said, well you know, this 

wasn’t part of it. You know, you should’ve read the fine print. 

Or you know, I had my fingers crossed behind my back, or I 

don’t know what, Mr. Premier. 

 

But this is a target of opportunity for that government opposite, 

for the kind of contortions that they’ll be subjecting the people 

of Saskatchewan to. And again, you know, contortions are fine 

at the circus, but when it comes to public policy, this is a pretty 

significant piece of legislation when it comes to the life of that 

government and the kind of things that are driving their 

decision making. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the case that has been made 

around the finances and the way that, you know, one time sort 

of shots in the arm, be it from the federal government or from 

other sources, Mr. Speaker, the way that we saw the mid-term 

finances kept afloat for one more little, one more round, it 

reminds me of the old analogy of laying out the track one 

section in front of the train, Mr. Speaker. But one of the things 

we found out again in the history of this province is that 

approach to the finances, that approach to the good times, Mr. 

Speaker, can be pretty disastrous should there be a turn. 

 

And the kind of opportunity and the kind of prosperity that the 

people of Saskatchewan entrust their government to manage, 

they expect, they expect tough decisions, Mr. Speaker, but they 

also expect being dealt with plainly and straightly. And in terms 

of what has happened around ISC and the approach of this 

government on Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, is not 

surprising, but it is at odds with what the undertakings were in 

the 2007 election and the 2011 election, which again are 

supposed be the sort of benchmark activities that we as 

politicians engage with citizens in terms of saying, here’s our 

plan for the province. So, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation, 

it’s really interesting and it’s really significant I think in terms 

of where this government is at in terms of trying to come to 

terms with where the people of Saskatchewan want the province 

to go and where their right wing base demand that they see 

action and how they find sort of short-term cash, cash band-aids 

to get through the current circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The problem is, once you make decisions like this, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not something that has an impact that lasts an electoral 

cycle. It’s literally something . . . This kind of decision has an 

impact that goes for decades. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I think back to the different sort of 

approaches that were taken to the question of privatization in 

the 1980s in this province and the way that the hands were tied 

and the die was cast for generations to come in terms of 

decisions that were made in those years. This decision is not 

something to be, you know, to see the way it plays out over the 

next four years, Mr. Speaker. This is the kind of decision that 

will work its way through the process of this legislature, work 

its way through the life of this legislature for many years to 

come. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, the problem is, it’s almost a 

self-fulfilling prophecy when you sell off assets like this and 

you screw up the finances so badly that, you know, good luck, 

good luck trying to regain these opportunities. It’s a ship that 

sails, Mr. Speaker, and never to come around again. 

 

And you know, on the initial offering of these sales, Mr. 

Speaker, of the stock that will be associated with ISC, on the 

way that the press release doesn’t line up to the actual 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, on the way that the community 

involvement of ISC continues to . . . Will it be impacting 

schools like Albert Community School where the Information 



2340 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

Services Corporation has been a valuable community partner 

with schools like Albert Community School, you know, as just 

one of a multitude of broader sort of public engagement on the 

part of Information Services Corp? Will the natural sort of 

monopoly activities that are anticipated in this legislation, how 

will they be handled by a shareholder intent on profit versus 

that public interest which is balanced off right now, Mr. 

Speaker, where there’s a return to the public purse, but there’s 

also that concern around providing what are in many ways 

monopolistic services at a fair rate to the people that rely upon 

this corporation? 

 

How will it translate in terms of jobs, Mr. Speaker? How will it 

translate into being kept here in the province of Saskatchewan, 

headquarters that are being kept in the province? How will this 

translate into opportunities outside of the province in terms of 

again taking opportunity beyond our borders and providing 

additional revenue for what happens here in the province? 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, on a number of fronts, this is a very 

interesting piece of legislation and a very significant piece of 

legislation. And we, as the opposition, we’re going to talk to the 

people of Saskatchewan about it. We’re going to talk to the 

folks that should’ve had a say to begin with, that that 

government should have been straight with, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the proposals they were taking forward at election 

time, not just in 2011, Mr. Speaker, but 2007, and again, you 

know, the litany of undertakings made by the current Premier of 

the province in terms of who should be trusted when it comes to 

the conduct and the stewardship of these public assets. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan I think are pretty fair-minded and 

they’re pretty broad-minded. And I think they don’t like it when 

people are playing games, semantic games with what the 

intentions of the government are really all about. 

 

And I also think, Mr. Speaker, that people in Saskatchewan, 

they’ve got a memory that’s longer than just what happened last 

week or last year. I think they’re pretty active participants in the 

life of this province. And when they see something like this 

come along that again is brought forward out of the history of a 

particular political party, I think that again I don’t know that 

we’ll be ringing the bells as per the proposed sale of 

SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t know that this will 

constitute a boulder in the backpack of that government as they 

climb the hill, but I do think it’s significant. 

 

And I do think that the people will pay attention and say, you’re 

doing something now that is very much at odds with what you 

said when you were on my doorstep, when you were at my 

kitchen table, or when you were on my television screen, Mr. 

Speaker. So I know that there’s a lot more consultation and 

discussion that we hope to have on this piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I know that our critic, the member from Nutana, as the critic for 

Information Services Corporation and as an individual that has 

a very, very finely detailed understanding of the workings of 

this corporation and the way that it has been of benefit to the 

people of Saskatchewan and the different sort of concerns that 

are out there through third parties and through the broader 

society, Mr. Speaker, I know that she’s going to be continuing 

to do some good work on this front. And I know that there are 

others who have long been observers of the political evolution 

of this province and the debates and the discussions that have 

been had on a topic like privatization that look at this, Mr. 

Speaker, and say, well here we go again. And how much further 

does it spread out in terms of the activity of the government? 

 

We know that privatization is the seized upon policy tool in a 

number of other circumstances, Mr. Speaker, but again in terms 

of making a bigger move on the Crowns and a bigger move on 

what happens with taking public assets and turning them over to 

private hands. And oftentimes it is a bargain, Mr. Speaker, not 

even handling the management of those assets with the 

management of the sale of those assets in a proper way. We’ve 

seen those things in the history of this province and sadly, Mr. 

Speaker, we see a lot of it here again today. 

 

So again, you know, we know that the Premier and that party 

opposite, they’ve got a base that they’re looking to. We know 

that they’ve got members that are long on the record in terms of 

their hostility towards any kind of public enterprise, but we’ve 

always wondered how that squared with their other 

undertakings of late, Mr. Speaker. Well we see here how that 

works today in terms of, I think, what is being counselled as 

incremental privatization of the Crowns. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that other members will want 

to participate in this debate. I know that the people of 

Saskatchewan will want to have a bigger opportunity to register 

their opinion on something that they weren’t talked to at 

election time about, and something that again comes in a pretty 

interesting historical way in the debates of this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. So with that, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 69. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 69, The Information 

Services Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 79 — The 

Representation Act, 2012 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to enter the debate on Bill No. 79, An Act respecting 

Representation in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

This bill basically takes the work of the Constituency 

Boundaries Commission and puts it into legislation. And the 

government has to do this by law because of The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, which is interesting. This bill directly has some 

. . . well it’s connected to The Constituency Boundaries Act, Bill 

No. 36, which was passed this last spring. It lays out . . . right 

now we currently have 58 MLAs who sit in this legislature, and 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

what Bill No. 79 does is put into law now, this government has 

chosen to add three more MLAs. And I know that the 

opposition is well on record for opposing the addition of three 

more MLAs for many reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So Bill 79 

basically entrenches those three more seats along with any other 

name changes to other constituencies that have happened into 

law. 

 

So with the bill that was passed in the spring, we saw the 

addition of three more MLAs — which is something that I 

know that campaigning last year, knocking on doors, I didn’t 

hear a single person who I spoke with who had told me that 

they thought one of their priorities was adding any more MLAs. 

That was not something that people were asking for. And 

interestingly enough it was about this time last year, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we heard about the government’s 

intention to increase the number of seats in this legislature and 

add three more politicians . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Merry Christmas. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Yes. As my colleague would say, Merry 

Christmas. But I don’t think it was in fact a very merry 

Christmas present. 

 

So we heard about it about this time last year. So what 

happened prior to that? Well we had an election, and adding 

three more MLAs was not part of this government’s election 

plan, not in the platform. I’ve flipped through the platform 

many times. I haven’t seen the addition of three more MLAs at 

all in that particular platform, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So they had 

ample time at that point to let us know that this was part of their 

plan and let people know in Saskatchewan that this was part of 

their plan. 

 

The next opportunity they had actually was their Throne 

Speech, and I can’t remember the date, but it would have been 

in late October, early November. And was the addition of three 

more MLAs in the Throne Speech? No it was not, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So it did again come as a surprise in early December 

that the government was going to choose to . . . wanted to add 

three more MLAs. 

 

I just want to give you some context here in terms of 

representation and numbers here in Saskatchewan. So I just 

want to let you know how we are currently represented before 

the addition of these three more MLAs. So as it stands now 

already our constituent to MLA ratio is extremely low 

compared to many other provinces. So in Saskatchewan with a 

population of just over 1 million people and 58 MLAs, MLAs 

would represent 18,240 individuals. 

 

So let’s go next to Manitoba that has a greater population at 

1,250,600 and one fewer constituencies at 57, and they 

represent about 21,940 people per MLA, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Alberta, the MLA to constituent ratio continues to expand here. 

In Alberta, a population of 3,779,400, they have 87 

constituencies and they represent on average 43,441 

individuals. Let’s move to British Columbia with 4,573,300 

people, 85 constituencies, 85 MLAs, and they represent one 

MLA per 53,804 constituents. Quebec, 7,979,700, 125 seats, 

they represent 63,838 constituents. Ontario — this one is 

particularly interesting — 13,373,000 is the number of the 

population, 107 seats and 124,981 citizens to elected members 

there. So I think even prior to these changes, we were doing 

quite well in terms of ample representation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And again I know that not once, not once in this entire year that 

we’ve been talking about this have I had a single person come 

up to me and tell me that the addition of more politicians is a 

good thing. People have other priorities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

know that. And this is, in fact the members on the other side of 

the House seem to get quite riled up when we say it’s going to 

be at a cost of millions of dollars to the taxpayer, but that in fact 

is what it will cost over the course of a term and into perpetuity. 

And here they go, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I knew that that would 

get them a little fired up, but that is the reality — that adding 

more politicians costs the people of Saskatchewan a great deal 

of money. 

 

And I know people in Saskatchewan have very different 

priorities. As the culture critic, I know the film employment tax 

credit is a priority of many people here in Saskatchewan, not 

. . . The credit that this government chose to cut arbitrarily in 

the spring in the budget, that has huge ramifications on people, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. People have had to pack their bags and go 

earn a living elsewhere. And it’s not the chamber of commerce, 

which wouldn’t be a usual . . . You wouldn’t automatically 

think that the chamber of commerce would be speaking in 

favour of a film tax credit, but they did the numbers, and they 

came out firmly on side that the return on investments for the 

film employment tax credit and to have a film industry here in 

Saskatchewan was well worth the cost. 

 

So that’s one example of priorities. And again, it’s not just 

people who work in the film industry who supported the film 

employment tax credit. It was business people. It was people 

who enjoy having the Saskatchewan story told, not just here in 

this province but around the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Lower costs, for another priority, is making sure that 

prescriptions are affordable. This government has increased the 

costs to seniors and youth for prescription drugs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I know I represent a constituency where the extra cost 

per prescription actually has a very real impact on many, many 

people. I know the one thing that this government has chosen 

not to touch is creating social housing. They’ve chosen an 

approach that I think still hasn’t quite met the mark, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So in terms of the people in Saskatoon Riversdale, I know that 

adding three more politicians was not a priority and continues 

not to be a priority. They’d rather have millions of dollars 

funnelled into programs and services that better support citizens 

in leading their best possible lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Another part of this legislation: so Bill No. 79, as I said, 

entrenches in The Constituency Boundaries Act basically or it 

has to . . . We passed a resolution here. We is actually generous; 

the opposition did not support the resolution.  

 

We had actually, last spring we had two opportunities. We 

brought forward a reasoned amendment suggesting trying to 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

work with the government and help them understand that they 

were making a huge mistake, that this wasn’t speaking to the 

population or the needs and wants and desires of Saskatchewan 

people. Adding three more politicians was not speaking to what 

people really had as priorities. 

 

So the opposition on two occasions in the spring tried to work 

with the government and provide some opportunities to not add 

three more MLAs. But because there are nine of us on this side 

of the House and a considerable number more on the opposite 

side of the House, our amendments fell on deaf ears, although 

not on deaf ears of the people of Saskatchewan. I know, talking 

to many people, they were very pleased that we were talking 

about an issue that was important to them, that they in principle 

agree with, that adding three more politicians was not 

something that they wanted to see happen. 

 

So this resolution, so this resolution that was passed in the 

spring, the resolution in the spring has to then come to . . . 

Because of The Constituency Boundaries Act, it now needs to 

be entrenched in law. So that’s why we’re talking about Bill 

No. 79, an Act respecting representation in the legislature. 

 

One of the arguments made, I know, following the 

announcement last December was that constituencies were too 

big or it was too difficult. But the irony is . . . And the Premier 

actually suggested, when they decided to add three more MLAs, 

he said perhaps there would be two urban and one rural. But 

obviously there is a commission that is struck that is responsible 

for determining where those constituencies are and how they 

play out. 

 

So the interesting thing is there were many members on the 

opposite side of the House who talked about constituency size. 

But the interesting thing, we have two northern constituencies 

that are entrenched in legislation that I had colleagues in. Our 

colleagues on this side of the House who represent the biggest 

constituencies in the province were not in favour of this either. 

They know that it’s a very difficult thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

to represent a large geographic area. Definitely, for sure. And 

there’s challenges to being a rural MLA, and there are 

challenges to being an urban MLA. There’s pros and cons in 

both experiences. But the wonderful thing about technology is 

it’s much easier to stay in touch than it ever was. We have 

allowances to be able to create offices and have our offices not 

just in one location, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So there are many 

ways of trying to better support our constituents in some of 

these large geographic areas. 

 

But another part that we had disagreed with was excluding 

those under 18 out of the count. I have a daughter who’s going 

to be 15 soon. So in the creation, in the redrawing of Saskatoon 

Riversdale, she wasn’t included in that count despite the fact 

she will be voting in the next election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

think an interesting person who weighted in on this debate 

actually was the Children’s Advocate, who talks that this is 

about rights. This is an issue of human rights, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. He says, “To eliminate those under 18 of the eligibility 

runs contrary to everyone’s right to equal representation. Every 

citizen has the right to effective representation.” 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he also outlined, the Children’s 

Advocate also said that he believed there was no valid reason to 

exclude young people, and that exclusion based on age is not 

acceptable whether it’s because you’re young or because you’re 

on the other end of the spectrum. Exclusion at any time based 

on age is not acceptable, and that equals discrimination based 

on age. So I know that there were many strong voices weighing 

in against the Bill No. 36 to add three more MLAs. 

 

I think the one thing that the Premier had said in some of his 

speeches, he had said elections are about voters. Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I couldn’t disagree more with that statement. 

Elections are about citizens. Just because you don’t vote doesn’t 

mean that the people who are elected are not important and 

valid. Elections are not about voters. Elections are about 

citizens. If elections were about voters, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 

a woman less than 100 years ago, elections were not about me 

then. Women did not have the opportunity to vote in 

Saskatchewan less than 100 years ago. First Nations men and 

women, not until 1960 were they eligible to vote and not lose 

their status. So elections, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I couldn’t 

disagree more with the Premier — are not about voters. They 

are about citizens, and counting those under the age of 18 out is 

absolutely not acceptable. 

 

I think it also really disadvantages some of the communities, 

First Nations communities, where you have some of the 

population growth here in Saskatchewan, where you have a 

large number of young people in some of these, in First Nations 

communities. So this excluding those under 18 out of the count 

really has an impact on skewing those constituencies, I believe, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think there are many, many difficulties with adding three 

more MLAs. And this Bill No. 79 to which we’re speaking 

today entrenches those three more MLAs and the names of all 

the other constituencies into law here. But we still continue to 

think that this was a huge mistake and unfair to many citizens, 

and just makes absolutely no sense in a time where this 

government has record revenues in this province but seems to 

be making some decisions like they don’t have record revenues. 

We wonder, with the debt going up by $1 billion this year, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that perhaps this government is out of money. 

So choosing to add three more MLAs, again governing is about 

priorities, and the priority should not be to add three more 

MLAs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So in terms of Bill No. 79, I know that I have other colleagues 

who will be weighing into the debate and discussion on Bill 79. 

And again I know we have very strong feelings on this side of 

the House, which I think are reflective of many people here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Oh, interestingly enough, actually I have a letter here from the 

Taxpayers Federation which again . . . The Canadian Taxpayers 

Federation, an editorial, I’d just like to read a small portion of 

this. It says, “During the recent provincial election . . .” So 

obviously I’m just going to back up and preface this. So this 

was written a little closer to this time last year rather than right 

now. So: 

 

During the recent provincial election do you remember 

Premier Brad Wall saying anything about a dreadful 

shortage of provincial politicians? 

 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

Do you remember him saying anything during televised 

leader debates, radio interviews or in newspaper stories 

about his plan to add three more seats to the provincial 

legislature? 

 

We don’t. In fact we checked his party’s provincial 

platform and there was no mention about adding more 

politicians. 

 

Then why is this government sliding in legislation during 

the busy Christmas season that would add three seats to 

the Saskatchewan Legislature? Good question [says the 

taxpayer federation]. 

 

So again, it’s not just the opposition who has some concerns 

with adding three more MLAs. I believe it’s a large majority of 

people here in Saskatchewan. But the Taxpayers Federation 

does not think it is a great plan either. Again, when you think 

about priorities of governments, you think about how best to 

spend citizens’ very hard-earned money, the taxpayers. And 

we’re all taxpayers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I would argue that 

this isn’t the best choice, the best priority. I think that we could 

have spent that money more wisely, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

think citizens in Saskatchewan would agree with that. 

 

So as I said, when I got sidetracked yet again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that I know that my colleagues also have much to say 

about this bill. And I would like to move to adjourn debate, as 

much as my colleagues would like . . . [inaudible]. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79, The 

Representation Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 72 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 72 — The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 

on the Bill 72, An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Act and to 

make a consequential amendment to The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990, to join in on, I guess, debating the bill and 

some of the concerns, and I guess the concern that has been 

raised about safety and safety of our highway workers and flag 

people. And you know, our condolences go out to the family 

and the loved ones of the individual that was, last summer was 

killed in a traffic accident. And, you know, again this is good 

legislation coming forward to address the situation, to protect 

not only highway workers but motorists to make sure they’re 

protected. 

 

So we’ve seen in this Act there’s provisions to come up with 

some measures to assist and try to make I guess the area, work 

zones, the orange zones, safer for individuals. But not just about 

the workers; it’s about, you know, motorists. It’s about anyone 

that’s out there on the roads to make sure when you talk about 

safety. So of course the government’s taken a response, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to that and we agree with the government to 

go ahead and move forward on this. And we will support that 

and we do support that. And it’s the right thing to do, and if we 

can help out in any way, you know, from our government, a 

government to help out the people, it’s good. 

 

And we have to sometimes come together as a Legislative 

Assembly and work together to pass some of this. But I guess, 

you know, they’re talking about different areas in this bill. That 

was one area of it. It covers off safety and safety is important. 

Losing one life is one life too many. It impacts a family. It 

impacts a lot of people, whether it’s the workers, whether it’s 

family. So when you talk about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s 

one area that we’re doing. 

 

Where we’re looking at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from another 

side and another point, there are other provisions in here that 

they’re going to amend this legislation. And they’re going to 

put in some ways to deal with the licence plates and the way 

one would operate, and the way SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] deals with our licence plates and 

whether it’s the stickers and the police enforcement, and the 

way they can, I guess, take possession of certain vehicles. So 

it’s interesting to see how this bill goes on, and we would have 

a chance to talk about that. There’s a lot of areas to go in and 

talk about. 

 

But you know, when you talk about safety, and I know my 

colleagues have raised this about the safety area of it, and not 

only in the orange zone but, you know, the amount of deaths 

that we have had in our province with impaired driving. And if 

you look at that and using those comparisons — you know, the 

amount — I think it’s 147 right now currently, and that’s not to 

the end of the year yet. We’ll see what happens. 

 

And I think I want to talk a little bit about that and safety. And 

safety is important because they’re talking about the safety. 

And any time you lose, you know, the loss of a loved one for 

any family to have to go through is, I guess the notice being 

notified of that, your heart goes out in prayers to the families 

that have to deal with that. 

 

But having said that, I think we have to — and we have — 

commended the government for bringing in this piece of 

legislation. And I think it’s going to help. But there is also, you 

know, so many people suffering with the impaired driving and 

the death that that’s caused. And I think we have to look at the 

deaths that have been caused by impaired driving, and I think 

the government’s going to have to look at this closely. 

 

And I’m going to talk a little bit about that, just to show the 

comparisons. And I’m glad that the government’s bringing 

some legislation forward for when you have a loss of life. But 

when I look at the numbers and hearing my colleagues talk 

about the numbers, it kind of just, you know, gives you a little 

more attention to the situations. And it’s concerning to see the 

amount of family members, loved ones, kids, and people that 

lose their life to an impaired driver or to an accident. And when 

you find out that it was a cause of someone’s impaired driving, 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

and we look at . . . And I know we’re going to get into it, and 

I’m going to have an opportunity to talk more about this in 

more detail when we talk about regulations that are being 

changed, proposed legislation that’s being amended and 

regulations that will be changed. 

 

But I want to go back and refer . . . When we see a bill like Bill 

72, what it’s trying to do. It’s about safety. It’s about taking 

measures to prevent the loss of life. And we commend that. But 

when we see 147 people dying in our province because of 

impaired driving, then we say the government has to do more 

and needs to do more. And we’re hoping that the government 

will be coming forward with ways of dealing with this because 

you can’t just open up regulations and allow access to more 

alcohol and not realize that you’re going to have more. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And you know, some minister has made comments about well 

there’s more people. Well that’s not an answer. You know, 

that’s not an answer. When you have 147 fatalities in car 

accidents because of impaired driving to say well because of 

our population, there’s just a . . . You know, that is just the 

wrong way to look at it. And I think for some people, it would 

be a little bit upsetting to them to hear that. 

 

Now we have to do more, and I think the government has to do 

more to address the numbers. And the numbers are way too 

high. I mean one, you know, person’s death in an accident 

caused by impaired driving is probably one too many. We 

understand that, and I think people will agree with that. But to 

have 147, I think the government has to do more and has to start 

taking some action on this. 

 

And again any time governments want to increase, I guess, its 

fines or the conditions to address this, definitely we have to go 

through legislation. We have to go through a process. And we’ll 

bring that information back here, and we have to debate it to 

make sure that we’re doing the right things and making sure 

we’re taking care of all our Saskatchewan citizens and people 

that are visiting this beautiful province because it’s not just 

Saskatchewan residents that probably lose their lives here. We 

don’t know exactly. Were some of them, you know, visiting? 

Had they moved away? Did they come back to our province to 

see their family, or were they here a tourist? You know, that’s 

many people impacted in different ways. 

 

So when we see that and, you know, about safety, and it’s about 

preparing and making sure that we have the right, I guess, tools 

for our enforcement officers to make sure that they have the 

opportunity to address. And you know, you talk about it, and I 

know my colleague mentioned it when she was referring to 

talking about, you know, the bill and using examples and 

showing that there’s more work that needs to be done. Clearly, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that needs to happen. 

 

You know, the RID [report impaired drivers] program, you 

know, report impaired driving, again I commend. This is a good 

thing and that’s . . . You know, mothers against driving, you 

know. You have all the different groups that are . . . MADD 

[Mothers Against Drunk Driving], you know. You have a lot of 

groups that are out there doing what they can do, and the public, 

the awareness, SGI being . . . And the awareness of reporting, 

you know, drinking and driving and stuff like that. And if you 

see something happen . . . And that’s a good, that’s a good way 

to do it. And you know, you talk about some of the measures I 

guess that we need to come forward with and government needs 

to do. But the challenges that are out there . . . And I mean, I 

don’t want to get too much into the regulations because we will 

have that opportunity. But I just feel I think when it comes to 

safety, government has to be doing more and needs to do more 

to deal and to curb the 147 deaths. That’s way too many. 

 

And the frustration, you know, that people are saying and we 

have to do more. And you know, there’s a way that government 

can do more by introducing legislation and provisions. And I’m 

not sure exactly what the government plan is, but it’s about 

educating. Education’s important, and you know, I’m going to 

have an opportunity later to talk more about this when we get 

into one of the other legislations, a piece of legislation that’s 

coming forward for debate. 

 

But I guess the frustration . . . And you talk about that from 

people saying educating people about the alcohol and the 

effects, and people going in for one or two drinks, you know. 

Where are we looking at? And is it three drinks? And does 

somebody realize, you know, who’s responsible for that? Are 

we going to start saying, holding, you know, and legislation . . . 

And is it more going to be on the facility or the establishment 

that’s allowing those individuals to drink and then they leave 

whether it’s to home? There’s different ways to look at it when 

a person’s not aware of how much they drank. And we know 

that some people leave places and they’re just, they’re wasted. 

And it wasn’t just social drinking. They might have started out 

having a few drinks, harmless. And that’s fine. Nobody’s 

opposed. But to see some of the damage and destruction that’s 

done after that person gets in their vehicle and leaves, you 

know, a house party or they leave an establishment where there, 

yes, there’s a bouncers in front. And it’s about safety.  

 

And it goes back to 72 when you talk about safety. We’re trying 

to have some provisions to protect our workers, highway 

workers, so we come up with legislation to protect that but also 

using the comparison on other issues that are facing motorists 

and people that travel on our highways. Those are the areas. So 

I’m just trying to show that the relationship to government 

making a response to, you know, clearly an incident that needed 

to be addressed. And I commend the government for addressing 

that.  

 

But I don’t commend the government for not addressing 147 

fatalities because of drinking and driving. And more needs to be 

done. I think people of our province deserve that and want that. 

Those families, you know, need to have government come 

forward to say, we’re willing, and we’re prepared to take some 

action, and we need to do more to protect all Saskatchewan 

residents when it comes into dealing with this type of a 

situation.  

 

But I know they’re going to the orange zone, and I know 

individuals are supposed to slow down to 60. And they refer to 

whether it’s gates, whether they narrow the pathways. When 

individuals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, go into an area that’s the 

orange zone, where we have highway worker construction 

going on, to slow them down, they’re recommending there are 

certain ways that they can address that situation by slowing 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2345 

down traffic. 

 

And then they refer to in here as photo radar which I think is a 

good thing. It’s another provision that could protect. And they 

talk about ensuring that the motorist is responsible to make sure 

that their plates at all times can be visible for photo radar, or if 

need be, they’re in a work zone, that’s going to give some 

protection to the workers. And I mean, some people for 

whatever reason maybe aren’t aware of it, don’t see it. I’m not 

sure what’s causing them not to notice the signs. 

 

When you go into a highway work area, we’ll say, with 

highway workers, the flag people, the signs, there’s so much . . . 

the flashing lights. There is so much notice given to individuals 

that you’re coming upon a I guess a work site. There’s going to 

be flag personnel there. The warnings are there, and I don’t 

know why some people miss it. And you’ll see some people 

and, you know, that fly by. And you wonder . . . Even I have 

done that. I’ve seen some people, you know, drive by me, and 

I’m thinking, wow, the speed they’re going when you’re 

supposed to be slowing down. And those, those are some of the 

issues I think they’re going to address, and I think it’s time that, 

you know, it be addressed. 

 

We’ve been hearing that for years I think from workers saying, 

there’s more protection needs to be put, whether you’re passing 

our highway vehicles that are with flashing lights and are 

saying . . . whether they’re painting. There’s a lot of different 

provisions. Whether it’s the paving companies that are in and 

whether they work for highways and they’re doing repairs on 

highways, they’re highway workers, or it’s construction 

companies doing that. We have to make sure that they’re 

protected while they’re on our highways. And we have to make 

sure that the education and awareness to people . . . And maybe 

that’s where it needs to happen. And you know, maybe the 

government’s going to come out with more. 

 

And I know Highways itself does a lot of awareness, and you 

see on the commercials on TV. And they do do a lot of 

awareness, and I commend what they’re trying to do to reach 

out and make people more aware of the orange zone, making 

people more aware of slowing down. And when you see, you 

know, people being injured and hurt because of . . . They’re 

doing, just doing their job. You know, they went to work to try 

to take care of a road, to make sure that our roads are, you 

know, kept in a good maintenance. And you know, whether it’s 

resurfacing, whatever they’re doing on that highway, whether 

it’s signs they’re putting up, whatever area they are, that we’re 

doing all we can as a government, and as I guess the 

department, to make sure workers go to work and are safe and 

can return to their home being safe. 

 

We have to do all we can do, and I think that’s clearly what 

we’ve been asked to do. And I think, you know, again, I’ll go, 

this is a good idea, and I think it’s an opportunity to address an 

area that needed to be addressed in light of the loss of a life. 

And it brought some attention, and I’m glad that it brought the 

attention. But also, like I said, there’s other areas where we 

have to, you know, loss of life we see, and we need to do more. 

And the government needs to do more. And hopefully over the 

next while government will introduce some legislation to 

protect and educate people about the effects of alcohol, 

especially impaired driving, and seeing the cause of death that 

has happened there. 

 

And I think some education and awareness is warranted by the 

government in light of allowing access to alcohol the way the 

government is. And some people will have access to . . . And I 

see some of the regulations being introduced, and I don’t want 

to get into that so much. But I want to make comment of a few 

areas because if somebody is out and they’re going to a spa 

now, apparently they’re going to be allowed to have drinks 

while they’re at a spa, whether they’re getting, you know, a 

pedicure, a manicure, whatever it is, the way I read it. If you 

look at certain regulations that the government’s going to . . . 

 

So a person could have a few drinks. Now how would that 

impact that person if all of a sudden they go out and they get in 

an accident. And all of a sudden it’s . . . They’re impaired 

because of the amount of alcohol they’ve had. Who will be 

liable for that? Because the person went in thinking they could 

have that. So you know, and I know they talk about social 

drinking, and you have to watch it. So I’m a little concerned 

about where we’re going with some of the changes. And I’m 

going to get a chance to talk about that, and I will get a chance. 

And I think there’s some numbers that we need to talk about, 

but I know that there’s people concerned about some of the 

changes. 

 

But I just refer to it because when we’re talking about the loss 

of a life, and if that’s in the orange zone or if that’s just 

highway workers, it’s not stopping somebody who’s impaired 

driving, going out and driving, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And even 

though we have all the warnings — we have the signs going up, 

we have the gates to make vehicles narrow, be aware, and you 

bring all the awareness with the signs — but if it’s an impaired 

driver and that person’s just not aware of that and they’re under 

the influence of alcohol, what’s going to stop them from 

slowing down or even paying attention? And they go through 

and cause an accident, and we end up having a loss of life 

again.  

 

Now that person might have been out, thought they just were a 

social drinker and had a few drinks, and went out. So if it’s 

found out in that situation, you know, I think those are things 

the government’s going to have to look at. You’re giving an 

area where you’re allowing certain people to consume alcohol, 

you know. Whether it’s the right thing at the end of the day, I 

don’t know if it is. But if it impacts and it creates an accident or 

a loss of life or injury to someone, then I don’t know that these 

so-called changes are going to be warranted or seen by the 

public as a good thing. So there’s a lot of concern that way 

when it comes to that type of situation. 

 

So when I go back into this, you know, and I want to be clear, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, people are concerned. And again I go back 

to the loss of life and, you know, any family that has to deal 

with that and a tragedy that has happened and has impacted 

many Saskatchewan families, and with the loss of a life of 

someone going to work figuring they were protected and 

unfortunately, you know, we lose a worker or we lose a 

construction worker or a highway worker, somebody who’s 

there, asked to do an excellent job and was doing a good job. 

We have to make sure they’re protected so that hopefully at the 

end of the day they put in their good work. They do a job. They 

go home and they take care of their family to be reunited with 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

their loved ones. Everybody wants that and we hope that . . . 

And when these situations arise, we know we have to do more. 

 

And again we are proposing some changes, whether it’s the 

photo radar, whether it’s the gates narrowing the access to a 

work zone. There are things whether it’s the flagman, whether 

it’s the awareness, and I guess the fines. You look at the fines 

and trying to impact it more so those individuals that decide that 

they’re going to not, for whatever reason, didn’t notice it, 

maybe the impact of . . . You know, the fine is what needs to 

happen. And maybe more needs to be done and maybe harsher 

penalties to those individuals need to come out, and maybe if 

this doesn’t go far enough and maybe we have to do more, but I 

think it’s a good start and it’s trying to deal with a situation. 

 

And again, I commend the government for moving forward on 

this. This is a good start and let’s see where we go and if, you 

know, hopefully it saves lives. And it brings people, educates 

people, individuals who are driving, and they won’t be driving 

through the orange zones and the work areas, that they’ll 

remember and there’s such an impact that they will, you know, 

pay attention and slow down. And we know that people get 

busy on the roads and technology sometimes. We know we 

passed legislation to protect people from hands free device that 

people were using and it was taking their attention, and 

sometimes I think that’s caused a lot of problems. 

 

And again, legislation that protects individuals when drivers are 

paying too much attention to their cellphones and, you know, 

certain other device that now we have whether it’s . . . There’s 

many different device that people are using now that distract 

them when they’re driving and to say that, you know, it’s clear 

that our police officers, our enforcement officers can ticket 

people who are not following the law. And I think that’s a good 

law. It adds something. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So it’s all about safety, and anytime we see safety coming in to 

bring people’s attention and educates people, I commend what 

we’re doing and the government and, you know, everyone 

that’s coming together to bring awareness about the orange 

zone and about making sure people are safe. But at this time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to make a few comments about 

this and join my colleagues, and I know more of my colleagues 

have comments they want to say about some of the other bills. 

At this time I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 72. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 73 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter debate here this afternoon as it relates to Bill 

No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. I’ve read 

through the minister’s comments as it relates to this bill that’s 

been brought forward and I’ve also analyzed some of what’s 

been put forward here. 

 

What I would say is that I’ll get to the point of the bill and the 

suggested intended consequences that the minister has put 

forward. But I will say that it’s going to be really important for 

us to establish that the consultation that the minister has 

suggested has occurred in this bill. It’s going to be important for 

us to make sure we’re doing our follow-up, our checks on that 

work, to ensure that that’s the case. 

 

Far too often when this government has derived legislation and 

brought legislation to this Assembly, they’ve dismissed the 

consultation process that serves building good policy, Mr. 

Speaker, building good legislation. And on a piece of legislation 

like this, it’s awfully critical that the stakeholders, those that are 

impacted, are fully engaged in the development of this bill and 

that the consequences — intended and unintended — are fully 

considered by the minister. I don’t have a level of confidence, 

Mr. Speaker, that that’s occurred in this case. It’s been far too 

often when this government rushes forward legislation with its 

own agenda and has dismissed that important consultation 

process for whom is impacted by legislation, in this case our 

municipalities all across this province, urban and rural. 

 

So we’re going to be following up with SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] and with SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and with 

administrators, rural and urban, to make sure that this bill 

reflects their consultation process that’s been suggested by the 

. . . alleged by the government opposite, and making sure that 

there’s not opportunities to strengthen legislation here at this 

point in time by way of amendments or making sure that there’s 

not aspects of this legislation that aren’t in the best interests as 

well of municipalities. 

 

To look at municipalities in a broader context and the 

challenges and pressures that they’re facing, I would argue that 

this is certainly very lacking by way of stepping up to the real 

challenges and pressures that they’re facing in all across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s our rural municipalities or 

our urban municipalities, there’s important needs that 

government needs to be able to support. 

 

I think of so many of our small towns, our cities all across this 

province and the pressures they’re facing by way of making 

sure that they’re able to deliver . . . have access to water, be able 

to deliver drinking water, but also able to deal with waste water 

within this province. And I know there’s such a pressure for 

many, and whether it’s the city of Regina who’s dealing with 

putting forward a plan as it relates to waste water, or whether 

it’s communities all across this province. 

 

So many of these small towns, this is really the issue that 

they’re dealing with. In so many cases we have lagoons and 

systems that are at capacity or that are at their lifespan, Mr. 



December 3, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2347 

Speaker, and they’re looking for real solutions that will allow 

them to chart a course into the future that doesn’t come at a 

significant cost for their residents. And in many ways that’s the 

big connect that we need to make is that a lot of the decisions 

and debt that municipalities are being forced to take on right 

now is certainly coming as at a direct consequence to 

ratepayers, families, and businesses all across this province who 

are going to carry that burden, carry that cost. 

 

And if we look at it in many ways and we look at the growth 

agenda of this current government, this government needs to do 

a better job of supporting those who are impacted with that 

growth agenda and making sure that we’re building healthier, 

stronger communities for tomorrow and for years to come. 

 

And it’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker, to boast about growth 

as this government does, but then fail to support that growth on 

the ground in the communities where the impacts are being felt. 

And it’s being felt by certainly families and homeowners. But 

it’s also being felt by those communities, those municipalities 

all across this province who are working hard to expand their 

infrastructure to meet the needs of growing communities by 

way of, as I’ve said, some of the water and waste water issues, 

but also the road infrastructure and public infrastructure that’s 

at strain, in strain and needs to be renewed, Mr. Speaker, and 

also the development of lots, servicing of lots that certainly is 

an important responsibility of municipalities. 

 

What we see is a government that boasts about growth, but then 

takes a very narrow view as to what role they play in supporting 

that growth and ensuring that growth improves the lives of 

communities and improves the lives of people. And I know 

when I look at the balance sheet of our province in a broader 

sense, we have to understand what’s going on in our 

municipalities all across this province, small and large, and that 

is significant debt growth within those municipalities. And of 

course there’s only one source of revenues to pay for that debt, 

and that’s back to property taxes. 

 

And it’s fair to say that, while our municipalities are very 

constrained with the revenue sources they have to deal with, it’s 

also fair to say that they have inordinate pressures and 

challenges, costs that they’re needing to deal with in addressing 

some of the challenges and opportunities we’re facing as a 

province. We have a government that’s failing to enable 

municipalities to address that in a meaningful way. And it is 

certainly fair to say that while the revenues of municipalities are 

constrained, the revenues of the province certainly are much 

broader, and certainly the province has many other fiscal tools 

at their disposal and record revenues to deal with these 

challenges and these pressures. 

 

Simply abdicating any responsible role in working with 

municipalities isn’t the right approach of this government. What 

we need to see is a government that’s willing to work with 

municipalities, to listen to municipalities, and to put forward 

thoughtful, meaningful solutions to address the challenges of 

the day. And I know that’s important whether you’re in Cupar, 

Mr. Speaker, or whether you’re in Carlyle or whether you’re in 

Strasbourg or Southey — as I know the middle desk here would 

care about — or all across this province in our larger centres. 

 

And I know Regina as an example . . . And I watch the debt 

levels and the borrowing of the city of Regina as but one 

example. And it’s exploded over the past few years, the 

borrowing limits for the city of Regina. And I look at the 

demands they’re facing by way of infrastructure, water, waste 

water, community and lot development, Mr. Speaker. And those 

pressures are inordinate and they’re placed in a heavy burden 

onto the backs of property tax payers, homeowners, business 

owners all across our city, and then of course across the 

province as well, Mr. Speaker. And I know there’s a role for 

government to work together to make sure that this 

infrastructure and these infrastructure challenges are met. 

 

I am disturbed by what I see right now by way of protection or 

the lack thereof of our Qu’Appelle watershed as but one 

example that’s directly related to municipal infrastructure. 

When I read the reports that analyze what’s directly going back 

into the Qu’Appelle chain, Mr. Speaker, from our fine city and 

back into the natural environment, Mr. Speaker — that connects 

in fact right through your constituency, Mr. Speaker — through 

that Qu’Appelle chain right through the creek of course and up 

through Last Mountain, in through the valley lakes and on and 

beyond, up through Round Lake and Crooked Lake, and the 

kind of contaminants that have been studied and analyzed and 

found to be within that system are something that we should be 

acting in a way to, acting now to protect ourselves for the . . . 

protect that natural environment for the next generation, Mr. 

Speaker. This government seems uninterested in playing an 

active role in working with municipalities to address these 

challenges, but we know not doing so comes at a consequence 

to so many. 

 

So when I look at the broader financial circumstance of the 

province, we have to take into view our municipal partners 

because it has such a direct impact both on the communities but 

also the property tax payers, the homeowners and businesses 

across the province. And really we see a very significant 

off-loading of debt onto municipalities, and it doesn’t fool 

anyone, Mr. Speaker. All we have to do is go look at the 

respective books of our small communities and towns and cities 

all across this province, and we know that the debt in this 

province is growing in a very, very significant way and that 

certainly someone’s going to have to pay for it. In this case it’s 

going to be residents, homeowners, families, as I’ve stated. 

 

Now this bill puts forward various changes that we’ll be 

analyzing. We’ll be seeking consultation and input with 

stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, with SUMA and SARM and 

administrators, both rural and urban. A few of these changes 

involve annexation and processes around annexation. We want 

to make sure that these are fair, both to urban and rural partners, 

that they are as effective as they can be. We know that this can 

be a big challenge for our municipal partners. We want to make 

sure that this represents the best interests of the public by way 

of the changes that have been put forward. 

 

It also highlights the changes that were made unilaterally by 

that government without any consultation as it relates to the 

New West Trade Partnership, and we want to fully understand 

what the impacts are on municipalities and our local economies 

all across the province by way of procurement and potential 

costs for those jurisdictions that are now having their hands tied 

in how they operate by way of an agreement that was signed by 

this government without any consultation with Saskatchewan 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2012 

people, and making sure we understand how this will impact the 

operations of our municipalities across this province but also 

impact them by way of cost. 

 

And I know there has been a lot of concern by way of, now, the 

fact that the tendering process will go all across Western 

Canada, that there’s a potential that this may simply drive up 

the bids that are coming in from municipalities, driving up the 

costs of our public goods but also sending our public dollars 

outside our province in many cases to other jurisdictions. And I 

believe there’s many that would like to have a reasonable 

discussion about how do we use our public dollars, deliver 

effective efficient services and keep some of those local 

benefits, economic benefits back within our province and within 

our jurisdiction, making sure that they’re driving investment in 

this province and collecting tax revenues as well. So that’s a big 

area that I look forward to further consultation with our 

members all across this province. 

 

I also recognize that there’s some changes as it relates to some 

of the recommendations suggested by SARM and SUMA. 

We’re going to go directly to the source, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that these do reflect their best interests and then do a broader 

analysis as to the impact on our province. 

 

I know when I look a little further here, it talks about bringing 

about certain flexibility for borrowing. Mr. Speaker, this speaks 

to the fact that this government is an unwilling partner to be 

working with our municipalities across this province in making 

sure that they are properly resourced to address the 

infrastructure challenges that they’re facing. And instead of 

simply bringing about broader flexibility so they can borrow 

more, property tax payers can pay more, Mr. Speaker, or 

homeowners who can least afford it are going to be asked to 

pay more. We look to a provincial government with a broader 

set of fiscal tools, a broader set of revenues to be working with 

our municipalities, to be addressing those challenges that are 

real, whether you’re in Moose Jaw or whether you’re in Prince 

Albert and you’re looking at that bridge that’s been 

piecemealed together by this government instead of stepping up 

to the plate and doing the proper work, rehabilitation that was 

required. 

 

So there’s many areas that we’ll be looking at. But certainly we 

have concern with a government that’s really shirking its 

responsibility onto the backs of the homeowner, back onto the 

backs of the property tax payer, Mr. Speaker, instead of a 

government playing the role that it should in developing 

healthier, stronger communities for tomorrow and, again, of 

course the impacts that are a direct result of the unilateral 

agreement signed by this government that now ties the hands in 

many ways of municipalities all across this province. These are 

the kinds of questions we’re going to be bringing forward. 

We’re going to be there as advocates and champions for the 

communities across this province, for those for whom it 

impacts. And we’re going to make sure the proper consultation 

is done to make sure it reflects their best, best interests, the best 

interests of our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that being said, at this point in time, I will adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 73, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 73, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. It now being past the hour of 

5 o’clock, this House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2317 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2317 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2317 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2317 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2317 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2318 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2318 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day of Persons With Disabilities 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2318 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2318 

 All Nations Job Fair 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 

 Publishing House Celebrates Anniversary 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 

 Habitat for Humanity Writes Success Stories 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 2319 

 Nipawin Seniors’ Facility Observes Anniversary 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2319 

 Celebration in Rider Nation 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Tuberculosis Prevention 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2321 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2321 

 Immigration Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2322 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323 

 State of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2324 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2324 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Community Rink Affordability Grant  

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 

 Bill No. 84 — The Common Business Identifiers Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 80 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2012 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2327 

 Bill No. 81 — The Global Transportation Hub Authority Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2329 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2330 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2333 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 2334 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2335 

 



 

 Bill No. 79 — The Representation Act, 2012 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2340 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2012 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2343 

 Bill No. 73 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2346 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Act ...................................................... 2335 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 66 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2335 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


