




















































Hansard: May 16, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 47A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 16, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1527 

 May 16, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce Ms. Mary Ann Rippert, past president of the 

South Saskatchewan chapter of Cystic Fibrosis Canada, who is 

joining us in the Speaker’s gallery. Mr. Speaker, of course we 

know the great work that the Cystic Fibrosis Canada do as far 

as education, support, and also making sure we as government 

members know the importance of this disease and the challenge 

that this disease presents. 

 

May is Cystic Fibrosis Awareness Month, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’ll be hearing a member’s statement on that in a little bit; 

but I’d like all members to stand . . . or not to stand. I’d like all 

members to welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will take the 

minister’s invitation to stand and offer a welcome to Ms. Mary 

Ann Rippert and say thank you to her for the work that she has 

done with cystic fibrosis over the years, and thank her as well 

for the work that the association does in raising awareness and 

promoting good solutions for those battling this disease. On 

behalf of the official opposition, I would also welcome her to 

the Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’d like to welcome a number of guests in your gallery, came 

down from Meadow Lake: my mother, Lorna — Mom, if you 

could give us a wave; my wife, Alaina, as well, holding my 

one-year-old daughter Finnley; and also Mac, my three-year-old 

son. And Mac, remember what daddy told you? This isn’t like 

at home and you can’t heckle the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

for their foolish economic policy. So thank you very much, and 

welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the legislature, I am very pleased to 

introduce two different groups of people today. 

 

I’d like to introduce some early childhood educators in the 

Speaker’s gallery today. Today we have here with us Kay 

Molnar, Shauna Coons, Shelley Boudreau, Traci Thompson, 

Lucille Gilliland, Anita Burkell, Joy Bergstrom, Sandra 

Mountford, Aimee Huard, Mardi Bley, Naren Jurgens, Belinda 

Helstrom, Tanya Mazarek, Nolad Dennison, and Chelsea 

Mergel. 

 

These are Saskatchewan residents who work in the early 

learning and care profession and are very concerned about the 

supports that we have here in place for families and children 

here in the province. So with that, I’d like my colleagues to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, I would like to ask my colleagues to 

welcome people from the film and television industry here 

today. Today we have Alan Bratt, Jodi Sadowsky, George 

Grassick, David Cormican, Tracy George, Crystal Van Pelt, 

Mike Burns, Shayne Putzlocher, Holly Baird, Carmen Kotyk, 

Sheree Fondeur, Daniel Maslany, and Layton Burton and others 

who I may have missed. They are both in the east gallery and 

the Speaker’s gallery, and I’m sorry if I’ve completely 

massacred any of your names. But these folks here today are . . . 

I think it says something when your galleries are filled with 

citizens who have concerns about their province, Mr. Speaker. 

So with that, I ask my colleagues to welcome these folks to 

their Legislative Assembly as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’m very 

pleased to introduce 24 grade 3 and 4 students from Douglas 

Park School in the heart of Douglas Park constituency, their 

teacher Joanne Patron, and their chaperones, Gabe Rosescu and 

Brigitte Zerr. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I met with the students and their teacher and 

chaperones just before they came in, and I can tell you that they 

are some excited to get into their new school come the fall. So 

welcome, and I would ask all my colleagues to join me in 

welcoming these students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Oh, sorry. I recognize the member for Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the 

opportunity to welcome, or introduce, a family member, Holly 

Baird who’s been introduced briefly already. Holly is a niece to 

my in-laws — I’ve got to get this right, Holly — cousin to my 

wife, movie producer as been announced, and granddaughter of 

the late Justice Lloyd Hipperson who I understand and got to 

know to be quite a legend on the Saskatchewan bench. So 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly, Holly. And I’d like all 

my colleagues to extend that welcome as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. To you and through you, I’d like to introduce to the 

House several union members who’ve come to watch our 

proceedings today. Of course there are many things of interest 

to working people in Saskatchewan. 

 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2012 

From SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General 

Employees’ Union], we have Bronwyn Wyatt, Fina 

Kapovic-Woq, Sandra Pfeifer. And from CUPE [Canadian 

Union of Public Employees], we have Vicky O’Dell; Kristina 

Atherton; Lori Sutherland; Patty Brockman; Stacy Durning; 

Tom Graham, president of CUPE here in Saskatchewan; Judy 

Henley; Nathan Markwart; and Alicia Baniulis. I’d ask all 

members to give them a warm welcome to the legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

member opposite in welcoming the union leaders to our 

legislature today. These people care greatly about the members 

that they support and have been very good promoters of moving 

our province onward and upward. And we support the work that 

they do and certainly support the very good work that their 

members do in our province to make our province a greater 

place. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly 28 students from the brand new Humboldt 

Collegiate in Humboldt. Mr. Speaker, they’re sitting in the west 

gallery, and with them is their teacher, David Millette, 

chaperone, Dr. Karen Martinuk, and the bus driver is Richard 

Jenkins. I would like all members to help me in welcoming 

them to their Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot twice and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. 

 

And we now know since Jimmy’s death there’s been at least a 

dozen dangerous occurrences in such workplaces when people 

work alone at night. But we know provinces have introduced 

several safety precautions through law, including the 

requirement that workers cannot be alone during late-night or 

early morning hours. And if they are required to work alone, 

there must be protective barriers such as locked doors and 

protective glass. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Prince Albert and the city of Saskatoon. I do so 

present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to stand today to present a petition in support of 

improving Highway 165. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Undertake to upgrade the section of Highway 165 between 

Beauval and the English River First Nation by adding 

proper lighting for pedestrian traffic, by adding space for 

pedestrians on the highway and its bridges, and by 

properly servicing the road with the material needed for a 

busy heavy-haul road. 

 

The people that have primarily signed this petition, Mr. 

Speaker, are from Beauval, Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; that 

is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Langenburg and Melville. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition signed by citizens who are calling on the Sask 

Party government to support the Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of 

rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 



May 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the Meeyomoot road, Highway 
969. The petitioners point out that the existing road has been 

severely eroded due to heavy rainfall and flooding and that four 

bridge structures on the road have been closed to the public for 

safety reasons earlier in the spring. They also point out that the 

road provides access for residents to trapping, fishing, blueberry 

and mushroom harvesting as well as the sources for medicinal 

plants, and it is important to the tourist access in sport fishing. 

The petitioners pray as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to stop turning their backs on the 

traditional resource users from northern Saskatchewan and 

to start investing in secondary road maintenance in the 

North and to recognize that maintenance on the 

Meeyomoot road is important to northern residents and 

must be undertaken immediately. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Air Ronge and La Ronge. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who wish this government 

to reassess the Saskatchewan wildfire management policy. Mr. 

Speaker, the policy has been in place for a long time without a 

review. Groups and individuals like the trappers, fishermen, 

outfitters, northern leaders, and many residents of northern 

Saskatchewan have been asking for this policy to be fully 

reviewed. It is long overdue. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to recognize that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve the very best in protection services 

as it relates to forest fire policy, and in so doing to cause 

the provincial government to immediately implement a 

full review of the Saskatchewan wildfire management 

policy as it has been years since this program has been last 

assessed. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It’s signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Cystic Fibrosis Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is Cystic Fibrosis 

Awareness Month. This is a special time to raise awareness of 

the disease and to show our support to people with cystic 

fibrosis. 

 

As you may know, cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal 

inherited disease affecting young Canadians This multi-organ 

disorder primarily affects lungs and the digestive system. 

People living with CF [cystic fibrosis] need to spend a 

significant amount of time planning their daily routine to 

maintain their health. 

 

The government recognizes the impacts of CF and supports 

residents coping with the disease through the Saskatchewan 

aids to daily living cystic fibrosis program. Annually $1.4 

million are invested in this program to provide comprehensive 

coverage for the drugs and certain nutritional supplements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government continues to invest resources to 

help improve the quality of life for those living with CF in their 

families. Recently two new drugs, Cayston and TOBI 

[Tobramycin Inhalation Solution] Podhaler, have been added to 

the Saskatchewan formulary to help control the disease. As well 

the Ministry of Health provided funding to the College of 

Medicine, Saskatoon Health Region, to support the recruitment 

and hiring of an additional pediatric respirologist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have not yet found the cure for cystic fibrosis, 

but we have made significant progress in control of the disease 

over the last 40 years. Our government will continue its strong 

support for the people coping with cystic fibrosis. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Yorkton Film Festival 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

highlight a very special and highly anticipated event taking 

place in Yorkton next week, the Yorkton Short Film & Video 

Festival or YFF. The longest running festival of its kind, the 

YFF has become one of Canada’s top film and video festivals in 

North America. Because of its excellent reputation, the festival 

attracts high-quality, creative entries year after year after year. 

 

Established in 1947 from the vision of James Lysyshyn, the 

Yorkton Film Council set out to encourage the production of 

films in Canada. In 1950, Lysyshyn’s vision became a reality, 

and the Yorkton International Documentary Film Festival was 

born. This year the Yorkton Film Festival is researching and 

writing its history as part of its 65th anniversary celebration 

slated for May 24th to 27th, 2012. 

 

When the festival began, many were doubtful that it would 

succeed as Yorkton was seen to be too small and too isolated 

for a major documentary competition. Over the decades though, 

the festival has overcome the odds. The fact that it continues 

after 65 years is largely due to the work and dedication of the 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2012 

people of Yorkton and the film industry of Canada. Clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, this film festival is loved by many. It inspires people 

to come together in a celebration of culture and creativity. It 

gives Saskatchewan people a sense of pride and identity. 

 

It is my pleasure to take a moment in this Assembly today to 

applaud everyone involved in the YFF, from the organizers to 

the supporters to the board of directors and of course to the 

many volunteers. At a time when the future of the film industry 

in Saskatchewan is bleak, a festival like this further underscores 

the importance of the film industry, arts, culture, and the 

creative economy to the development of our province. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Early Learning and Child Care 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 

the Assembly to proclaim Early Learning and Child Care 

Month as well as Early Childhood Educator Appreciation Day. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan recognizes the importance of 

early learning and child care in supporting positive social and 

emotional development, early literacy, and student 

achievement. The knowledge children gain at this stage of their 

lives will have a long-term, positive effect on them in our 

province. 

 

This month also provides an opportunity to celebrate the 

exceptional programs and experiences available to children in 

Saskatchewan. The early childhood years are a critical phase of 

development. This is when children begin acquiring social, 

emotional, physical, intellectual, and communicational skills. 

Early childhood educators play a critical role in that 

development. 

 

This year the government has allotted an additional 500 child 

care spaces and 15 new pre-kindergarten programs. This 

represents a 42 per cent increase in child care spaces and an 85 

per cent increase in pre-kindergarten programs since we took 

office. 

 

Our government is committed to supporting high-quality early 

childhood care, development, and learning. Investments in these 

areas are included in the cross-government approach of 

Saskatchewan child and youth agenda. 

 

Please help me in joining and recognizing the value of these 

services early childhood educators provide to our province’s 

children. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Lac la Ronge Indian Band Dominates Hockey 

Championships 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

recently the Lac la Ronge Indian Band competed in three 

divisions at the 2012 FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] youth minor hockey championship, held in Saskatoon 

April 27th to April the 29th. 

Each team — peewee, bantam, and midget — played 

undefeated throughout the two-day championship and won gold 

medals in all three divisions. It was truly outstanding hockey 

played by all three teams. 

 

Earlier in the month at the FSIN adult hockey provincial 

championships, the Lac la Ronge Indian Band recreation team 

played so well that they also brought home the gold medal. 

After losing their first game, Mr. Speaker, they went on to win 

the next nine games. At the same event, the Lac La Ronge 

Indian Band women’s team continued the gold medal winning 

streak by playing undefeated as well and winning the 

tournament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the success of the Lac La Ronge Indian Band 

hockey teams can be attributed to the determination and skills 

of the players as well as the dedication of the coaches and the 

volunteer support staff. But also having a professional arena 

on-reserve has contributed greatly to the development of 

hockey in the community. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 

to please join me in congratulating the Lac La Ronge Indian 

Band hockey teams for their tremendous effort and success. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Young Fellows Club of Weyburn 

Celebrates 90th Anniversary 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise in the Assembly today to announce that this 

upcoming weekend, the Young Fellows Club of Weyburn will 

be celebrating their 90th anniversary. 

 

On May 25th, 1922, the club held their first meeting and since 

then they have continued to honour and uphold their motto of: 

we serve. To date they have had over 750 members belonging 

to their club. All members work together to raise funds of 

which 100 per cent go back into the community. Mr. Speaker, 

when you take all the money raised by this group, it works out 

to $57.87 per day each and every day over the past 90 years that 

it’s gone back into the community. 

 

The money raised by the Young Fellows Club goes towards 

community organizations and projects that are meant to be 

enjoyed by all. In fact in 1931, the club built Weyburn’s first 

outdoor swimming pool, one of the first in the entire province. 

They have continued that tradition by supporting recreational 

facilities including the newly constructed outdoor spray park 

and just recently announced a commitment of $100,000 towards 

our new performing arts centre that’s currently being built. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this weekend past and present Young Fellows will 

gather to mark this 90th year and, Mr. Speaker, of the some 200 

invitations that were sent out to past members, 170 have 

indicated that they will be attending and as far away as Texas, 

proving that once a Young Fellow, always a Young Fellow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

good work and continued service of this organization in their 

90th year. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



May 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Red Cross Month 2012 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 19th, 1909, 

the passing in parliament of the Canadian Red Cross Society 

Act established the Canadian Red Cross Society to serve 

Canadians as an auxiliary to government and public authorities 

in accordance with the Geneva Convention. 

 

For more than a century the Red Cross Society and their 

dedicated volunteers have been committed to improving the 

situation of the most needy in Canada and around the world. 

 

Canadian Red Cross programs and activities are guided by the 

fundamental principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, 

independence, voluntary service, unity, and universality. Red 

Cross makes no discrimination as to nationality, race, religious 

beliefs, class, or political opinions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with May being designated as Red Cross Month, it 

reminds us all that disasters can strike any time and anywhere 

and that those in need can’t wait. Following a disaster, Red 

Cross workers provide vital assistance for people’s basic needs, 

including shelter, family reunification, first aid, clothing, and 

food. It is because of the tireless efforts of volunteers that the 

suffering of distressed people worldwide has been eased. 

 

I would like this Assembly to recognize the tremendous efforts 

of the Canadian Red Cross Society and remind all 

Saskatchewan residents that they can make a difference by 

making a donation or by contacting their local Red Cross office 

to learn about volunteer opportunities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

Natural Resources and the Canadian Economy 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week we learned 

that the federal NDP leader continues to defend statements in 

which he called Canada’s natural resource sector a disease. And 

yesterday he dismissed his critics, which include three premiers, 

numerous economists, and a former federal Liberal leader, as 

“Harper messengers.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP leader’s divisive comments have 

given rise to a new political affliction, something the Calgary 

Herald editorial board has called “Mulcair disease.” Mulcair 

disease can be defined as pitting East against West in a blunt 

and clumsy assessment of the Canadian economy that ignores 

all basic economic facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, economists and facts have overwhelmingly 

discredited the NDP theory that a thriving natural resource 

sector is bad for the Canadian economy. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

StatsCan [Statistics Canada] monthly survey of the 

manufacturing for March says, “Manufacturing sales increased 

. . . The gain was led by the petroleum and coal products 

industry.” What’s even more concerning than the divisive 

comments of the federal NDP is the silence from that NDP. 

 

Two weeks ago they voted against a motion in favour of 

Canada’s petroleum industry. Last week they refused to stand 

up for Saskatchewan’s resource in debate. And yesterday they 

refused to talk to CHAB about this very issue. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

time for the Saskatchewan NDP to support Canada’s resource 

sector and stand up to their political masters in Ottawa. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier says he 

doesn’t want to compete in the global economy when it comes 

to the film and television industry. He has chosen to give up on 

this industry rather than show some support for the many 

businesses and workers associated with it. Well that’s a 

different approach than what the Premier was saying less than a 

year ago. In a letter from June 2011, the Premier said: 

 

Saskatchewan’s film and television industry is a vital 

component of our province’s . . . economy and, as such, 

boasts globally competitive tax credit incentives through 

the Saskatchewan Film Employment Tax Credit program. 

 

I’ve got the letter right here, Mr. Speaker. Nice picture — this 

was used to entice producers from around the world. A picture, 

and it’s not even in a textbook, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: has he sent a revised letter to the 

film industry where he indicates his new position and where he 

revokes his support for the tax credit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 

the member for the question. Mr. Speaker, a couple of points. 

The letter she’s holding references the fact that the industry had 

seen some significant growth over 25 years. Some of those 

years, of course, would have been occurring before there was a 

refundable tax credit in the province of Saskatchewan — point 

number one. 

 

Point number two, the industry asked that we would support a 

mission, an effort to market the province as a venue for films. 

We provided the letter is part of that support. Mr. Speaker, there 

was some early interest. There was one particular film that had 

a very close look at the province and actually chose to pass us 

by in favour of, I think, the province of Quebec who have much 

more generous grants in place for the film industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s precisely the point. Unfortunately, the 

efforts on this particular mission to attract film didn’t bring the 

results that anybody would have wanted because the industry’s 

been in decline here and because the industry has said itself, in 

order to compete, you’ve actually got to offer more grants to the 

industry. We’ve simply decided to take another course. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2012 

Remarks Concerning the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the Premier should 

have put a footnote at the bottom of his letter. This isn’t the first 

time the Premier has been less than clear. On social media, 

reports are coming in from members of the public are being fed 

completely inaccurate and misleading talking points from 

members of the Premier’s staff. 

 

The Premier’s staff is apparently telling citizens who call his 

office that members of the film industry do not pay taxes, and 

they get handouts. That’s simply not true, Mr. Speaker. Even 

the Minister of Agriculture shared those same talking points last 

night when he spoke to an audience in Moose Jaw. He said, 

“They get it upfront when they hired them, and 98 per cent of 

them never paid a cent of tax in this province.” Those 

statements are completely inaccurate. 

 

Does the Premier stand by these misleading talking points about 

the film industry that are being delivered by his staff and 

echoed by his Agriculture minister. Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, yes I did speak at a breakfast yesterday morning, 

and I was reiterating my support for our government’s decision 

to remove the grant from the film industry as part of our 

balanced budget. Mr. Speaker, having said that, I will admit I 

should have chosen my words more carefully, and for that I 

apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Support for Community-Based Organizations 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, CBO [community-based 

organization] employees work for community-based 

organizations because they care about people they’re working 

with. By not ensuring a fair and equitable wage, this 

government is forcing CBO workers to look elsewhere for 

employment in order to meet their increasing costs of living. By 

undervaluing the work of CBO sector employees, the 

government is undervaluing some of the most vulnerable people 

in this province. 

 

This is an important issue that has been raised in this House on 

a number of times over the last few years. What is the 

minister’s plan to address chronic underfunding in the CBO 

sector? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for 

the question and, more importantly, it gives me an opportunity 

to thank the very many CBOs right across the province who do 

provide a lot of support to individuals and do a lot of good 

work. 

 

When we became government, we knew that there was more 

work to be done with the CBO sector when it came to the wages 

that they were given. And so since we became government, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s been an 18.6 per cent increase to the CBOs 

here across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s more work to be done, and I 

know that the work they do is very, very important. We also 

know that we’ve done other things to address the living and the 

affordability issues in the province, right from looking at the 

income tax that people pay, looking at the average weekly 

earnings and at some of the other benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot undervalue the work that they do. We 

understand that the province is who they are because of the 

CBOs, and we will continue to work with them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, over 200 declarations from 

community-based organizations, forms with over 900 signatures 

on them, have been mailed to the ministers this year. There’s 

not been a single response back from any of the ministers yet. 

 

And the declaration outlines a three-point action plan calling for 

a four-year funding strategy to address salary, training, and 

operation cost issues; development and funding of a 

comprehensive salary benefit plan that provides parity with 

other public sector workers; and development of service 

delivery and facility maintenance standards to ensure quality 

client service and care. Instead of continuing to stonewall 

CBOs, will this minister agree to implement this three-point 

plan of action? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

opposite, and to the number of people that work on our very 

important CBOs across the province, I have never missed an 

opportunity to meet with the CBOs and discuss their concerns 

and the work that they are doing. We continue to do that to 

ensure that the work that they’re doing is, continues to be 

valuable to the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that they talked to me about is 

the fact that our province is a place they’re proud to live in. The 

fact that we have things like the only balanced budget in 

Canada. The fact that we have fewer people on the 

unemployment roll than we used to have. Mr. Speaker, the fact 

that we’ve removed people from the tax rolls. There’s more 

work to do, Mr. Speaker, and I assure you that I continue to 

work with them and have their best interests at heart. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We often hear the 

refrain, there’s more work to do. But the first piece of work she 

could do is respond to the letters she gets in the mail from 

people like this. 

 

Now we know the CBO employees work in group homes, early 

learning and child care centres, crisis centres, and a range of 

other agencies. They do valuable work, helping some of the 

most vulnerable people here in Saskatchewan, and they have 

been undervalued and underpaid by this government. So several 



May 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

of the CBO workers have come to the Assembly today to raise 

these important issues. To the minister, and she has said just 

now that she’s willing to meet with these folks, will this 

minister agree to meet with these people today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite full 

well knows that I would meet with people whenever they’d like 

to talk to me about their issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is important that people realize that 

we’ve also, besides the low-income issues that we have and the 

people that are working the child care offices right across the 

province, besides that, they have things like the Saskatchewan 

employment supplement that’s been increased by 14 per cent 

since we became government. And we have, we’ve extended 

the threshold by 16 per cent and it’s the largest increase in the 

history of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we became government, the members 

opposite had not looked at the CBO rate for a number of years. 

We’ve increased it by over 18 per cent. There’s more work to 

do, Mr. Speaker, but I assure you we will continue doing the 

work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Child Care Issues  

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is Early 

Childhood Educator Appreciation Day. Well there is a group 

here today who don’t feel particularly appreciated by their 

government. One of the visitors is currently a director at a 

Saskatoon centre. In her 25-year career, she has never attended 

the legislature until her first visit in March. 

 

These early childhood educators are here again today to say, 

enough is enough. They need the minister to understand how 

critical the recruitment and retention issues are. Adding more 

child care spaces is only good for families if they are properly 

staffed. With low wages and stressful working conditions, this 

is getting harder and harder to do. There are centres with many 

families on wait-lists, but they are not even asking for spaces 

because they can’t staff the ones they already have. When is the 

minister going to get serious about ensuring we have the child 

care workforce we need to support the rest of our workforce? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I too 

would like to thank the child care workers for the great work 

that they do. As the member opposite is fully aware, the 

government is not the employer of child care workers nor is 

government the only income stream for the organizations that 

run child care spaces. We do not own and operate child care 

centres. 

 

What we do do is we provide funding for operating plus some 

capital to develop child care spaces. We provide funding, 

operating funding that is along with their other revenue streams 

that they have. The government provides regulations and 

standards for the sector, and government provides the play and 

exploration program if they should choose to use it. As well, 

government provides subsidies to low-income families. But 

government is not the employer. Government does not set the 

wages. Government gives them some revenue stream, but not 

their entire revenue stream. And yes, this government is 

committed to child care spaces and child care workers. And I’m 

looking forward to the next question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Child care is about 

supporting families and providing educational opportunities for 

children. But adequate child care is also an issue that affects 

almost every sector of our society. If we expect parents to be 

fully engaged in the workforce, we need a child care system that 

meets people’s needs. Parents need to have affordable, reliable, 

and high-quality child care options available to them. This 

allows them to be the best employees possible. But it’s about 

much more than child care spaces. It’s about working with 

families and professionals to create a system that truly meets 

their needs. How can this minister not understand that adding 

spaces is not enough? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 

like to have a quote that I would put into record, and that quote 

is: 

 

Saskatchewan has the poorest record when it comes to 

child daycare. And, Mr. Speaker, I take some 

responsibility for that because I was part of a government 

that did not put a lot of new resources into child daycare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was said by a senior NDP cabinet minister, 

only in 2011. That was said by Ms. Pat Atkinson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last five years of the NDP government, they 

allocated funding for only 1,950 child care spaces. In our first 

five years of government, Mr. Speaker, we have expanded child 

care spaces by 3,935. That is double over what the NDP did.  

 

In the last five years of the NDP government, they only 

increased funding for CBOs by 9 per cent. Mr. Speaker, in our 

first five years we increased funding by 18.6 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, again that is over double to what the NDP did. We do 

not want to go back to what the NDP did. By their own 

admission, they did not address child care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan, 

our early learning and care system is broken. The average wage 

of a child care worker is not much better than working at a 

fast-food outlet. We have a government that in some cases pays 

out a whopping subsidy of 25 cents to families. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, 25 cent subsidies are being paid out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a hodgepodge of a system that falls under three 

different ministries, meaning that the right hand doesn’t know 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2012 

what the left hand is doing at times. We have a system where 

the government admits it has no idea how many Saskatchewan 

families are looking for licensed child care. Will the minister 

commit today to a broad review of this system with real and 

meaningful consultations with parents and professionals to 

create a system that will meet the needs of families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — You know what’s interesting? The 

member opposite doesn’t seem to realize that the last 

government was NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP is the one that split the child care and left 

the subsidy under Social Services and moved the child care 

space for development and regulations to Education. That split 

she calls hodgepodge was done by the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to put another quote into record. And that is 

this, and I quote because I agree, “. . . that this has been a 

significant ramping up of child care.” Again that was said in 

May of 2011 by Ms. Pat Atkinson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last five years of the NDP government, only 

$3.4 million were provided for education support, professional 

development, the learning environment, nutrition, physical 

activity, and outdoor environment for child care spaces and 

child care workers. Mr. Speaker, in our first five years we have 

committed 8.5 million to that initiative. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly there is a 

problem, clearly there is a problem with our early learning and 

care system. I ask the minister: will she commit to an 

overarching review of the early learning and care system here in 

Saskatchewan? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I am not committing to 

an NDP review that sits on a shelf. They’ve done many, many, 

many reviews. What we are committing to is expanding child 

care spaces in our province. We are committing to continue 

putting increases into CBOs, with their funding, that they can 

apply to their workers because they are the employers. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to continue expanding pre-K 

[pre-kindergarten], which is also a great service for our little 

early learners. We have expanded the pre-K by 85 per cent 

within our province. Mr. Speaker, we are not going to adopt an 

NDP agenda which failed child care in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Funding for University of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we have question 

period today, the University of Saskatchewan is holding yet 

another financial town hall meeting to deal with the significant 

shortchanging that has occurred under this minister as they deal 

with a large deficit. An overview document just released shows 

that the board of governors is being forced to make a variety of 

cuts to deal with the $15.5 million deficit created by that 

minister. We’ve already seen tuition climb at the U of S. We’ve 

already seen the minister push almost $100 million of debt onto 

the university’s books and now we learn, even after this round 

of cuts, the university faces a shortfall of yet $6 million more. 

 

My question to the minister: his Sask Party government has 

millions for more politicians here in the province. How at the 

very same time can he force millions of dollars of cuts at the 

University of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity to speak directly about the University of 

Saskatchewan. Under this government, we’ve seen more than 

$1.5 billion invested at the University of Saskatchewan. In fact 

just this morning the Minister of Health and I had an 

opportunity to meet with the provost and others from the 

University of Saskatchewan. So we have a very, very good 

working relationship, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve made sure that there have been key investments at the 

University of Saskatchewan, whether we’re talking about the 

Academic Health Sciences building that was announced in 2003 

under the members opposite but that we’ve actually rolled up 

our sleeves and ensured has been constructed. And that 

construction continues, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, walked away with tarps left on the Western 

College of Veterinary Medicine, saying it wasn’t going to be 

done under their watch, Mr. Speaker. We rolled up our sleeves, 

worked with the federal government, and through the 

knowledge infrastructure program we were able to make sure 

that that was completed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of investments at the 

University of Saskatchewan, including for the first time in 30 

years more than 1,000 beds that are going into a new student 

residence, Mr. Speaker. That’s part of an investment in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Despite promises 

before the election to pay for the Health Sciences building, 

we’ve seen this minister force nearly $100 million of debt onto 

the university’s books. For this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, we saw 

the University of Saskatchewan request operating funds for the 

Health Sciences building, something very important especially 

to ward off the probationary warning for the College of 

Medicine that has happened under this minister. 

 

We learn, Mr. Speaker, that the deficit created by the minister, 

we learn because of the deficit created by the minister, the 

Health Sciences building won’t be opening up as soon as it 

could. From the budget summary: 

 

As the requested new building space funding of $3 million 

for 2012-13 was not received from the provincial 

government, these projected costs have been reduced by 

1.7 million by developing a plan to transition more slowly 



May 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

to full custodial and maintenance services over the course 

of 2012-13. 

 

So let me get this straight, Mr. Speaker. The Health Sciences 

building will be there on College Drive, but will be sitting idle 

because we cannot afford to turn on the lights. My question to 

the minister: how on earth does this make any sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — The only dim bulbs are right across the 

aisle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased funding to the University of 

Saskatchewan by 46.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker, since 2007. An 

increase of 46.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We’ve invested more 

than $1.5 billion. 

 

What we’ve said to the University of Saskatchewan regarding 

operating funds to the Academic Health Science wings is, as the 

construction’s wrapping up, let’s have the discussion about 

operations, Mr. Speaker. Let’s see what that transition looks 

like. Today, Mr. Speaker, the construction’s under way. It’s still 

going on, Mr. Speaker. And this is important, as that dialogue 

about operations will then be able to proceed once the 

construction’s complete and people are moving into the 

building, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the minister doubts 

that the Health Sciences building will not be opening up as soon 

as it can, I urge him to look at the 2012-13 operating budget 

summary released today. Page 6, bottom paragraph clearly says 

that they will not be opening it because they don’t have the 

resources for full custodial and maintenance services. 

 

It’s not only the Health Sciences building that is having 

problems, Mr. Speaker. We also see a variety of maintenance 

projects that are being deferred because of the budget shortfall, 

and we also see the elimination of a planned 2 per cent increase 

to departments and units to deal with inflationary pressures. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the university is still looking for $6 million 

because this minister has shortchanged the U of S [University 

of Saskatchewan]. Thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, tuition is 

already set for this year or surely students would be paying even 

more. 

 

My question to the minister: as the campus community now 

waits for the other shoe to drop with respect to cuts, will the 

minister admit that his actions are having a negative effect on 

the campus? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget, in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, the public dollars that are going to the 

University of Saskatchewan are more than $304 million in this 

budget alone, Mr. Speaker. Now the fact that the members 

opposite ignored structural deficits, especially relating to capital 

investment, well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been able to make some 

real progress there because of the knowledge infrastructure 

program. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, we’ve insured that there were $118 

million invested in 21 different projects, Mr. Speaker, including 

millions of dollars at the University of Saskatchewan that we 

invested in things like roofs to make sure that the classrooms 

and the laboratories could actually stay dry, Mr. Speaker. That 

was the kind of level of inattention that the members opposite 

put in. Three hundred and four million dollars, Mr. Speaker, an 

all-time record within any budget for the University of 

Saskatchewan, and that’s the kind of investment that their 

students, their faculty, and others can count on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Remarks Concerning the Film Industry 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, a few minutes ago we were 

pleased to receive an apology from the Minister of Agriculture. 

My question is to the Premier: will he apologize to this House 

and to the people of Saskatchewan for the misleading remarks 

made by his staff about the film industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know about the 

remarks that the Leader of the Opposition’s referring to. I don’t 

know the details. If the point was made that the industry, the 

companies themselves, those shell companies set up to do film 

productions actually pay no tax, that’s actually true, Mr. 

Speaker. 98 per cent of the time we see with the film tax credit 

it’s paid out in the form of a grant because these companies 

aren’t paying any corporate tax. And when they don’t pay any 

tax the credit has to come off, has to be paid at the front end. 

 

And so if the member can present the words that have been 

used by any staff with the Government of Saskatchewan, I’d be 

happy to look at it, Mr. Speaker. And I welcome the apology 

from the Minister of Agriculture. He certainly did the right 

thing today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Electoral Representation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite surprising that the 

Minister of Agriculture gets up and apologizes for remarks that 

he’s made based on the information that he received from the 

Premier’s office as it relates to the film industry, but the 

Premier doesn’t apologize. So I would say perhaps he’ll take an 

opportunity to do that in a few minutes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, today, today after question period, the 

government is going to be voting on the three more MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] Bill, No. 36. Nobody in 

the province wants this government to pass this Bill. Nobody 

wants the Premier to spend more money on this Bill. 

Saskatchewan people have written letters, made phone calls. 

Thousands have signed petitions and right across party lines. 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2012 

They’re not NDP or Liberal or Sask Party people. They are the 

people who support this Premier who have said, this is nuts. 

Why are we adding three more MLAs at a time when people 

need other funds for other activities? 

 

So this is the last chance for the Premier. Will the Premier show 

leadership and admit that he’s made a mistake and pull this Bill 

right now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

the opportunity to get up and address this one more time. What 

I would like to do, Mr. Speaker, is urge the member from 

Athabasca to get up and convince his colleagues that his initial 

vote was the right vote. He lives in one of the constituencies 

that’s very large. He has to travel a great distance. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would urge him to talk to his colleagues and advise 

them of the problems there are with travels and distance across 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want that same kind of fairness and equity 

throughout the province. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a good piece 

of legislation. We feel that it adds a great deal of fairness and 

equity and adds a great ability for our citizens to be able to 

contact our MLAs. And I’m sure . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Will the government members please come to 

order? I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, all 

nine of them over there have got the same issues with travel, 

and I’d urge them to talk to their member from Athabasca. They 

too will learn the issues with distance and travel, and we urge 

them to support this Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Student Achievement Initiative 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today 

I had the pleasure of announcing that our government is 

launching a student achievement initiative. The student 

achievement initiative will ensure that all students from 

pre-kindergarten to grade 12 are provided with regular and 

consistent feedback on their progress. This strategy will help 

teachers to identify specific instructional supports that 

individual students may need, and they will be provided with 

additional tools to help children in the classroom. 

 

Research shows that students need to be assessed at an 

individual level and at regular intervals in order to identify the 

actions required to help them succeed in learning. Our new 

approach to student achievement will support that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are the last province in Canada to implement a 

province-wide approach to student achievement. This approach 

has proven to be very successful in other jurisdictions. We will 

be setting targets, and we will be sharing the responsibility of 

meeting those targets. 

 

This is a four-year implementation plan with stages of 

development throughout the pre-kindergarten to grade 12 years. 

We look forward to working with our educational partners in 

developing the province-wide assessment. We have an advisory 

committee comprised of our key stakeholders who will provide 

advice and guidance to the Ministry of Education. The advisory 

committee will include representatives from the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation, the Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association, League of Educational Administrators, Directors 

and Superintendents of Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan 

association of business officials as well as First Nations and 

Métis communities. The ministry will also involve parents as 

the student achievement initiative moves forward. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, as has been a past practice, the ministry 

will be asking for teacher involvement in the development of 

the new assessments. Teachers will be seconded from school 

divisions to support development of the assessment items. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new initiative will bring us in line with our 

counterparts across the country, and I look forward to the 

implementation of this very important initiative. We recognize 

that a strong education system is essential in sustaining our 

growing provincial economy and will help us to maintain the 

Saskatchewan advantage. We want our students to be prepared 

for success at school and in their future endeavours. This is just 

another way, Mr. Speaker, that our government continues to 

make education a priority. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to 

the minister for supplying and sharing the ministerial statement 

just before question period here today. I followed the 

announcement today that occurred at a Regina school today, 

chatted with some of the folks that were over at the school for 

that announcement. 

 

I guess when we’re looking at this announcement, it announces 

that the ministry is aiming to make some changes at it relates to 

assessment, looking for some provincial standards to that 

process. Certainly this needs to be a thoughtful discussion 

moving forward. It’s not a simple discussion. And what we 

need to make sure is that when we engage in this process that 

the minister is suggesting that it’s done in a genuine way with 

the education sector, that consultation is key to that activity, 

that listening of the minister, listening to the educational leaders 

and the education sector is going to be paramount to making 

sure this tool is in fact something that strengthens education in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We need to make sure that it’s focused on the best interests of 

students and on learning here in Saskatchewan, make sure that 

it’s supporting what contributes to achievement. And we need 

to make sure that’s based on the evidence and the research that 

supports achievement and students’ achievement. I say this 

because without doing so, we could certainly have a tool that is 

not enabling or supportive of students in that achievement. In 

fact we could end up with something that’s quite regressive, 

something that strips down education, that shifts potentially to a 



May 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

circumstance where it’s sort of the standardized testing that we 

may see in jurisdictions in the United States where we see sort 

of a right wing approach to education. 

 

But certainly we’ll take these statements that have been put 

forward here today of the minister, that there’s going to be a 

process of consultation, at face value. We’re going to be 

following that process carefully. We’re going to be looking for 

some reflection of the meaningful work that’s been done by 

many across this province in the student achievement panel, 

that advisory group that has worked for well over two years. 

Their work was tabled last year, and to date we haven’t seen 

any reflection of that into the Ministry of Education or the 

minister’s decisions. So we’ll be looking for a reflection of that 

work. 

 

And we’ll be making sure that the focus remains on addressing 

some of the barriers to education that are external to the 

classroom that certainly impact student learning. We’ve 

certainly debated on this floor some of the broader contexts of 

education. But it’s certainly fair to say that at this time in 

Saskatchewan where we see reduced supports and reducing 

supports in many circumstances and many classrooms all across 

Saskatchewan, that’s certainly not supportive of achievement 

results that we’re aiming to improve. So we’re going to be 

following this process closely. I think consultation’s the key 

word, focusing on the best interests of students and then moving 

forward based on evidence, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, asking leave for a personal 

statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for a 

personal statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Apology for Remarks During Question Period 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. During 

question period, I offered remarks that were not intended to be 

hurtful, and I apologize to the House for those comments and 

ask for forgiveness. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

(continued) 

 

Saskatchewan International Physician 

Practice Assessment 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve often said that we are very fortunate in this 

province to have such a dedicated group of physicians who 

often go beyond the call of duty to care for their patients. 

Physicians are in great demand not only in Saskatchewan but 

across Canada and around the world. That’s why our 

government announced the physician recruitment strategy for 

Saskatchewan in 2009. Flowing from this strategy, today’s 

announcement fulfills a commitment which will see more 

doctors, in this case internationally educated physicians, 

working in Saskatchewan. 

 

Earlier today I was pleased to announce full implementation of 

a new Saskatchewan-based assessment process designed to 

recruit more international medical graduates, or IMGs, to this 

province. Physicians have asked for it. Saskatchewan 

communities have asked for it as well. They told us that the old 

assessment, which was administered outside Saskatchewan, did 

not always fit our needs. So we listened to their comments, and 

today, in partnership with stakeholders, we are pleased to 

introduce full implementation of our province’s own assessment 

for family physicians, IMGs, called the Saskatchewan 

international physician practice assessment or SIPPA. Without 

our stakeholders, this could not have been possible, so I’d like 

to recognize the efforts of the College of Medicine, the College 

of Physicians and Surgeons, and the physician recruitment 

agency saskdocs. 

 

The SIPPA program has operated as a pilot since early last year. 

During this time, 25 international medical grads have 

successfully completed the program and are now practising in 

20 communities throughout the province. SIPPA will ensure 

physicians are assessed with sufficient rigour to ensure that 

patients receive safe, high-quality care while also meeting the 

needs of communities and health regions in recruiting doctors. 

 

[14:30] 

 

There are many benefits of the new assessment. To begin with, 

one of the key changes involves removing the barrier that 

previously existed based on the doctor’s country of training. 

Now IMGs will be eligible for assessment from all countries as 

long as they meet the licensure criteria. Opening the assessment 

to IMGs from around the world will allow the province to 

screen a wider range of physicians and will promote recruitment 

to the province. 

 

Under the new Saskatchewan assessment, IMGs will also be 

assessed before they start their practice. This allows for safer 

patient care because the College of Physicians and Surgeons 

will know immediately whether the IMG is qualified to practise 

in our province. It also allows physicians to provide seamless 

delivery to health care to their patients with no disruption of 

service. This is unlike the old process where IMGs were 

required to leave their practice and their community for a period 

of time to be assessed. At times it was very disruptive when a 

physician who had started to build relationships with patients 

was required to leave a community after receiving a negative 

assessment and resulting change in licensure privileges. In fact 

communities and physicians told us this disruption to health 

care delivery was the biggest problem with the old assessment 

process. 

 

Providing orientation to IMGs prior to their assessment is 

another benefit of the new assessment. Receiving this 

orientation to the Canadian practice environment beforehand 

will help doctors adjust to the province and will increase the 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2012 

chances of success. The new assessment process also has a 

capacity to assess almost twice as many IMGs every year. 

 

While our province has many great doctors and we have been 

successful in adding over 200 additional physicians since 2007, 

we know there is much more work to do. That is why our 

government has added seats to the College of Medicine, 

doubled the number of residency opportunities, and invested in 

an innovative, attributive learning model for doctors to gain 

exposure to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

With the transformation of primary care under way across 

Saskatchewan and this new made-in-Saskatchewan assessment 

process, I am confident we will continue to grow the number of 

physicians and to ensure enhanced patient- and family-centred 

care throughout Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to the 

minister for the opportunity to read the remarks before he gave 

them. 

 

In looking at this, Mr. Speaker, we know that in Saskatchewan 

there is a great need for physicians, and that includes in urban 

and rural centres and regional centres as well. Based on my 

understanding of SIPPA, as it’s referred to, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment, 

based on my understanding of it, it’s something that I think is a 

good decision and I hope will prove to be very beneficial. 

 

I know in the previous approach with having physicians start 

practice and then go to Manitoba to do the CAPE [clinicians’ 

assessment and professional enhancement], that did in some 

instances present problems for communities. So I hope that this 

process will improve that, and I hope that the consultation with 

the stakeholders and the groups identified has been vigorous, as 

I assume it is, and that the plan that has been developed will be 

good for Saskatchewan. 

 

I know in talking to people, Mr. Speaker, new Canadians who 

have come to Saskatchewan, if they are physicians, this issue of 

how they can be assessed and how they can get into a position 

where they might be able to practise medicine is a very 

important one. So opening this option to more people I think is 

a positive step. 

 

The one thing that I would mention, Mr. Speaker, which isn’t 

referenced in the ministerial statement, is that when individuals 

take the SIPPA and if deficiencies are identified for those 

people, we also need to ensure that there is the available and the 

appropriate educational opportunities for those people to 

enhance or improve their skills so that they might be in a 

position where they can practise. And I don’t know if that . . . I 

assume that has been part of the discussion so far, but I didn’t 

see specific reference to that here in the ministerial statement 

today, so I look forward to hearing more about that and hope 

that the work in that area is under way. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I will conclude my remarks. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Leave to make an introduction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Can we wait until after presenting reports? 

After presenting reports. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the importance 

you’ve put on the standing committee reports. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, in accordance with rule 34(4) and 

rule 35, this Bill will now be read the third time. The minister 

may proceed to move third reading. I recognize the Minister of 

Justice and Attorney General. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 now be read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Call in the members, 

recorded division. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:35 until 14:45.] 

 

The Speaker: — We will now proceed with the question on 

Bill No. 36. All in favour, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 43] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert Toth 



May 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

Bradshaw Reiter Duncan 

Ross McMillan Harpauer 

Harrison Wyant Hickie 

Hutchinson Elhard Hart 

Tell Parent Brkich 

Stewart Weekes Campeau 

Wilson Michelson Kirsch 

Doke Makowsky Jurgens 

Steinley Doherty Lawrence 

Tochor Moe Marchuk 

Phillips   

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed, please rise. 

 

[Nays  9] 

 

Nilson Forbes Belanger 

Wotherspoon Broten Chartier 

Sproule McCall Vermette 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 43; those 

opposed, 9. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m further 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 37, The Tourism 

Saskatchewan Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, in accordance with rule no. 34.4 

and rule 35, this Bill will now be read the third time. The 

minister may proceed to move third reading. I recognize the 

Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 37, The 

Tourism Saskatchewan Act be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report Bill No. 18, The Degree Authorization Act without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this Bill, and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 18, The 

Degree Authorization Act, and that the Bill now be read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration that Bill 

No. 18, The Degree Authorization Act be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2012 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to present its second report. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take 

an opportunity to thank all the members of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice for their 

assistance in developing the lobbying legislation inquiry final 

report. 

 

Following the order of reference from this legislature last 

December, the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice began an inquiry in respect to a legislative 

model for new legislation regarding lobbying in Saskatchewan. 

Our committee met in January and adopted the steering 

committee’s report which outlined the plan for the committee’s 

inquiry regarding lobbying in Saskatchewan. Members of the 

committee travelled to Ottawa in February of this year where 

we observed the House of Commons Standing Committee on 

Access to Information, Privacy and Ethics’s statutory review of 

the Lobbying Act and met with many of the commissioners and 

registrars as well as interested stakeholders. 

 

The committee further accepted nine submissions that were 

received by February 28th deadline and based the study on the 

information. On that information, we made 23 

recommendations. All of the recommendations can be reviewed 

in the committee’s final report. 

 

Today I would like to speak to a few of the findings in our 

inquiry. Firstly, we agreed on the definition of what it means to 

lobby that is consistent with all the other provinces’ provincial 

jurisdictions. We worked together on a definition of what is a 

lobbyist and agreed in two categories: consultant and in-house. 

These definitions are also consistent with all other provincial 

jurisdictions and the federal government. The committee’s 

recommendations of registering and reporting time frames 

should ensure effective transparency and accountability, Mr. 

Speaker. These are but a few of the recommendations the 

committee’s found, and we are satisfied with our findings. 

 

It should be noted that professional lobbying activity is a key to 

the development of sound public policy and thus not only 

legitimate but necessary for healthy democracy. The Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice is pleased 

to be afforded the opportunity to carry out its duties with regard 

to this report. On behalf of the committee, I trust the members 

of this House and the people of Saskatchewan find this report 

both informative and instructive. 

 

Thanks to the committee Clerk’s office for their support 

throughout the process. Their professionalism and guidance has 

ensured a timely delivery of our committee’s report. Again, 

thank you to the members of the committee and the opportunity 

afforded to me to table the lobbying legislative inquiry final 

report. I move: 

 

The second report of the Standing Committee of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Does the Assembly adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Thunder 

Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

honourable Assembly Mr. George Schofield, a constituent of 

mine from Thunder Creek, the mayor of the town of Regina 

Beach, and son of Her Honour Vaughn Schofield and Mr. 

Gordon Schofield. A prominent citizen of Thunder Creek, and 

we certainly welcome him here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join in on behalf of the opposition to welcome Mr. Schofield to 

the legislature. I know at one point in the last couple of years, I 

thought I might have the pleasure of running against Mr. 

Schofield, but it turned out that the nominating convention 

turned out differently. But I appreciate Mr. Schofield’s strong 

interest in politics, and I know that we will see him around this 

place in many different ways, perhaps as the member 

representing the Regina Beach area. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 



May 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

The Speaker: — What is your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a point 

of order arising out of question period. During question period 

the Leader of the Opposition made an accusation about 

statements made by a staff member of Executive Council. I 

would ask that the Leader of the Opposition table those alleged 

comments in the House. 

 

In that same vein, Mr. Speaker, I have to lay on the Table 

comments made by one Rachel Birns, who is a staff member for 

the NDP, referencing the best thing she’s ever seen on the 

Internet, which is an incredibly vulgar and inappropriate video. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll lay those comments on the Table as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the quotes that the questions 

were based on in part rely on the report from an individual who, 

and I quote from a . . . and shall be tabling this shortly, “This is 

a few of the things that the person answering the phone told me. 

Film companies from out-of-province got money upfront to 

make their movies and didn’t pay any taxes here.” 

 

Further on in the report it says, “Then I asked about all those 

people at the rally, what was that about? The person said most 

of them probably don’t pay taxes, and they were upset about not 

getting any more free government money.” That aligns 

somewhat with the statements by the Minister of Agriculture. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we stand by those questions. 

 

The Speaker: — After listening to the arguments from the 

Government House Leader and the counter arguments from the 

Opposition House Leader, it seems to me these are matters of 

debate outside of this House, and therefore are matters under 

debate and the point of order is not well-taken. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order 

answers to questions 403 through 405. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

403 to 405. The Lieutenant Governor is now present to attend 

the Assembly. 

 

[15:00] 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 15:01 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills.] 

 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 1 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011/Loi 

de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du 

Banc de la Reine 

Bill No. 2 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi corrective (droit 

collaboratif) de 2011 

Bill No. 3 - The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 

Act, 2011 

Bill No. 38 - The Active Families Benefit Amendment Act, 

2012 

Bill No. 10 - The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 9 - The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 6 - The Miscellaneous Business Statutes 

Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 7 - The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 

2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les 

coopératives 

Bill No. 8 - The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 34 - The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Act 

Bill No. 19 - The Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 

2011 

Bill No. 20 - The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 

2011 

Bill No. 41 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs 

— Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 17 - The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 27 - The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 

2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

Bill No. 28 - The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 

2011 

Bill No. 43 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 

Bill No. 23 - The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment 

Act, 2011 

Bill No. 42 - The Graduate Retention Program Amendment 

Act, 2012 

Bill No. 5 - The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 11 - The Court Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur 

les fonctionnaires de justice 

Bill No. 12 - The Court Officials Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2011 

Bill No. 13 - The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 

2011 sur les questions constitutionnelles 

Bill No. 14 - The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 21 - The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

Bill No. 22 - The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 portant 

modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

Bill No. 24 - The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

Bill No. 25 - The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

Bill No. 29 - The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances 

alimentaires 

 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2012 

Bill No. 30 - The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

Bill No. 31 - The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements 

canadiens 

Bill No. 32 - The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi sur les ordonnances alimentaires 

interterritoriales 

Bill No. 39 - The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority 

of Saskatchewan Act 

Bill No. 40 - The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority 

of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 

2012/Loi de 2012 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée The Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

Act 

Bill No. 26 - The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

Bill No. 35 - The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le 

Conseil exécutif 

Bill No. 33 - The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 4 - The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 16 - The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

Bill No. 15 - The Uniform Building and Accessibility 

Standards Amendment Act, 2011 

Bill No. 18 - The Degree Authorization Act 

Bill No. 36 - The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 

2011 

Bill No. 37 - The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 44 - The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 1) 

 

to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 15:07.] 

 

The Speaker: — Be seated. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 

a.m. Thursday morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:08.] 

 



May 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 1458 of Hansard, No. 43A Wednesday, May 9, 2012, 

in the right column, the third paragraph spoken by Mr. Broten 

should read, “My question to the minister: why is the Sask 

Party government so desperately urgent to prevent young 

people from paying union dues, but at the exact same time they 

are prepared to turn around and demand that young people pay 

more through increased tuition?” 

 

The online transcript for May 9, 2012 has been corrected. 

 

We apologize for these errors. 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1527 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1527 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1527 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1527 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1527 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1527 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1528 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1540 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1540 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1529 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1529 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Cystic Fibrosis Awareness Month 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1529 

 Yorkton Film Festival 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1529 

 Early Learning and Child Care 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1530 

 Lac la Ronge Indian Band Dominates Hockey Championships 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1530 

 Young Fellows Club of Weyburn Celebrates 90th Anniversary 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1530 

 Red Cross Month 2012 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1531 

 Natural Resources and the Canadian Economy 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1531 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1531 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1531 

 Remarks Concerning the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1532 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1532 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1535 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1535 

 Support for Community-Based Organizations 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1532 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1532 

 Child Care Issues 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1533 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1533 

 Funding for University of Saskatchewan 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1534 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1534 

 Electoral Representation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1535 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1536 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Student Achievement Initiative 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1536 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1536 

 Saskatchewan International Physician Practice Assessment 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1537 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1538 



 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Apology for Remarks During Question Period 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1537 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1538, 1540 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1539 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1538 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1538 

 Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1539 

 Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1539 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1541 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

CORRIGENDUM .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1543 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


