




















































Hansard: October 25, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 1A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 25, 2012, 2 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1559 

 October 25, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 14:00.] 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 

and gentlemen, please remain standing for the arrival of the vice 

regal party. 

 

[Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

14:01.] 

 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, honoured 

guests, people of Saskatchewan, welcome to the opening of the 

Second Session of the Twenty-Seventh Legislature. 

 

The last five years have been a period of remarkable growth in 

our province. 

 

From July 2007 to July 2012, Saskatchewan’s population 

increased by nearly 80,000 people. 

 

In the last year alone, Saskatchewan grew by more than 22,000 

people – the most growth in any year since 1921. 

 

Our cities are growing and so are our rural communities, thanks 

to our thriving resource sector and renewed strength in 

agriculture. 

 

This Saturday, the Town of Warman will become the City of 

Warman – Saskatchewan’s 16th city – after seeing its 

population more than double from 3,500 in 2001 to more than 

7,000 today. 

 

Warman is just one example. 

 

Every Saskatchewan city and nearly 80 per cent of 

Saskatchewan towns saw their population increase during the 

most recent census period. 

 

This is a remarkable turnaround from the previous census, 

which saw over half of Saskatchewan cities and more than 85 

per cent of our towns decrease in population. 

 

There are also more people working in Saskatchewan than ever 

before. 

 

In August, the number of people employed in Saskatchewan hit 

an all-time high of nearly 550,000, after growing by more than 

20,000 in just the past year. 

 

My government is committed to ensuring this growth continues, 

because growth has been good for our province. 

 

It means a strong economy and more opportunities for our 

young people. 

 

It means more support for our seniors and lower taxes for 

families. 

 

It means we can hire more health care professionals, complete 

more surgeries and shorten wait times. 

 

It means we can balance the budget and reduce the debt. 

 

Growth has meant all of these things for Saskatchewan, and 

that’s why we want it to continue. 

 

PLAN FOR GROWTH 

 

Last week, my government released The Saskatchewan Plan for 

Growth – Vision 2020 and Beyond. 

 

This plan will ensure our province continues to grow, that 

Saskatchewan people continue to benefit from the opportunities 

of growth, and that we are addressing the challenges of growth. 

 

The Plan sets a bold target – 1.2 million people living in 

Saskatchewan by 2020 – and outlines my government’s vision 

for what that province should look like: 

 

• A thriving economy powered by exports, innovation and the 

best workforce in Canada; 

 

• Modern infrastructure that supports growth and enhances 

quality of life; 

 

• An educational system and training programs that meet the 

needs of students and employers; 

 

• A health care system that is responsive, patient-focused and 

efficient; 

 

• A clean environment protected by regulations that reconcile 

economic growth and conservation; 

 

• Thriving, safe communities that are culturally vibrant and 

welcoming to newcomers; and 

 

• A compassionate society that cares for people in need. 

 

The Plan sets out both the principles of a growth agenda and the 

actions required for achieving these goals. 

 

In the months and years ahead, this vision for growth will guide 

the actions of my government, beginning in this legislative 

session. 

 

The underlying principle of my government’s Growth Plan will 

continue to be fiscal responsibility. 

 

Today, many provinces and many countries are struggling with 

growing deficits and crushing debt. 

 

Saskatchewan has chosen a different path. 

 

This spring, my government tabled the only balanced provincial 

budget in Canada. 

 

This is a key part of the Saskatchewan Advantage and my 

government will maintain the Saskatchewan Advantage by 

ensuring that the Growth Plan is achieved within a balanced 

budget. 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2012 

INVESTING IN INFRASTRUCTURE 

 

This summer, government MLAs travelled throughout the 

province, meeting with people to discuss their priorities. 

 

One message was clear: the government should do more to 

renew and rebuild Saskatchewan’s infrastructure. 

 

In the past five years, my government has invested more than 

$5 billion to improve and expand highways, schools, health care 

facilities and municipal infrastructure. 

 

That total doubles the amount spent during the previous five 

years. 

 

But even with that significant investment, there is more to be 

done. 

 

New solutions are required. 

 

My government will establish SaskBuilds - an organization 

designed to drive innovation in infrastructure financing, design 

and delivery. 

 

The new SaskBuilds Fund will receive $150 million to be used 

to develop partnerships with other levels of government and the 

private sector. 

 

My government will work with our municipal partners to 

develop a new cost-shared municipal infrastructure program 

through SaskBuilds. 

 

This will ensure that money is in place for the province and 

municipalities to partner with the federal government on any 

new infrastructure program. 

 

These partnerships will mean that the $150 million initial 

commitment will leverage hundreds of millions of dollars of 

additional investment for use across the province. 

 

This new infrastructure funding is in addition to my 

government’s ongoing commitment to provide funding for 

much-needed projects – a commitment of at least $2.5 billion 

over the next three years. 

 

We also will work with municipalities and other stakeholders to 

improve planning to ensure infrastructure investments are 

coordinated and aligned with future population growth and 

private sector development. 

 

Saskatchewan has a thriving housing sector, with more than 

8,000 housing starts forecast for this year – the most since 1979. 

 

There also has been a major expansion of on-campus housing. 

 

But with the province’s population growing at the fastest rate in 

90 years, we know more housing is required. 

 

My government will use an array of programs to stimulate 

private sector development to help ensure housing construction 

keeps pace with demand. 

 

Government initiatives will help add 12,600 new housing units 

between 2011 and 2016, giving low and moderate income 

citizens across the province better access to safe, quality, 

affordable shelter. 

 

BUILDING THE WORKFORCE 

 

Today, more people are working in Saskatchewan than ever 

before. 

 

This means more of our young people are choosing to stay in 

Saskatchewan and many others are moving to Saskatchewan 

from other provinces and other countries. 

 

Still, many available positions go unfilled. 

 

Today, Saskatchewan faces a shortage of skilled labour. 

 

Skilled workers in a variety of occupations are in demand as the 

economy grows. 

 

At least 60,000 more workers will be required by 2020 to meet 

the objectives set out in the Growth Plan. 

 

My government has taken steps to address labour market 

challenges. 

 

Since 2007, $3.5 billion has been invested in post-secondary 

education, including more funding for programming to assist 

First Nations and Métis students. 

 

The number of registered apprentices has increased by 43 per 

cent and there are now more than 35,000 training opportunities 

available in Saskatchewan. 

 

My government has aggressively promoted Saskatchewan to 

convince former residents to return home and to attract 

newcomers. 

 

My government will continue to pursue these strategies and it 

will take further steps to ensure Saskatchewan has the right 

workers, at the right place, at the right time. 

 

These include: 

 

• Adding 300 more apprenticeship spaces and working to 

develop additional apprenticeship training opportunities for 

students in high school; 

 

• Beginning to eliminate the backlog of people who want to 

work but need to develop the basic skills necessary to learn a 

trade; 

 

• Working with First Nations and Métis organizations on ways 

to improve educational outcomes and increase employment; and 

 

• Continuing engagement with the federal government to 

increase the annual cap on the immigrant nominee program by 

50 per cent from 4,000 to 6,000. 

 

Addressing the skilled labour shortage is an important aspect of 

our government’s Growth Plan, as is ensuring there is an 

effective legislative framework for businesses and workers to 

flourish. 



October 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS 

 

Since 2007, my government has worked to make Saskatchewan 

more competitive, to enable the province to attract the 

investment necessary to drive growth. 

 

Personal income taxes, small business taxes and property taxes 

have been reduced, putting hundreds of millions of dollars back 

into the pockets of Saskatchewan people and into the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

My government will take further steps to ensure Saskatchewan 

remains competitive with Alberta and British Columbia, which 

have lower business tax rates. 

 

Saskatchewan’s business tax rate will be lowered from 12 to 10 

per cent by 2015. 

 

My government is also working to reduce the regulatory burden 

on business. 

 

Government ministries and agencies have reviewed regulations 

and have eliminated many unnecessary barriers to growth. 

 

These efforts to reduce red tape for business will continue 

through the Regulatory Accountability Initiative. 

 

Regulations are necessary to protect public health, safety and 

the environment, but they should serve a clear purpose and not 

impose an unnecessary bureaucratic burden on individuals or 

businesses. 

 

My government remains on track with its four-year plan to 

reduce the size of the public service by 15 per cent. 

 

That objective will be met in the upcoming fiscal year, fulfilling 

the government’s commitment to become smaller and more 

efficient. 

 

This fall, my government will introduce a new Saskatchewan 

Employment Act that will support economic growth by clearly 

outlining the rights and responsibilities of employers, 

employees and unions in the workplace. 

 

With this legislation, Saskatchewan will have the most modern, 

competitive, fair and balanced labour and employment 

environment in Canada. 

 

My government will continue efforts to increase the head office 

presence of major companies operating in Saskatchewan, such 

as Mosaic, which established its potash headquarters in Regina 

in 2010, creating 120 new jobs in the city. 
 

AGRICULTURE 

 

American business writer and broadcaster Andrew Ross Sorkin 

made this observation a few years ago: 

 

“If you care at all about the future of the world’s food supply, 

you care – whether you know it or not – about Saskatchewan.” 

 

Thanks to the hard work of our farm and ranch families, 

Saskatchewan is now Canada’s top agri-food exporting 

province with more than $10 billion worth of exports in 2011 – 

up 60 per cent since 2007. 

 

My government’s goal is to see agricultural exports increase to 

$15 billion by 2020. 

 

Research and innovation will be vital to the future success of 

our farmers and ranchers as we work to continue this growth. 

 

This year’s budget included a record $20 million for agriculture 

research, an increase of more than 50 per cent since 2007. 

 

Research will continue to be a priority for my government as 

we work to meet the demands of a growing population at home 

and throughout the world. 

 

My government will also focus on potential growth in other 

areas of agriculture, such as value-added processing and 

irrigation. 

 

Since 2008, nearly $30 million in federal-provincial funding has 

been provided for irrigation expansion and rehabilitation, an 

increase of $25 million over the entire term of the previous 

government. 

 

RESOURCES 

 

Development of Saskatchewan’s vast natural resources – 

including our massive deposits of potash - is driving economic 

growth and boosting the profile of our province. 

 

This year, capital investment in Saskatchewan will surpass $20 

billion – a record amount and nearly double the 2007 total. 

 

The potash industry is in the midst of a $13 billion expansion 

that will create thousands of jobs and generate millions of 

dollars in economic activity and provincial revenues. 

 

K + S Group of Germany is building the first new potash mine 

in Saskatchewan in 40 years, after being forced to sell its last 

mine during the nationalization of the industry in the 1970s. 

 

BHP Billiton is continuing to develop its Jansen mine. 

 

PotashCorp, Mosaic and Agrium are all continuing with 

significant mine expansions. 

 

The potash industry is demonstrating its faith in Saskatchewan. 

 

The same is true of the uranium industry. 

 

In 2013, Cameco Corporation is expected to begin 

commissioning of the Cigar Lake mine – the world’s largest 

undeveloped high-grade uranium deposit. 

 

Throughout the province, but especially in northern 

Saskatchewan, the uranium industry provides valuable careers 

for Saskatchewan people including many First Nations and 

Métis people. 

 
INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT 

 

Saskatchewan is on track to surpass British Columbia to 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2012 

become the fourth-largest exporting province. 

 

The rapid growth in investment and exports underscores the 

importance of engaging with our trading partners. 

 

My government will continue to undertake international trade 

missions to support our exporters and strengthen ties with other 

countries – with a goal of doubling the value of Saskatchewan 

exports by 2020. 

 

Our export industries are supported by the Global 

Transportation Hub, located west of Regina, which is rapidly 

developing into a world-class intermodal facility. 

 

During this session, my government will turn the Hub into a 

self-sustaining Authority which will allow it to expand and 

open the door to new markets around the world. 

 

INNOVATION 

 

In Saskatchewan today, researchers are working on many 

innovative ideas that will drive our economy and make life 

better for people around the world. 

 

Our innovation agenda is based on the foundation of our 

province’s natural resource wealth – providing the food and 

energy security the world requires. 

 

My government will continue to enhance Saskatchewan’s 

reputation as an innovator in agriculture by establishing the 

Global Institute for Food Security. 

 

With over 40 per cent of Canada’s arable farm land and more 

than 30 per cent of the nation’s biotech research community 

located in Saskatchewan, the Institute is well placed to advance 

innovation in food production techniques and crop management 

systems to help feed a growing world population. 

 

Ground-breaking energy research and development is also 

underway. 

 

At the Boundary Dam Power Station, SaskPower and its private 

sector partners are developing the world’s first commercial 

power plant to be equipped with a fully-integrated carbon 

capture system. 

 

SaskPower is also in the process of developing a carbon capture 

test facility at Shand Power Station, where new carbon capture 

processes will be tested in a commercial setting. 

 

Through its CCS Intelligence Consortium, SaskPower will 

market information gathered at Boundary Dam and Shand 

Power Plants and further the development of carbon capture 

technology throughout the world. 

 

The Sylvia Fedoruk Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation 

was recently renamed to honour Dr. Fedoruk, a former 

Lieutenant-Governor, a gifted athlete and a pioneer in the field 

of nuclear medicine, whose research and innovation has 

extended the lives of millions of cancer patients throughout the 

world. 

 

The centre is now operational and has commissioned research 

projects scheduled to begin early in 2013. 

 

It will serve as an important incubator of ideas in the areas of 

small nuclear reactor technology, nuclear medicine, nuclear 

safety and materials management. 

 

HIGHWAYS 

 

In this year’s budget, my government invested $581 million in 

Saskatchewan highways. 

 

More than 1,200 kilometres of provincial highways have been 

improved. 

 

With an eye to growth, my government has prioritized the 

completion of Highway 11 twinning between Saskatoon and 

Prince Albert, a new passing lane pilot project and the 

construction of the West Regina Bypass which is part of a 

long-term plan that will ease traffic congestion within Regina 

and help shippers move goods more efficiently around the city. 

 

But we have much more work to do. 

 

That is why my government recently committed another $50 

million to high-priority highway projects across the province. 

 

In August of this year, 18-year-old Ashley Richards was 

working her first day as a flag person on a highway construction 

crew. 

 

Ashley died after being struck by a car driving through a 

construction zone, a tragedy that was entirely preventable. 

 

Working with the RCMP, my government has already taken 

action to improve safety in Orange Zones throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Additional measures will be taken to protect workers. 

 

Fines for speeding through construction zones will be increased 

to triple the normal penalty. 

 

My government also will introduce a legislative amendment to 

allow police to ticket drivers speeding through construction 

zones through the use of photo radar. 

 

My government’s strong desire is that these measures will cause 

drivers to slow down in the Orange Zone so this tragedy is 

never repeated. 

 

EDUCATION 

 

A society without the capacity or willingness to educate its 

young people will cease to move forward. 

 

Saskatchewan is moving forward and education is a priority for 

my government. 

 

During the past five years, my government has invested $3.5 

billion in the province’s post-secondary education system. 

 

We also have taken steps to make post-secondary education 

more accessible and to encourage the province’s young people 



October 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

to study here. 

 

My government introduced the Saskatchewan Advantage 

Scholarship which provides high school graduates with up to 

$2,000 over four years to attend a Saskatchewan post-secondary 

institution. 

 

This fall, approximately 4,000 students received the 

Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship. 

 

The Saskatchewan Graduate Retention Program provides 

tuition rebates of up to $20,000 over seven years to 

post-secondary graduates who stay in the province. 

 

This fall, my government will introduce legislation to create the 

Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings. 

 

This new program will help Saskatchewan families who are 

saving for their children’s post-secondary education by 

providing up to $250 per year per child. 

 

My government will support schools as they prepare students 

for post-secondary studies through a new Student Achievement 

Initiative. 

 

This four-year program will see the introduction of provincial 

assessments for each student enrolled in the kindergarten to 

Grade 12 system. 

 

By 2016, all school divisions will consistently and transparently 

measure and report student progress. 

 

Parents and educators will have a clear picture of a student’s 

performance and how it might be improved. 

 

High school completion is a priority for my government. 

 

Our goal, as outlined in our Growth Plan, is to have the 

province lead the country in high school graduation rates by 

2020. 

 

By next year, all school divisions will report baseline 

graduation rates and establish graduation rate targets. 

 

My government knows all students – First Nations, Métis and 

non-Aboriginal – deserve the same opportunities to learn and 

succeed. 

 

Last year saw the launch of the First Nations and Métis 

Education and Employment Joint Task Force. 

 

An interim report on the work of the Task Force is due by the 

end of 2012. 

 

The recommendations of the Task Force will inform my 

government’s actions to ensure all students reach their full 

potential. 

 

HEALTH 

 

My government continues to make progress reducing surgical 

wait times. 

 

Since November 2007, the number of patients waiting more 

than a year for surgery has been reduced by 81 per cent. 

 

The number of patients waiting more than six months has been 

reduced by 56 per cent. 

 

By utilizing LEAN techniques and private sector delivery 

where it makes sense, my government is on track to meet its 

goal that no patient will wait longer than three months for 

surgery by 2014. 

 

Saskatchewan was the first province in Canada to commit 

funding for research into the Liberation Therapy treatment of 

Multiple Sclerosis symptoms. 

 

The first of 86 Saskatchewan patients have travelled to Albany, 

New York to participate in clinical trials and more will follow 

during the next two years. 

 

My government has kept its promise to bring the Shock Trauma 

Air Rescue Service (STARS) to Saskatchewan. 

 

Since this service began providing emergency response out of 

Regina in April, STARS helicopters have flown more than 75 

emergency missions throughout southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Earlier this month, STARS began operating out of Saskatoon. 

 

In the months ahead, my government will continue to work with 

the Physician Recruitment Agency of Saskatchewan to step up 

efforts to retain Saskatchewan-trained physicians. 

 

However, we recognize that the province’s population growth 

will require the recruitment of additional international medical 

graduates. 

 

This fall, 24 international medical graduates entered the 

Saskatchewan International Physician Practice Assessment. 

 

Since the program began in 2011, 37 foreign-trained family 

physicians have successfully completed the assessment and 

more than 90 per cent are practicing in a rural or remote 

community. 

 

In the upcoming year, up to 90 international medical graduates 

are expected to enter the assessment. 

 

Nearly 9,000 Saskatchewan children contract rotavirus each 

year. 

 

Beginning this fall, my government will expand the infant 

immunization program to provide free, universal access to the 

rotavirus vaccine. 

 

Expanding our public immunization program ensures the best 

protection is available for all infants and young children, while 

reducing costs for families and the health care system. 

 

Earlier this year, the Premier appointed a new Minister of Rural 

and Remote Health. 

 

The Minister spent the summer travelling through rural and 

northern Saskatchewan where he visited health care facilities 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2012 

and met with health care professionals and community leaders. 

 

The common concerns heard in rural Saskatchewan relate to the 

recruitment and retention of physicians, the availability of 

emergency services and the need to utilize health care 

professionals to the full extent of their training. 

 

In response, this year my government will implement a new 

team-based approach to providing primary and emergency care 

in rural and remote settings modeled on Nova Scotia’s 

Collaborative Emergency Centres. 

 

My government continues to fulfill its 2011 commitment to 

alleviate the shortage of health care workers in rural 

Saskatchewan. 
 

My government will forgive up to $120,000 in student loans for 

new doctors and up to $20,000 for new nurses and nurse 

practitioners who agree to practice in rural, remote or 

underserved communities for up to five years. 

 

As well, my government will develop a program of partial 

student loan forgiveness for doctors providing relief services to 

address temporary doctor shortages in rural and remote areas. 

 

My government is also keeping its promise to establish a 

20-doctor rural locum pool and is adding 20 new nurse 

practitioner training seats over four years. 

 

SOCIAL SERVICES 
 

A society is judged by how it cares for its most vulnerable 

citizens. 

 

My government’s goal is to make Saskatchewan the best place 

in Canada for persons with disabilities. 

 

Earlier this year, we increased benefits under the Saskatchewan 

Assured Income for Disability program, putting an extra $2,400 

per year in the pockets of people who need it the most. 

 

In the years ahead, my government will build on this 

investment, adding an average of $1,800 per year to these 

benefits by 2015. 

 

But support for persons with disabilities goes beyond financial 

considerations. 

 

There are concerns around transportation, education, 

employment, housing and community inclusion. 

 

In consultation with the disability community, my government 

will develop a comprehensive strategy that will consider all 

these matters and the important role played by caregivers. 

 

Helping seniors with low incomes continues to be a priority for 

my government. 

 

By 2015, benefits under the Seniors Income Plan will have 

tripled in six years, putting up to $2,100 more per year in the 

pockets of low-income seniors. 

 

Increases to the new Personal Care Home Benefit over the next 

four years will give low income seniors living in personal care 

homes up to $4,400 per year in additional income. 

 

Saskatchewan’s child welfare system is undergoing a 

transformation and early indicators are pointing to progress. 

 

The number of children in care has decreased by 17.5 per cent 

since March 2009 and the number of foster homes with more 

than four children has dropped by 54 per cent in the same 

period. 

 

However, a true transformation will occur only when fewer 

children are entering the system in the first place. 

 

My government will begin development of an early-years 

strategy that puts a priority on parental training and family 

supports. 

 

JUSTICE 

 

During this session, my government will introduce legislation 

giving the Ministry of Justice authority to oversee the seizure of 

criminal property which is now administered by police services. 

 

This will make the seizure of criminal property more efficient 

and effective. 

 

GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 

 

This summer, Saskatchewan cities launched a campaign 

highlighting the benefits of growth in Saskatchewan and 

thanking my government for working in partnership with 

municipalities. 

 

My government would like to thank municipalities for this 

partnership as well, and it congratulates and looks forward to 

working with all the mayors, reeves and councilors who were 

elected in yesterday’s municipal elections. 

 

Our partnership has benefitted from long-term, stable and 

predictable revenue sharing for municipalities. 

 

In the coming fiscal year, municipalities are expected to receive 

over $264 million in revenue sharing, more than double the 

amount they received in 2007-08. 

 

PARKS, CULTURE and SPORT 

 

Consultations are proceeding on a new plan to move creative 

industries forward. 

 

These discussions are aimed at enhancing opportunities for 

commercial success in an increasingly digital environment and 

developing new and innovative strategies to support this sector. 

 

The consultations will lead to a long-term strategy to advance 

the commercial objectives of creative industries. 

 

My government will continue to support arts and culture. 

 

From 2007 to 2011, funding for arts and culture increased 35 

per cent, compared to the previous four years. 

 



October 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

My government is proud to support several major events taking 

place in the province in the coming year. 

 

2013 will be the “Year of Music” in Saskatchewan and will be 

highlighted by the Juno Awards to be held in Regina and Moose 

Jaw next April. 

 

2013 will also be a big year for sports in our province. 

 

Junior hockey’s Memorial Cup championship will be held in 

Saskatoon next May while the Grey Cup will take place in 

Regina in November. 

 

My government would like to thank the thousands of volunteers 

who will work to make these events a spectacular success. 

 

From the Athabasca Sand Dunes in the north to the Cypress 

Hills in the south, Saskatchewan is blessed with beautiful 

provincial parks. 

 

My government has invested $46 million over five years in our 

park system to ensure visitors have the best experience possible. 

 

Saskatchewan citizens are responding. 

 

This year, there were more than 3.5 million visits to our 

provincial parks – a new record. 

 

More than 60,000 reservations were booked on the 

government’s new reservation system. 

 

Legislation to establish a new provincial park will be introduced 

in this session. 

 

My government will continue to support the province’s regional 

parks, which received a 500 per cent increase in funding during 

its first term. 

 

ENVIRONMENT 

 

My government understands the importance of balancing 

economic progress and environmental protection. 

 

Saskatchewan is experiencing unprecedented growth, which is 

causing an increased demand for water. 

 

We must take strong action to effectively manage our water 

resources to support our growing population and economy and 

to ensure environmental sustainability. 

 

The newly-created Water Security Agency will implement a 25 

Year Water Strategy to protect water quality and sustain water 

supplies for residential, industrial, agricultural and recreational 

users. 

 

This fall, my government will proclaim a new Saskatchewan 

Environmental Code. 

 

The Code has been developed with the input of more than 200 

representatives from a broad array of stakeholders, including 

First Nations and Métis groups, environmental organizations 

and municipalities. 

 

The Code will modernize environmental protection by focusing 

enforcement activities in high-risk areas while encouraging 

innovation and increasing transparency. 

 

CONCLUSION 

 

During this session, the Estimates for the New Year 

commencing April 1, 2013 will be submitted to you. 

 

The Public Accounts for the current year have been tabled. 

 

Today, Saskatchewan faces new challenges – the challenges of 

growth. 

 

The rapid pace of growth in Saskatchewan is creating 

significant demands for infrastructure, for housing, for labour, 

and for health and education. 

 

Still, the challenges of growth are preferable to the challenges 

of decline Saskatchewan faced just a few short years ago. 

 

My government will continue its growth agenda and will 

continue to work with Saskatchewan people to meet the 

challenges and opportunities of growth, confident in the belief 

that Saskatchewan’s best days are still ahead. 

 

I now leave you to the business of the session, knowing that you 

will favourably discharge your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May divine providence continue to bless our province and guide 

this Assembly in all its deliberations. 

 

God bless Saskatchewan. 

 

God bless Canada. 

 

And God save the Queen. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to invite Elder Tony Cote to 

come forward please. I will begin with our traditional Assembly 

prayer. All please rise. 

 

Present us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious 

favour and further us with thy continual help, that in all our 

works, begun, continued, and ended in Thee, we may glorify 

thy holy name, and finally by Thy mercy attain everlasting life. 

Amen. 

 

Mr. Cote: — First I’d like to say a very good afternoon to the 

Lieutenant Governor Schofield, Premier of Saskatchewan Brad 

Wall, and his cabinet, and the opposition party and all the 

dignitaries and visitors that are in the House. 

 

I think it’s a very big honour for me to be standing here in front 

of you, to be given the opportunity to say a prayer in my own 

language which is the Saulteaux language. I come from the 

Cote First Nation and I was one of the people that survived to 

maintain my Saulteaux language. As you all know that the 

Indian people had to go underground to keep their traditions, 

culture and religious faiths and their beliefs but I managed to 

hang on to mine even though I spent 7 years in the residential 

school. 

 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2012 

I’m going to pray for the delegates, the Premier and his cabinet, 

the opposition party so that we continue to maintain a good 

relationship with the First Nations people. Foremost I would 

say as well that my great grandfather was one of the signatories 

to Treaty 4. His name was Chief Gabriel Cote and I’m one of 

his great grandsons. With that I will pray that we continue that 

Saskatchewan will continue to develop its initiatives and 

continue to be very progressive. So if you’d all join with me. 

 

[Elder Cote continued in Saulteaux.] 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you, Elder Cote. 

 

Please remain standing for the departure of Their Honours. 

 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:42.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that a Bill respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 

the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 

for this session will be returning Page Lambry Stamatinos, the 

new Pages Sarah Cheshire, Samantha Fontaine, and Joel 

Richter. 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move: 

 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

be taken into consideration on Friday, October 26, 2012. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

be taken into consideration on Friday, October 26, 2012. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m about to move 

adjournment of the House. I know you’ll have a few things to 

add before you put the question. Just before I make the motion, 

if I may, Mr. Speaker, there’s a few guests we should honour 

and welcome today. 

 

We have with us His Honour George Tuccaro, Commissioner 

of the Northwest Territories. We have a number of individuals 

as well, Mr. Speaker, from the diplomatic corps, from the 

consular corps for this country. We want to, without naming 

them all, could we give them a warm welcome here to this 

Legislative Assembly as well. 

 

I would also acknowledge and welcome Michael and Alison 

Hammond to their Legislative Assembly. They’re newly arrived 

from Scotland together with their four-month-old baby Jenson. 

Baby Jenson is his name, and they’re here as guests of all of us 

as well. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to move that the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question of adjournment 

motion, I have a few announcements to make. 

 

I would like to thank all the guests including the guests the 

Premier has just mentioned and the members of the public for 

joining us here today. 

 

I want to thank the members of the judiciary from the Court of 

Appeal, the Court of Queen’s Bench, and the Provincial Court 

for your attendance today. 

 

I would also like to acknowledge and thank Elder Tony Cote for 

his part in the ceremony today, and also other clerical 

individuals that are with us today including the Archbishop of 

Regina. 

 

I would like to introduce the school group that is with us today. 

In the east gallery we have the Grade 12 students from Bedford 

Road Collegiate in Saskatoon. I would like to thank all of you 

along with your teacher for attending today’s ceremony. 

 

I’d like to also welcome the Luther College High School 

Advanced Vocal Ensemble. They are seated in the west gallery 

and I will be calling on them to sing in a few moments. 

 

I would like to thank the members of the following 

Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve force units for 

providing us with the honour guard earlier this afternoon: Land 

Force Western Area Domestic Operations Detachment, 15 

Wing Moose Jaw, Royal Regina Rifles, Saskatchewan 



October 25, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

Dragoons, 734 Communications Squadron, 16 Service 

Battalion, 16 Field Ambulance, and HMCS Queen. 

 

As well I would like to thank the 10 Field Regiment, the Royal 

Canadian Artillery for the 15-gun salute, the Royal Canadian 

Artillery band and the Royal Canadian Air Force Band piper. 

 

I would like to invite everyone to join Their Honours, the 

Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, the members of the 

Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 

immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 

held in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and the 

library reading room in the east wing. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I would now like to welcome AVE, the Luther College High 

School Advanced Vocal Ensemble. AVE is an auditioned 

ensemble drawn from the members of Luther College High 

School Senior Choir and like the Senior Choir they have gained 

a reputation for outstanding performances of quality choral 

repertoire. 

 

It is a note of interest Luther College will be celebrating its 

100th anniversary in October 2013. 

 

The choir is directed by Mr. Stewart Wilkinson and they will 

sing “Ubi caritas” and “Little Lamb.” 

 

[The choir sang.] 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you very much on behalf of all present, 

for a very, very, fine performance. I may have to ask them back 

on occasion to maintain a harmonious atmosphere in here. 

 

One final announcement. I ask that members and guests observe 

the following order when departing the Chamber: the Speaker’s 

party, Her Honour’s party, the Premier and Provincial 

Secretary, Leader of the Opposition, judges of the Court of 

Appeal, Queen’s Bench, and Provincial Court, members of the 

cabinet and their spouses, other members of the Legislative 

Assembly and their spouses, followed by guests. 

 

This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:49.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE ................................................................................................................................................. 1559 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Pro Forma Bill 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1566 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1566 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1566 

MOTIONS 

 Speech from the Throne 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1566 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


