




















































Hansard: April 30, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 37A  MONDAY, APRIL 30, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1319 

 April 30, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my 

pleasure to introduce some guests who have joined us in the 

government gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re here to help mark the 

100th anniversary of Huskie athletics from the University of 

Saskatchewan, and so I’m going to introduce each of them and 

ask maybe that they give us a wave or stand — whatever 

they’re comfortable with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, beginning with Dr. Carol Rodgers, dean of the 

College of Kinesiology, University of Saskatchewan. And 

joining in support of the U of S anniversary from the University 

of Regina is Dr. Craig Chamberlin, dean of Faculty of 

Kinesiology and Health Studies at the U of R. Councillor Wade 

Murray from the city of Swift Current . . . from the city of 

Regina — Regina, Swift Current — representing very 

effectively ward 6. We want to welcome Councillor Murray as 

well. Basil Hughton, Huskies athletic director; Kyle Ross, 

Huskies men’s hockey team; Jason Grieve, Huskies women’s 

volleyball head coach; Ashley MacNeill, women’s wrestling 

team; Robin Ulrich, women’s hockey assistant coach; and, Mr. 

Speaker, Amy Prokop, Huskie athlete services officer and 

member of the centennial planning committee; Naomi Selent, 

member of the centennial planning committee; Cheryl 

Sedgewick, member of the centennial planning committee; 

Heather Dawson, member of the centennial planning 

committee; Merry Beazely, member of the centennial planning 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are marking 100 years of Huskie athletics. 

Centennial events have been held over the past year to 

encompass the themes of heritage, alumni, education, and 

legacy. And the events of course are also being held to pay 

tribute to Huskie athletics, their stakeholders, and their 

supporters both past and present. A fitness initiative involving 

hundreds of young people across the province has also been a 

part of the celebrations called the Huskie Centennial Walk, and 

a walk was held here at the Legislative Assembly grounds 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously at both of our campuses, we have 

dynamic and very successful athletic programs. It’s very, very 

true at the University of Saskatchewan and may I just say 

through you and to you to all members, we want to welcome 

these guests to their Legislative Assembly. We want to thank 

them for their leadership in Huskie athletics and to our friend 

from the U of R in Cougar athletics as well. Mr. Speaker, 

welcome to your Assembly, I would say, as well as, go dogs. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the Premier in celebrating 100 years of Huskies at the U of 

S. We know that the Huskies add so much to life on campus, 

but not just on campus, to life in Saskatoon and indeed the 

entire province. So a very impressive delegation representing 

the good work that has occurred for many decades and also the 

good work that is ongoing on campus. So I’d like to, on behalf 

of the official opposition, join with the Premier in welcoming 

this group to the Assembly and wish them all the best as the 

celebrations continue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I 

would like to introduce three guests seated in the west gallery, 

Mr. Speaker. The first one is Andrea Robertson who is the 

president and CEO [chief executive officer] of STARS [Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society]. And also joining her is Ron 

Dufresne who’s vice-president of Saskatchewan operations, and 

Darcy McKay, clinical operations manager and flight 

paramedic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course these three are in the gallery today 

because it was a very special day out at the Regina airport when 

we announced the launch of STARS. There’ll be more in the 

member’s statement so I don’t want to take thunder away. But I 

do want to say that I want to thank Darcy who guided me 

through my first helicopter ride today, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

they put a paramedic on board just in case I didn’t do so well, 

Mr. Speaker. But I want to thank those three, as well as an 

amazing team of individuals that will be supplying this one 

extra step of our EMS [emergency medical services] system, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the patients get timely and safe care 

in our province. I want to thank them in advance of all the work 

that they’re going to be doing in the province in the future. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the delegation from STARS. Clearly 

ambulance service in the province is so very important. I didn’t 

know that the minister was up in the air today, and perhaps he’s 

tucked away the aviators for question period. But this is a very 

serious issue, Mr. Speaker, and I would welcome this group to 

the Assembly here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce through you and to you a couple of grandparents 

who’ve joined us in the Assembly today, David and Heather 

McMillan. And they asked me a while back if they might be 

able to bring their grandson, Aaden, and their granddaughter, 

Aurora, to the Legislative Assembly for just an educational 

opportunity. So I want everyone to join with me in extending a 

warm welcome to them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you somebody who you know well who is sitting behind the 

bar, Mr. Kim Trew now of Elbow, Saskatchewan and the 

former member from Coronation Park in Regina. I know all 

members of the legislature will give him a warm welcome. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

welcome the teachers and ministry officials we have here today, 

ministry officials of Education for the Saskatchewan institute 

on parliamentary democracy. These teachers, these officials on 

a daily basis, do such important work in the classroom here in 

Saskatchewan. These educators are from across Saskatchewan, 

here for a couple of days or a few days of meetings and of an 

institute of which the goal is to strengthen their understanding 

of our democratic process. And I know these inspiring teachers 

will certainly instill that importance of the democratic process 

in students, engagement back into their students in the days, 

weeks, and years ahead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I ask all members to join with me in welcoming the very 

special teachers that have joined us here today, and one of the 

organizing officials with the Ministry of Education, Mr. Brent 

Toles. 

 

And while still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss not to 

mention and highlight a community leader that’s with us here 

today. Mr. Gerry Harris, who has played an instrumental role in 

Luther Invitational Tournament here in Regina, has been a . . . 

is certainly an athlete who played for the Huskies. He was a 

menacing force on the football field. To this day he still, I think, 

could take that field and fare quite well. 

 

Mr. Harris was also a teacher, lifelong teacher and coach, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s also an entrepreneur who’s very successful. I 

know that the students and players that had Mr. Harris influence 

their lives know that he was somebody they could count on, 

somebody that would challenge them, but also somebody who 

is compassionate. So I’d like to . . . He’s also been inducted into 

the Regina Sports Hall of Fame recently, Mr. Speaker, and truly 

a Regina leader. He’s also important to my family — he’s my 

wife’s godparent and someone I count as a good friend. So it’s 

such a pleasure to have Mr. Harris here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think 

you’re, in a few moments, going to provide a formal welcome 

and introduction of our guests in your gallery from the SSTI 

[Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 

Parliamentary Democracy], from the teachers’ institute, but I 

was remiss in my earlier introduction of the folks from Huskie 

athletics in not acknowledging our guests from SSTI. 

 

We’re grateful that the institute continues to move ahead at full 

strength. And I had the great opportunity to meet with the 

teachers that have joined us here today, this morning in the 

cabinet room, and then a little bit in the Premier’s office. And 

there was a short Q & A [question and answer]. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re obviously hopeful that the teachers find the 

program very rewarding. I’m looking actually at their program, 

and they don’t have a lot of spare time built in here, Mr. 

Speaker. So again, on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, we welcome them here to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with members opposite welcoming city councillor Wade 

Murray to his Legislative Assembly. Wade not only does a fine 

job for the people of ward 6, of which I am one, Mr. Speaker, 

but certainly they hold down the 7 block King in fine fashion, 

Wade and his spouse, Laura, and their family. But the Huskie 

delegation couldn’t have picked a better host for this occasion, 

Mr. Speaker. So it’s good to see Wade Murray, city councillor 

in the city of Regina, here in his Legislative Assembly. I’d ask 

all members to join me in welcoming Wade Murray to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, obviously the 

Premier has already made appropriate and warm introductions 

to the University of Saskatchewan delegation. From the 

University of Regina we have a board member here. Ms. 

Brenda Barootes is here, and I’d also like her to be recognized 

and ask everyone in the Assembly to welcome her to her 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you very much. I’d like to take this 

opportunity to introduce the teachers in the gallery. And as they 

can see, our students of politics are very anxious to be involved 

in this. So it’s my pleasure to introduce to you a group of 

teachers who are in the Legislative Assembly to attend the 14th 

annual Saskatchewan Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 

Democracy. The institute began on Saturday and will conclude 

on this coming Wednesday. 

 

This group has already met with a number of people including 

the members of the judiciary, the Acting Chief Electoral 

Officer, and the Clerk. Earlier today they met with caucus staff 

from both sides of the House, the Sergeant-at-Arms, and the 

House leaders. And they are scheduled still to meet with the 

caucus Chairs, the caucus Whips, several MLAs [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly], and cabinet ministers. 

 

At this time I would like to introduce the individual teachers; if 

they would like to give a wave, please. And the first one on the 

list, based on alphabetical order, is Mr. Jeffrey Ambrosia of 

Thom Collegiate in Regina; Ms. Ashley Anholt of Saskatoon 

Christian School; Ms. Cara Fleischhacker of St. Brieux School; 

Mrs. Melissa Grona of the Invermay School; Mr. Daniel 

Headrick of the University of Regina; Ms. Melissa Loder of the 

Kyle Composite School; Mrs. Erica Long from the University 

of Saskatchewan; Ms. Kimberley Lynchuk of the Kenaston 

School; Mr. Andrew Neufeldt of the Blaine Lake Composite 

School; Mr. Pat Orobko of the Unity Composite High School; 

Mr. Terrance Pelletier of the Cowessess Community Education 

Unit, Cowessess First Nation; Mr. Thomas Skelton, University 

of Saskatchewan; Ms. Ali Strunk, University of Saskatchewan; 

and Ms. Shayna Zubko of the Esterhazy High School. 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

I’d also like to make special mention of our steering committee, 

composed of three teachers who attended past institutes and an 

official from the Ministry of Education. From the Ministry of 

Education we have Brent Toles, and we have Ms. Maria 

Sparvier of the Cowessess Community Education Centre, 

Robert Jardine from the Blaine Lake Composite School, and 

Ms. Corinne Harcourt of the Englefeld School. 

 

I’d like to ask all members to welcome these teachers to their 

legislature. 

 

As well at this time I would like to introduce Mr. Kevin 

Fenwick, the Ombudsman, and joining him here today are Ms. 

Leila Dueck, Kelly Chessie, Greg Sykes, and Pat Lyon. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I would like to table the 2011 

annual report of the Ombudsman. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present another petition calling for protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. 

 

We know that British Columbia and other provinces have 

brought several safety precautions through law, including a 

requirement that workers cannot be alone during late-night, 

early morning hours. And if they are required to work, there 

must be protective barriers such as locked doors and protective 

glass. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

actually standing today to present a petition on Highway 165. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

undertake to upgrade the section of Highway 165 between 

Beauval and English River First Nation by adding proper 

lighting for pedestrian traffic, by adding space for 

pedestrians on the highways and its bridges, and by 

properly surfacing the road with the material needed for a 

busy, heavy-haul road. 

 

And the people who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Beauval, and I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices and that 

is developed through consultation with the education 

sector and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of Big 

River, Prince Albert, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Success for Saskatchewan Golfer 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At 

this time of day we often hear members talking about important 

sporting achievements in their constituency by individuals and 

teams. A disproportionate number of them seem to come from 

Arm River-Watrous and Carrot River Valley. 

 

But I want to rise if I can, Mr. Speaker, and draw some 

attention to a sporting event that happened in New Orleans over 

the weekend where the PGA held its Zurich Classic, Mr. 

Speaker. Saskatchewan sporting history was made there. 

Keegan Bradley, Graeme McDowell, Geoff Ogilvy, Ben Curtis, 

and Bubba Watson have some things in common. First of all, 

they’ve all won majors on the PGA. Bubba Watson most 

recently won the Masters. Here’s what else they have in 

common. They all finished behind Graham DeLaet from 

Weyburn, Saskatchewan, who tied for fourth in the PGA event 

in New Orleans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Graham was 16 under and tied for fourth. He 

birdied the last hole after getting on in two on a par 5, hitting 

his two iron. The announcers noted that hardly anyone even 

carries a two iron around on the PGA. Mr. Speaker, Graham 

DeLaet for about, well three years — he had to take last year off 

for medical leave — has been really excelling at golf, putting 

Saskatchewan on the map, making those American golf 

announcers learn how to pronounce the province of 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

Saskatchewan correctly. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that 

we would take this day, on this historic and unprecedented 

achievement, to say to Graham DeLaet, thank you very, very 

much for representing us so well and all the best the rest of the 

way out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

100th Anniversary of Huskie Athletics 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to recognize the 100th anniversary of Huskie athletics 

at the University of Saskatchewan. I am honoured to represent 

the constituency in which the U of S is located, and I’ve had the 

pleasure of being involved in the centennial celebrations. 

 

Huskie athletics has provided hundreds of students with the 

opportunity to develop their personal and professional 

knowledge of life skills with athletic competition and becoming 

well-rounded student athletes. Centennial events have been held 

throughout the year to encompass the themes of heritage, 

alumni, education, and legacy, and pay tribute to Huskie 

athletes and stakeholders, both past and present. A highlight of 

the celebration has been the Huskie Centennial Walk, a 

provincial fitness initiative that involved hundreds of young 

people from communities across the province. 

 

I have handed out centennial pins to all members today, and I 

extend an invitation to join Huskie representatives in 

completing the centennial walk initiative, a walk around this 

beautiful building this afternoon. Notwithstanding the proud 

allegiances of our hon. members to the Rams, the Cougars, and 

other teams of home communities, but for a brief time this 

afternoon we invite you to follow the catch phrase of the 

centennial which is, we are all Huskies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members to put on their centennial 

pin and join me in congratulating the University of 

Saskatchewan in this impressive achievement. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

French-Language Film Festival in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend 

the city of Saskatoon played host to Festival Cinergie, 

Saskatchewan’s international French language film festival. 

Celebrating its seventh year, the film festival presents us with a 

richer understanding of the diversity and vitality of our 

Fransaskois community while allowing audiences to travel the 

world with films from the Democratic Republic of Congo, 

France, Belgium, and across Canada. 

 

Cinema helps us to better reflect on our world, our society, each 

other, and ourselves. In addition to screening a wide variety of 

films from comedy to drama to animation to experimental art 

films, Festival Cinergie provided several opportunities for 

festival goers to engage in thought-provoking activities through 

workshops and discussions. 

 

On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, my daughter was fortunate 

enough to attend the screening of Un monstre à Paris, an 
animated movie set in Paris in 1910, centred on a monster who 

lives in a garden and his love for a beautiful young singer. And 

she loved the film, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The arts are vital to developing our identity, inspiring creativity, 

spurring innovation, and contributing to the economy. Much 

work went into making this wonderful and valuable event 

happen. And so, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to thank la Fédération 

des francophones de Saskatoon for continuing to host this 

festival, and the festival director, Tao Chamberlin, for all of her 

hard work and insight in organizing this spectacle. 

 

I would also like to extend much appreciation to the Cinergie 

Festival planning committee, Audrey Adele-Rose, Gisèle 

Lalonde, Eric Lefol, Laurette Lefol, Sarah Marchildon, and 

Ludovic Piejos, for their contributions to putting on this 

marvellous event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday night I had 

the pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of the Premier, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and SaskTel at the 14th annual 

SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards. Also joining me that night 

was the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

These awards were established in 1997 to recognize 

achievements of Aboriginal youth in Saskatchewan. These 

awards are supported by the public, government, and private 

sectors, and SaskTel has been a proud sponsor since the 

beginning. These awards celebrate the achievements of 

Saskatchewan Aboriginal youth in 10 categories, where judges 

are most interested in personal sacrifice, determination, effort, 

commitment, attitude, demonstrations of leadership, and a sense 

of Aboriginal culture and language. These judges look to 

recognize youth who have a balanced lifestyle, display strong 

values, are physically fit, demonstrate academic success, and 

are inspiring leaders in their communities. 

 

It is important that our youth have positive role models to 

emulate and, while having positive role models is important, we 

know that having great role models in one’s peer group is even 

more important. The award winners and nominees present on 

Friday evening were all examples of achievers who will move 

forward and inspire the upcoming generation. 

 

I would invite members of this Assembly to join me in 

applauding the great work of all nominees and winners at this 

year’s Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Saskatchewan Book Awards 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

before the Assembly today to acknowledge the Saskatchewan 

Book Awards Gala, which I attended this past Saturday at the 

Conexus Arts Centre in Regina. 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

The Saskatchewan Book Awards celebrate excellence and 

diversity in Saskatchewan writing and publishing. Each year the 

SBA [Saskatchewan Book Awards] presents over a dozen 

awards to celebrate and recognize the achievements of our 

province’s authors and publishers. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, the keynote address was given by Mark 

Abley, a highly respected author, journalist, and editor who 

grew up in Saskatoon. Mr. Abley is known for his work as a 

freelance writer, a feature writer for the Montreal Gazette, a 

book review editor, literary columnist, and author of several 

books. As Mr. Abley remarked, Saskatchewan’s publishers 

continue to do great work and the province need not worry 

about how it stacks up in relation to a Toronto or Ottawa or 

anyone like that. Saskatchewan stacks up very well by 

anybody’s standards. I could not agree more. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to take this opportunity to 

congratulate all of the nominees and award winners for their 

outstanding works. And of course many thanks go to the 

Saskatchewan Book Awards staff and board members for doing 

such impressive work in promoting greater awareness of 

Saskatchewan books, authors, and publishers. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Emergency Medical Care Milestone 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks a 

landmark for emergency medical services in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, as of this afternoon, STARS medical helicopters are 

available for southern Saskatchewan patients who need 

emergency medical care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, reaching this milestone required vision, 

commitment, and a willingness on the part of many partners to 

serve Saskatchewan people. We thank the corporate and 

individual donors who helped make this possible: our founding 

donor Crescent Point Energy, Mosaic, PotashCorp, Enbridge, 

Energy Plus, Husky, and Rawlco Radio. Mr. Speaker, our 

government is also a proud supporter of this new initiative 

within our province. 

 

In emergencies, minutes can make the difference between life 

and death. We know that STARS will help us reach critically ill 

or injured patients sooner. We know it will save lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the coming months, the Regina STARS base 

will expand to 24-7 service, helipads will be developed here and 

in communities across the province, and later on in the fall 

we’ll have a second STARS base open up in Saskatoon. With 

each new development, Saskatchewan people have better access 

to emergency medical care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all those that STARS will help in the 

future, thank you to everyone who has played a role in bringing 

this exceptional service to Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Partnership Supports First Nations Workers 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today and speak about a fabulous new partnership that was 

recently forged between Xtreme Mining & Demolition and the 

Kahkewistahaw First Nation. The two groups have entered into 

a working agreement in which Xtreme Mining will hire First 

Nations students, giving members of the Kahkewistahaw 

community opportunities to work in the mining sector. 

 

Eight students were chosen out of a list of 35 applicants, and 

these talented individuals will complete a hands-on orientation 

prior to beginning work. Once these students have completed 

the course, they will be employed by Potash Corp, Mosaic, and 

Agrium potash mining companies. 

 

Len Banga, president of Xtreme Mining, was proud of this 

agreement, citing the importance of the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan and the growing importance of Aboriginal 

employees in the province’s workforce. Between 2007 and 

2011, off-reserve Aboriginal employment has increased by 8.2 

per cent, a great statistic demonstrating the results of improved 

education and employment investments as well as the strong 

state of the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Banga stated that the general managers see this as a step in the 

right direction for the mining industry and the province of 

Saskatchewan. We are dedicated to making this work now and 

into the future. 

 

Xtreme Mining and Demolition has a current staff of 160 

employees and operates out of Saskatoon. I would like to invite 

my colleagues to join me in congratulating these two groups on 

the signing of this working agreement and focusing on the 

continued improvement of our great province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, students waited three years 

for the Sask Party to come up with a new education funding 

formula. When it, along with the budget, was finally presented, 

it was clear there were deficiencies. Divisions across 

Saskatchewan are left with shortfalls. As a result, the impacts 

will be felt by students. At a time of growth in this province, 

why is the minister forcing school boards, students, and 

teachers to sacrifice? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our 

government has been very supportive of education. We consider 

it a priority for the future of our growth. And indeed we are 

growing. We have increased the education budget over our 

course of being government by over 21 per cent now as well as 

invested over half a billion dollars into capital projects. 

 

We will be working with school divisions who have raised 

some questions on their budgets. Just last week — and I’m 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

assuming the member opposite is referring to Saskatoon — 

Saskatoon, I met with the Saskatoon public school division and 

their request was how we react in future years of the funding 

formula more quickly to increases in students. And we talked 

about a couple of solutions that we could perhaps implement, 

and those discussions, I think, are very, very important as we 

move forward with the school divisions. But I do want to point 

out that the urban school divisions received increases as well as 

all school divisions across our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the increases the minister 

speaks of simply don’t cover the growth and enrolment or the 

inflationary costs in education. So it results in cuts, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Both the Saskatoon public and Catholic school boards have said 

they’re falling short of millions of dollars of what they need. 

George Rathwell, director of Saskatoon public, said, I quote, 

“We’ve got our work cut out for us on this one.” And Bev 

Hanson, director of Saskatoon Catholic, said, “We do have a 

shortfall in this budget.” 

 

How is it fair that the government’s failure to address growing 

enrolments in a responsible manner is forcing school boards and 

teachers to make choices that will negatively impact students? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I do have to question the 

member opposite’s numbers. I think he’s still using the 

campaign calculator because indeed his numbers are a little off. 

He said that our increases are not keeping up with the increase 

of enrolment, but in fact Saskatoon Public, Mr. Speaker, their 

increase in enrolment was 1.7 per cent. The increase in their 

budget was 7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s a significant 

increase. That does not include capital dollars; that is 7 per cent 

for operating only. 

 

For the Saskatoon Catholic school division, the increase in 

enrolment was 3.3 per cent. The increase in their budget, Mr. 

Speaker, was 6 per cent, and again that does not include the 

capital dollars for their capital projects. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

not sure of the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] math, but 7 per 

cent is quite substantially more than 1.7 per cent. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I guess the minister knows better than 

those delivering education in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Presenting both opportunities and challenges, many of the new 

students in schools are new Canadians who need some extra 

support as it relates to English, and that takes resources. We’ve 

been calling for action on this front, and school divisions are 

speaking out. Bev Hanson, director of Saskatoon Catholic, said, 

I quote, “A lot of students making up our increase require 

English as an additional language supports, so that diversity 

combined with unprecedented enrolment growth is posing some 

challenges.” 

Why is the minister shortchanging school boards, teachers, and 

students and not enabling them to meet the growing demands of 

English as an additional language? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the member opposite for 

recycling a question he had a couple weeks ago, and so I am 

very happy to repeat yet again that the English as an additional 

language teachers has increased in our province by 51 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, growth does pose some challenges, but it’s 

something that we don’t want to back away from. These are 

very, very exciting times in the province of Saskatchewan. And 

we’re not going back to the NDP days where they underfunded 

education. They forced the taxpayers to have a tax revolt within 

our province. They did not address the inequities from one 

school division to another due to differences in tax wealth. So, 

Mr. Speaker, we do not want to go back to that system, and I 

am looking forward to working with our school divisions as we 

move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the official 

opposition, just so the minister’s aware, will continue to make 

the call for action on this front until we see some from 

government. 

 

Growth in this province does come with opportunities and 

challenges, and they need to be dealt with in a meaningful and 

responsible manner. On the specific issue of increased 

enrolment, education funding is based on student population 

from the previous September. This has left Saskatoon school 

boards alone with over 1,000 students in there, registered but 

without proper funding. School boards are calling on 

government to provide funding based on enrolment in the 

current school year. It was mentioned here today by the 

minister. We called for this in committee. We called for it last 

week on the floor of this Assembly.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a problem that can be solved. Will the 

minister agree to fund school boards on the number of students 

registered in the current school year and meet the demands of 

growth? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

surprised that the Finance critic doesn’t realize that the school 

fiscal year and the government fiscal year do not line up, which 

is a difficulty that we have and why I met with the Saskatoon 

Public School Division just last Thursday to discuss different 

ways that we can address it in a more timely manner. I have 

promised school divisions that we will be revisiting different 

challenges within the new funding formula. This September 

we’ll have a debrief, and we’ll be able to identify different areas 

where adjustments can be made. 

 

But they are all very clear, nor do they want to go back to what 

the NDP were doing. And the NDP was underfunding 

education. They were downloading onto property owners. There 

was a tax revolt within our province. We have significantly not 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

only backfilled the property tax, but we have increased funding 

for education by 21 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we are going to stay 

working with our partners in education to find solutions, not 

with the NDP because they allowed all of this to happen year 

over year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Agricultural Programming and Supply Management 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There have been a 

number of cuts to agriculture as a result of the federal budget, 

and these cuts have had a negative impact on Saskatchewan 

farmers. Mr. Speaker, the cuts have impacted agriculture 

research, the shelterbelt program at Indian Head, meat 

inspectors, and community pastures. 

 

When I asked recently about the impacts of the federal budget 

on Saskatchewan farmers, the minister said, “I’ll be talking to 

my federal counterpart, and we’ll have more information on that 

at that time.” 

 

My question to the minister: what new information came out of 

his meeting with the federal minister? How is he planning on 

making up for federal agriculture cuts so that Saskatchewan 

farmers don’t suffer as a result? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

and I did have the opportunity to meet with the federal minister 

last Friday morning. Got a commitment from the federal 

minister when it comes to community pastures: that being this 

year there would be no closures of pastures, next year there will 

be five, and the following year five, and then the balance in the 

next three years; that he would commit to making this a smooth 

transition to the patrons of those pastures. And we will certainly 

work with him to do that. 

 

When it comes to the Indian Head tree nursery, actually the 

minister had said they’d had a couple of inquiries from the 

private sector to this point and are hoping that something 

materializes there and that that shelterbelt program can 

continue. And I hope so too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, Minister 

Ritz was in Regina talking about the benefits of the 

Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade 

Agreement, or as referred to as CETA. A prominent business 

columnist has raised the following concern: 

 

What the Harper government isn’t saying is that supply 

management and government support for agricultural 

research are bargaining chips that will be thrown into the 

pot to obtain favourable treatment from our trading 

partners. 

 

My question to the minister: what other agriculture supports or 

programs are being used as bargaining chips? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the federal 

minister made it very clear at the federal table when provincial 

ministers were there, when asked the question by Ontario and 

Quebec, that supply management would not be used as a 

bargaining chip at these trade talks. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, 

we can only take him at his word. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal minister I think covered a number of 

areas, whether it was programming or research or a number of 

those issues, Mr. Speaker, and the federal government has made 

it their commitment to carry on with funding for those 

programs. And I again would take the federal minister at his 

word. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think the province of 

Saskatchewan and our Ministry of Agriculture has backed 

farmers very well over the past four and a half years. We took a 

program called Crop Insurance, it was gutted under the NDP, 

and rebuilt it again so there’s more acres under the program 

than there ever has been. Mr. Speaker, we’ve made a number of 

changes including the education tax on property when it comes 

to farmers across this province, something the NDP said they 

would deal with and never did deal with, Mr. Speaker. So I 

think we’ve been here for farmers in the first four and a half 

years, and we’re certainly going to continue to do that into the 

future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s no doubt 

that CETA promises to boost trade and create jobs, but it could 

mean the end of supply management agriculture; specifically 

ag, dairy, and poultry marketing boards. A new report 

commissioned by the Canadian Council of Chief Executives 

says, “. . . the rest of the economy . . . cannot afford to be held 

hostage to demands by dairy and poultry producers to preserve 

the status quo.” 

 

My question to the minister: does he agree with the Canadian 

Council of Chief Executives? Does he think the economy is 

being held hostage by the dairy and poultry producers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, our supply 

management industry in this province provides very good 

efficiency in food and value for the dollars that we pay in this 

province. They are also a very important part of the economy 

that we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only go by what the federal minister said. 

And I answered that in my first response that he made the 

commitment that it would be not used as a bargaining chip. And 

I don’t know where else I can go with that issue. Mr. Speaker, I 

cannot speak for the federal minister. I go by what he tells us 

and we will see what comes into the future. 

 

On the other hand, we’re working on farm programs, as I said 

before, to continue to improve these programs for producers. 

The one thing I will say, and something that was not done in the 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

past, is provincially we are fully funding the programs that 

come up with the federal government and all the provinces in 

agreement. So, Mr. Speaker, I think producers are looking to us 

to provide programs on behalf of them, and I believe we have 

done that over the first four and a half years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, my questions are about supply 

management, and that’s what I would like an answer from the 

minister about. The author of that report is Michael Gifford, and 

he says that Canada should be taking steps now to help protect 

its sectors prepare for a future in which agricultural trade 

liberalization is inevitable and in Canada’s national interest. 

Does the minister agree with this position? Or does he agree 

that poultry and dairy marketing boards are an essential feature 

of Saskatchewan’s agricultural economy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how 

much more clearly I can answer this question. The supply 

management sector in the province of Saskatchewan, and for 

that matter across the country, is very important to consumers 

and in our case, to the economy of the provincial economy 

when it comes to the dairy industry, the chicken industry, the 

egg industry. All those entities provide a very good value for 

dollar in the province of Saskatchewan. So what I’m 

committing to today, and only going by what the federal 

minister committed to, is that they will not be using that as a 

pawn. So I don’t know where the member is getting her 

information from, but I will rely on the federal minister and 

take him at his word. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Support for Northern Housing 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, home ownership is something 

many people want, but in northern Saskatchewan it can be a 

challenge to reach that goal. Sask Housing had a rental purchase 

option that gave low-income people a chance to work towards 

buying their rental property. Unfortunately for many people 

wanting to take advantage of this program, the government 

indicated late last year that the program was being cancelled. 

 

To the minister: why would the government end such a needed 

program that helped many low-income northern people become 

home owners? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be 

more than happy to get the details of that particular program for 

the member. I don’t have that here right now but I am very 

proud of our government’s record on housing. We have 1,924 

new units, which is $173 million, quite frankly, that we have 

invested in housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to invest 344 million more in the 

next five years and that will create approximately 12,600 new 

units within our province. 

Mr. Speaker, we have put millions of more dollars into housing 

than the previous government ever considered. We have worked 

with northern communities, we’ve worked with large 

communities, small communities right across our entire 

province to help individuals with home ownership and with low 

rentals. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — The minister says that the lack of fairness in 

the amount people were paying for their homes is the reason for 

killing this program. That makes no sense, Mr. Speaker. If the 

government really thought that it was unfair, it could have 

changed the policy to make the program work better for all 

people. 

 

To the minister: if fairness was your main concern, why did you 

not change the policy of the rental purchase option program 

instead of tossing it completely out? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take notice 

of the question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, another important housing 

program for the North has been the residential rehabilitation 

assistance program which helped homeowners improve the 

condition of their homes. The minister said in committee 

recently that major changes were coming to this program. The 

Saskatchewan home repair program was announced last week 

as one of those major changes. There was nothing in that 

announcement to deal with unique issues of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: why is the government ignoring the housing 

issues of northern Saskatchewan with this new, home repair 

program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the minister, I take notice of the question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Children in Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since Ottawa 

changed the children’s special allowances funding, the Minister 

of Social Services said some families are actually better off, but 

she has no idea how many families are what she would describe 

as better off. What we do know is that there are currently 2,500 

children in the care of persons of sufficient interest or PSIs. 

These people are often grandmothers or other extended family 

members. We also know that many of our offices continue to 

get calls from these families, and they are not better off. In fact 

they are receiving less money than they did before the changes 

took place. 

 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

To the minister: why won’t she take a serious look at how her 

government’s administration of this program is failing the very 

people it’s meant to support? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the minister, I take notice of the question. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister said she has a solution for everyone who is worse off. 

They should call their social workers, their MLAs, or the 

Children’s Advocate so they can be dealt with on a case-by-case 

basis. This seems a rather complicated and stressful way to fix a 

problem of the government’s own creation. 

 

Many of these families will either choose to struggle by living 

without the money or they will give up the children they are 

trying to help because they don’t have the resources to properly 

support them. There are many people who are negatively 

impacted by this change, and the minister is making them come 

to her again on a case-by-case basis. 

 

To the minister: why won’t you use common sense and simply 

fix the program so everyone, absolutely everyone, is assured of 

receiving all the money the province is getting from the federal 

government for these children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a federal 

program, and I do not have the details on the federal program 

that was cut, so I take notice of the question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister has now said they plan to grandfather in the current 

PSIs and ensure these families get the money they received 

under the old system. But what about the new PSIs? Well the 

minister has said there are new rates in place for dealing with 

new PSIs, but we are not confident on this side of the House 

that all of the federal funding for these families will necessarily 

flow to them. 

 

Clearly the program is a mess, and this is not an issue that 

should be handled on a case-by-case basis. It affects up to 2,500 

children, Mr. Speaker, which is an awful lot of case-by-case 

advocacy that takes a great deal of time before families get any 

resolve. 

 

To the minister: instead of asking these families to come 

begging on a case-by-case basis, is she going to ensure that both 

current and new PSIs receive every penny the federal 

government is forwarding to the province for support of 

children in their care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I take 

notice of the question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Accommodation for Ministries 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in 

committee and in question period, the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration was unable to answer, 

unable to give a response to this Assembly why his ministry is 

prepared to pay $1.2 million more for leasing a new posh office 

space in Regina. This, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the new 

office space is actually smaller than the existing location for 

160 employees. 

 

My question to the minister: how does he plead poverty to 

students, to universities, to regional colleges, to SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] on 

the one hand, and then he can go around in the exact same 

moment, Mr. Speaker, and he’s happy to spend $1.2 million 

more on accommodations for offices? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Regina vacancy rate remains at under 2 per cent; 2 

per cent makes it very tight. So because of that, we have 

decided to reduce our footprint for our office spaces. And that is 

a standard that we have brought forward of 200 square feet per 

FTE [full-time equivalent]. Because of that, Mr. Speaker, we 

are amalgamating spaces, creating open office spaces which in 

fact will be saving the government money in the long run, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is what a prudent government does. 

It looks at its resources and then figures out, how do we take 

and economize them. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is not prudence to pay more for 

less space. That simply doesn’t make sense. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker . . . well, not my question. We’ve 

heard two different stories coming out of ministers on the front 

bench, Mr. Speaker. The one night in estimates, the Minister of 

Advanced Ed said they were going to pay 21 per cent more for 

accommodation services for ministry staff for office space. 

 

Fast forward a day, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 

informed the Human Services Committee that for 

accommodation services for the Health ministry, with their 

many properties in Regina, was actually going to be a decrease 

of 18 per cent from $5.035 million to $4.148 million. 

 

My question to the minister: how is it that we have these two 

different stories coming from the two ministers? How come the 

Health minister can find savings when it comes to 

accommodations, but the Minister of Advanced Ed is more than 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

happy to pay 21 per cent more? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the way Government Services provides 

accommodations is no different from when the members 

opposite were in government. The ministry officials work with 

the ministries to meet their accommodation needs throughout 

the whole province, but specifically here in Regina, where we 

have less than 2 per cent office space. So there’s been no 

change to the manner of Government Services and how we 

charge the ministries for the space they occupy. The approach is 

now the same as the approach, like I said, that was used by the 

members opposite. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we have reduced the number of square 

feet per FTE to 200. In the previous government, there was no 

thought that 350 was maybe too much. We have set a goal of 

reaching and working towards 200 square feet per FTE. With 

the amount of space we will save, Mr. Speaker, there is going to 

be more accommodations available to the public. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there was no reply in that answer 

to address the issue of why there are two different, two very 

different stories coming from two ministers on the front bench. 

On the one situation, the Ministry of Advanced Education, we 

have the ministry leasing the exact same properties as last year 

with one exception — moving from the current spot in Grenfell 

into the Hill Tower III. The one difference, Mr. Speaker, is for 

half of the year, the ministry will be paying $1.2 million more. 

 

In Health, Mr. Speaker, we had the minister admit that the 

accommodation expenses within his budget were going down, 

down by an amount, Mr. Speaker, of 18 per cent, and Mr. 

Speaker, there were four locations recognized in Regina. My 

question to either minister: why, Mr. Speaker, the difference 

between the two amounts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what I’d like the members opposite to kind of 

visualize, we are amalgamating space. Ministry of Health has 

given back space. So consequently, they are spending less. 

 

But also, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is amalgamating 

within ministries different spaces. We’ve met space standards 

of 200 square feet. The amount that we are going to be turning 

back in the city of Regina is equivalent to the size of city hall. 

Mr. Speaker, that is a substantial amount. That is over 100,000 

square feet that we will be turning back to the commercial 

office space, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a good example of savings in that we are reducing 

our floor space. We are going to open-office concepts. Mr. 

Speaker, this is prudent government. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 1, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2011 — this is a bilingual Bill — without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be heard in committee? I 

recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill 

and the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 1, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill be now 

read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed moving 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011/Loi 

de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la 

Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 1, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011. This is a bilingual 

Bill without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be referred to committee? 

I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the 

Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative 

Law) Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill now be read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed with 

moving third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011/Loi corrective 

(droit collaboratif) de 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 3, The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be referred to committee? 

I recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration of 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill now be read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 3, 

The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 and 

that the Bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed moving third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 3, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding CPA 

[Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] attendance. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion regarding CPA attendance. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that, 

by leave of the Assembly: 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Regina Coronation Park for Monday, May the 14th to 

Thursday, May the 17th inclusive to attend the 37th 

Regional Conference of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association of the Caribbean, Atlantic, and Americas 

Region in Kingston, Jamaica on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member of 

Coronation Park for Monday, May 14th to Thursday, May 

17th inclusive to attend the 37th Regional Conference of 

the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association of the 

Caribbean, Atlantic, and Americas Region in Kingston, 

Jamaica on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 27 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi 

de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today to speak, continue in the adjourned 

debates on this particular Bill, Bill No. 27, which is the Act to 

amend The Education Act, 1995. There’s a number of changes 

proposed in this Act, Mr. Speaker, and we haven’t had a lot of 

opportunity to speak to it yet, but we are glad to do so today. 

 

And first of all, I guess just to go through it, there’s a number of 

clauses that could be addressed and to explain to the people 

exactly what changes are being proposed. In this case we have 

some changes to the definitions in the Act, in particular the 

definition of academic year and school day. And those are being 

replaced and there’s now . . . The definition is going to be 

moved down to the regulatory authority rather than being found 

in the Act. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Again, and I’ve commented on this on several occasions, the 

concern with moving meanings and definitions and all of the 

other provisions that we’ve seen, where the authority to make 

those changes is being devolved down to the Executive 

Council, is of concern, Mr. Speaker. And it’s something I think 

that the public needs to take note of and express their opinions 

on that because there’s no opportunity for debate on those 

regulations. There’s no opportunity for consultation with the 

public. They just are passed by order in council and that’s the 

end of it. So as long as this government continues to devolve 

things down to the regulatory level, it is something of concern 

and we will be watching those regulations as they come 

through. But as I say, Mr. Speaker, those regulations are already 

in force before anyone gets a chance to look at them and 

comment on them. 

 

There’s some other changes in section 9 dealing with copyright 

licence agreements. And in this section what the government is 

doing is introducing new provisions to reflect new copyright 

laws and tariffs. And that’s entirely appropriate, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s not a change that we have any concerns with. 

 

Another section that’s being amended is section 11, the 

technology supported revolving fund. And apparently, 

according to the explanation that we’ve been given is that this 

section is now being repealed because the fund is no longer 

used any more to support the provision of correspondence 

programs because boards of education are now funding these 

programs through their operating budget. So again it’s another 

example of how funds have been devolved down to the school 

board level. And this was a recommendation from the 

Provincial Auditor because the fund really should formally be 

closed, as it has no assets. So in that way, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

another good change to this Bill that reflects the current status 

and clears up some issues of administration. 

 

There’s two other sections that are being repealed: section 12, 

which is referring to the educational council and their 

responsibilities under section 14; and section 13, where the 

meetings of the council were to take place. And these are being 

repealed because the educational council apparently is outdated 

and hasn’t operated for decades. So this is an appropriate 

change, Mr. Speaker, and it’s one that we have no issue with. 

The explanatory notes indicate that there are other ongoing and 

ad hoc forums for discussing issues of common interest with 

stakeholders. And if this council hasn’t operated in decades, 

then it makes sense to repeal those provisions of the Act. 

 

Another provision, one provision, the next one that’s being 

amended is section 60(1). And further, section 60(4) is 

repealed. So this is in relation to the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board, and it used to have a historical role of overseeing 

borrowing or payment of monies by the school board, but that’s 

now the responsibility of the ministry. So the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board, because they’re no longer required to 

disestablish the school division because it is changing its 

historical role, then these clauses are amended accordingly. 

 

The next area that’s being changed is in section 85 of the Act. 

And that’s regarding the duties and powers of the boards of 

education and the conseil scolaire. And in this case it’s 

regarding the audit provisions. Section 85(1)(s) talks about how 

the books are to be audited, and the changes that are being 

proposed is that the person who does the audit is now required 

to hold a professional accounting designation. So that’s a 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

modernization of that clause, Mr. Speaker, which we would 

have no issues with. 

 

And section 86(1)(s) is a similar change in relation to the duties 

of the conseil scolaire with the francophone education areas, 

and again the person who does the audit is required to hold 

professional accounting designation. So that’s an entirely 

appropriate amendment and one that was due. So we’re okay 

with that change. 

 

Further to that, we have section 87.7(2) which is also amended, 

and it’s in relation to the new regulatory authorities that are 

being provided, and in this case the effective date of school 

closure or discontinuance of grades or years is going to be 

referred to in section 183 of the Act and the regulations. So it’s 

amended accordingly. 

 

In that case, Mr. Speaker, the amendment will read as follows: 

87.7(1) which . . . The reference is in 87.7(2), I’m sorry, and it’s 

just adding “and the regulations” after section 163 because the 

regulatory powers are being extended in relation to this clause. 

 

Section 88(2) is amended in a similar fashion. Again this is in 

relation to the powers of le conseil scolaire and when they can 

close schools, and the effective date of the school closure. And 

that also is being amended to add “and the regulations” after the 

words, the section 163. So that’s again another example of the 

devolution of authority to the regulatory sphere, which can be 

of concern. And again we’ll have to ensure that we scrutinize 

the orders in council as they come through and any, I guess, 

added changes to regulations, Mr. Speaker, and without any 

opportunity for comment by the public or the opposition in this 

House. 

 

So the next one that they are changing, in this long list of 

changes to the Act, is section 110 of The Education Act. And 

section 110(4) is repealed. And this is regarding production of 

documents. The entire section is repealed — it’s a long section 

— and from this point forward, they’re not required, boards of 

education are no longer required to send copies of their audited 

financial statements to the municipality, but the municipality 

can request a copy if they wish. 

 

And there’s a broadened definition of notice, of how sending 

can be done, and it’s in addition to mail. It can be done in other 

manners. So it’s just a wider definition of how they can forward 

those copies. So in this case, the new wording says, “If 

requested by a municipality.” So it’s only if a municipality 

requests it. They’re no longer required to do that. 

 

In section, the next amendment is an amendment to the French 

version of the Act. Section 134.2(2) of the French version is 

amended by striking out the word “réglementaire.” But there 

was no explanation provided for that one. 

 

Now section 163 is a significant change, and one that requires 

some discussion, Mr. Speaker. And the previous section was 

quite extensive, and in the previous section they talked about 

two terms of school ending on December 31st and June 30th 

and then two semesters ending on January 1st and June 30th, or 

ending on December 31st and June 30th and any other period 

that they think was necessary. 

 

This has been changed just to say that a school year consists of 

200 school days, and it doesn’t give any indication as to the 

terms any more. And they have a definition now for 

instructional day which is a new definition that: “. . . means a 

day within a school year on which instruction is given to pupils 

or on which examinations or other educational activities 

involving pupils are conducted.” So that’s a fairly big change to 

that. 

 

The school year continues to consist of 200 school days, but it 

allows in any year for the minister to determine for that year: 

“. . . any lesser number of school days that the minister 

considers advisable.” And that section is basically unchanged 

although there is a small wording change to that. 

 

In the previous Bill, it was up to the boards of council or le 

conseil scolaire to determine the opening and closing dates of 

schools. In this case, the power to determine the opening and 

closing dates of schools has been delegated to the regulatory 

sphere. 

 

So we don’t know for sure what those regulations are going to 

look like until after they’re passed, Mr. Speaker. And we 

certainly won’t have any comment, nor will the public have any 

comment on the opening and closing date of schools, the school 

hours of operation — although the boards will still be able to do 

it, they are subject to the regulations — and the schedule of 

operation for a school year and for any term. So those three 

things are still within the realm of the board of education and 

conseil scolaire but is subject now to the regulations, and that’s 

the regulations regarding the terms and the periods that the 

ministry or the government considers advisable to reduce the 

number of days on. 

 

There was a requirement in the previous section to notify 

employees and boards of trustees and publish information for 

parents and pupils with respect to the matters of the opening 

and closing dates of the school. That’s no longer there. There’s 

no requirement any more for them to notify the people, which is 

unfortunate. And this is the big change that we’ve heard lots 

about from various school groups and school boards. And it’s 

really sort of shaken their world, Mr. Speaker, because there’s a 

mandatory requirement now for the first instructional day in a 

school year is the first day following Labour Day. 

 

And we know that this was something that was advocated for in 

the business world, Mr. Speaker, but it is not something that is 

of interest to a lot of other people, and particularly the schools 

and the children in the schools. This type of change is to 

support people who are able to get away in the summer and 

perhaps enjoy the luxury of being at a lake or in a cabin, which 

is not a lot of people in the province, Mr. Speaker. In fact that’s 

a limited number of people that have those privileges. 

 

And certainly I think for a lot of the children who are looking 

forward to school starting, the idea of sitting home for an extra 

three or four days before the long weekend in September is of 

absolutely no benefit to them whatsoever. They’ve had a long 

summer break and they’re ready to get back at school. And it 

should be up to the individual communities to make that 

determination, and certainly not something that should be 

dictated to them by the ministry and by business needs and 

business interests. 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

In fact I know a number of school boards are now struggling 

with eliminating the February break. This is something that is 

disrupting families planning for their activities that they pursue. 

And it’s certainly something that I know my children certainly 

look forward to in February, is that little break just to get 

through the winter, and school boards simply don’t have room 

any more for that kind of break. So as far as I’m concerned, 

section 163(5) — which indicates that boards of education no 

longer have any discretion in terms of when the first 

instructional day is going to be held, it must be the first day 

following Labour Day — this is arbitrary and it is dictatorial. 

And it’s telling schools what they should be doing when often 

we hear from our Minister of Education how much she defers to 

the school boards and how hands-off she likes to be in terms of 

them determining their own affairs. 

 

So this is somewhat inconsistent with what we’re hearing from 

our minister. And it’s an example of this government listening 

more to the needs of business than to that of educators or school 

children or parents. And I think that’s really unfortunate. So 

that’s really the biggest change in this whole Bill. 

 

There are a number of other changes though that are indicated, 

and just to carry on on a few more of them, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

looking at a modification of l’article 110 et maintenant. Section 

110(4) is now being modified. I’m just going to find the section 

here. Oh sorry. That’s one I’ve already spoken to in the English 

version, so I don’t need to refer to it in the French version. 

 

We’re now moving into the section regarding teacher education 

certification and the classification board. And there’s seven 

sections that are being repealed there; sections 270 to 276 are 

being repealed. Fairly extensive description of the teacher 

classification board. And what’s happening here, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of the explanatory notes that we’ve been provided — 

just let me get to that — in fact there are no explanatory notes 

provided in the notes to the Bill. So just looking at it briefly, we 

can see that the board now is being defined as Teacher 

Education, Certification and Classification Board. And 

previously it was just the teacher classification board. 

 

So the changes here are in respect to the certification and 

classification of teachers and their education as well. So there’s 

a number of changes being made. Most of them appear to be 

administrative in nature, and perhaps the big change is the 

classification board under 271(1) now can make 

recommendations to the minister with respect to defining and 

classifying teacher qualifications for inclusion in the 

regulations. So here’s one case where the minister will be 

consulting with teachers and through the board. And there are a 

number of other things that the board must do under the old 

section. 

 

[14:45] 

 

In 272, there was a list of people that used to be on the board, 

and now that list is no longer there. It’s up to Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to make the decisions about the terms of 

the members of the board and their remuneration, and the board 

members are now going to be appointed in accordance with 

regulations. 

 

So there again, we have a change from actually naming who 

will be on the board in the Act to moving that naming of those 

members to the regulatory sphere. And again, something of 

concern, but we will be keeping note of those regulations as 

they are passed and making comment at that time. 

 

273 now gives out a list of the powers of the board. And in this 

case, the board can arrange for studies or investigations of 

problems related to education and training of teachers and 

arrange for consultants to assist it in studies considered 

necessary to perform its duties, submit proposals to the 

universities with respect to staffing of the colleges of education 

of the universities, and propose or recommend to the minister 

policies considered to be desirable to improve or expedite 

administration of the regulations governing teachers’ 

certificates of qualification. 

 

So in the previous section, the responsibilities of the board were 

quite detailed and there was several of them there, and so were 

the powers of the board. And now we see them basically being 

shortened up and referred to the regulatory sphere. And finally 

there’s a new selection on an appeals committee which didn’t 

exist in the previous Bill in as much detail. 

 

And then section 277 is a new section. The previous one is 

repealed and the new one talks about the fiscal year again. And 

in this case, the fiscal year is September 1 to August 31. And in 

the previous Act, there were a number of different iterations of 

the fiscal year, but it seems to be something that has now 

moved through a period of change and is now fixed upon 

September 1st to August 31st for school years. And it also just 

updates the fiscal year for the boards of education and the 

conseil scolaire. 

 

There’s a new section 283, and that is in relation to previous 

financial statements. The explanation here is that the previous 

financial statements section is being repealed and substituted 

with new wording and the boards of education and conseil 

scolaire will arrange for their board approval of their annual 

report in advance of the submission to the ministry. So this will 

be following The Tabling Of Documents Act and so there’s 

some timing issues there that are now being corrected. So that’s 

a change that’s being made to section 283; 288. 

 

There’s some changes in terms of the other sections that are 

relevant to this Act which is The Municipalities Act, and the 

explanation that’s provided here is that the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs has a responsibility of determining mill rates 

for each taxation year. So this section is repealed and 

substituted with new wording that clarifies the authority for 

different mill rates to be set for properties within the city of 

Lloydminster. So this is in relation to one particular city and the 

authority for mill rates in that particular city. 

 

Section 289 is also amended, and it’s adding after the word 

minister the phrase “or the minister responsible for the 

administration of The Municipalities Act.” And 289(1) is in 

relation to the notice of tax rates. So it’s just to provide for 

communications out to municipalities and school divisions 

regarding the provincial education property tax to be handled by 

Municipal Affairs as per the delegation of responsibilities 

between ministries. So that’s the clarification in responsibilities. 

 

We have levy of taxes, section 290. There’s a substitute for 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

290(3) and again, it’s just repealed and substituted with new 

wording to indicate mill rates are no longer set by boards of 

education although separate school boards may be exempt from 

that. There’s changes to the provisions regarding operating 

grants to boards of education and this is section 310 and 311. 

Those sections have been repealed and there are new sections 

that have been proposed and the new wording references that 

terms and conditions may be placed on the operating grant paid 

to school boards. So there will be strings attached now to these 

operating grants. And the grants are paid to boards of education 

and not school divisions, which is a geographic area the board 

of education oversees, so that there’s clarity around that 

language. And the reference is also made to broader terms such 

as sites or facilities rather than just schools, so there’s further 

clarification in that section. 

 

Section 315(1), it’s a very small change to that. Strike out the 

word “prescribe” and substitute the word “direct”, and I think 

that’s an appropriate change just to make it in line. Section 319, 

loans for current expenditures is repealed and there’s a new 

version of it, 319(1). And what it refers to, as the case may be, 

is that boards of education and the conseil scolaire must seek 

the approval of the minister before borrowing funds for its 

current expenditures, for example, its line of credit. 

 

So they need the minister’s consent to do that, and I believe in 

sub (2) previously they were also required to have the consent 

of the minister. It’s repealed because it doesn’t apply under 

their new funding distribution model. And operational 

borrowing requirements are unrelated to the amount of accounts 

receivable held by the board, so subsection (3) is no longer 

required, which required notification of the minister and 

Minister of Finance. So the minister can also notify the Minister 

of Finance, if needed, in that context. 

 

There’s some changes to subsection 321. Sub (3) has been 

repealed, and sub (4) is amended by striking out “and the 

bylaw.” And the reasoning provided here for that change is that 

a board of education and the conseil scolaire may still borrow 

for capital expenditures. The minister’s consent is still required. 

The board will still be required to pass a resolution to borrow 

but will no longer need to pass a bylaw. So that’s the main 

change there. 

 

Section 323(3) is also being amended, and in that case it’s 

regarding resolution setting forth intent to borrow. This section 

has been much modified and reduced, and basically the 

explanation there is that borrowing for capital will no longer 

require the involvement of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 

Again this looks like the Municipal Board is no longer as 

involved in public school board and French schools’ loan or 

financial management. 

 

The Saskatchewan Municipal Board had a traditional role that 

included ensuring that the debt was manageable, the term and 

cost of financing were appropriate, and local electors were 

informed. I guess in this case, seeing that school boards are now 

capable of making those determinations on their own and they 

don’t need the oversight of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

to make those types of decisions, the section still provides for 

school division residents to be informed of the resolution to 

borrow funds. And electors will still also be able to view the 

resolution in board minutes, which are publicly available. So 

the public will still be notified of these intentions to borrow, 

and the only change here is that the Municipal Board is no 

longer required to provide an oversight for those types of 

decisions on the part of school boards. 

 

Section 324 is completely repealed because again they no 

longer need to apply to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board for 

loans. So it seems that that should be appropriate, Mr. Speaker, 

because school boards should have the capacity to make those 

types of determinations. However, borrowing still requires 

approval of the minister. And despite I’ve heard the minister 

say in public on several occasions that she defers to the boards, 

but in this case she still has to approve borrowing. So I’m not 

sure about the consistency of her approach, but there you have 

it. 

 

Section 325(1) used to be an application to the minister by a 

French le conseil scolaire, and the changes that are being 

proposed here is new wording. The Conseil des écoles 

fransaskoises and boards of education are still required to apply 

to the minister for loans and submit the resolution to the 

minister. So it’s a fairly . . . The section is now somewhat 

lengthier, but it details the procedures that are required for 

getting ministerial approval. These changes are all, of course, in 

French as well. 

 

And we now have a number of sections that are repealed. 

Section 326 is repealed, and again this is in relation to the 

Municipal Board which no longer has a role. The same goes for 

sections 328, 330, 331 to 335, 336 to 341, and 342 — they’re 

all repealed, and the explanation is mostly in relation to the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board and their previous requirement 

to approve. So those are now all removed because there’s no 

more need for that. 

 

School boards are also given a bit more lenience in some of 

these other clauses that are being repealed. There’s no 

requirement for a bylaw to be passed any more, and they don’t 

need to use debentures as a means of borrowing any more. So 

the school boards are given a lot more flexibility here on the 

ways that they approach borrowing money. They don’t need 

sinking funds any more. They will no longer issue debentures. 

And so a lot of these things are just moving that forward into a 

more modern approach to borrowing. It’s difficult when they 

have to borrow money, but that’s another story for another day. 

 

Section 347 . . . Sorry, I want to go back to section 344. This is 

an amended section and this is regarding acquiring property. 

And there’s some changes made. After 344(3) there’s two more 

subsections added. These new subsections are added that will 

consolidate provisions regarding the acquisition of property. 

And what it does is it’s requirements under the New West 

Partnership Agreement that say that any procurement over 

$75,000 has to go to tender for purchases of services and goods, 

and any procurement over $100,000 for construction is required 

to follow the rules under the New West Partnership Agreement, 

which means that there would be no preferential treatment for 

local companies or Saskatchewan-based companies and that 

anyone who underbids them, despite any sort of need to 

promote business in Saskatchewan, will be the favoured 

contractor. 

 

So we may see a lot of outside, extraprovincial contracts now 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

going out for construction. Most construction bids are going to 

be over $100,000. That’s not a lot of money, Mr. Speaker, so I 

would expect that most construction bids are now being opened 

up across Canada and certainly that will affect smaller 

businesses and locally grown businesses that are just starting up 

here in the province. So it’ll be really difficult for new 

companies in Saskatchewan to get those contracts because they 

won’t have the capacity to underbid more established and larger 

companies, Mr. Speaker. So that’s a bit unfortunate that these 

things are caught by the New West Partnership Agreement. But 

we’re in it now and I guess that’s the way everybody has to 

follow the rules of the New West Partnership Agreement. 

 

Three forty-seven, so it’s also been changed. This is a section 

relating to the disposal of real and personal property. Again a 

fairly lengthy section originally but now the amendment is 

going to change that section. And what it will do is it also 

brings it into consistency with the New West Partnership 

Agreement. So this is where the amount at which they go to 

tender or auction for the sale of property. So it’s the converse. 

When they’re disposing of property, the same rules apply and 

what they’re saying is that the amounts that exist right now are 

quite low. So they’re going to allow regulations to reflect 

current and future trade agreements, and I suppose then this will 

give them the ability to make sure that this Act is consistent 

with the New West Partnership Agreement. So again we’re 

stuck with it and these Acts have to be brought into line with 

that agreement; otherwise we will be in violation of the 

agreement and we would be called upon that by the other 

partners. 

 

Section 349 has been repealed. It’s just regarding tenders for 

acquisition of vehicles and the explanation is that it’s covered 

off in a new subsection 444(5). So that’s already been covered 

off. We have locations of schools and teacher residences. 

Section 350 is also being repealed and substituted with new 

sections. Actually 350 and 351 are repealed and the 

explanations there are that the wording of school site has been 

changed to site and construction plans apply to all buildings, so 

they’re not just limited to schools. So it’s the broader definition 

of the site and the broader definition of building rather than 

school building. So that seems appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to 

make that clarity in the Act. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Section 352 is the section regarding tenders; it’s repealed. And 

the explanation is that it’s now covered by the previous section 

I referred to where the amount is going to be set in regulations 

— again here we go to the regulatory sphere — in accordance 

with the New West Partnership Agreement. So we’re caught by 

the New West Partnership Agreement, and also we don’t know 

what those terms are going to be until after the regulations have 

been passed. 

 

Section 353 is repealed, with a new section which expands the 

requirements for building plans to encompass all buildings 

rather than just schools. So it’s consistent language. Section 354 

is repealed. There’s a new section being provided there and it’s 

broadened to refer to transportation in general rather than just 

pupils and others such as parents or volunteers. So it’s a more 

broadened definition of transportation. 

 

Section 355 is amended and it’s taking out an amount of 

$50,000 and moving it to tendering amounts to be now set in 

the regulations. So we don’t know what that amount’s going to 

be until we see the regulations. 

 

And finally section 370 is changed, and that is the ability to 

make regulations. In this case there are a number of new things 

that are being moved into the regulatory abilities of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council including provisions 

concerning instructional time, school hours, days, vacation, 

holiday days, alternative school hours and days. They’re now 

going to be addressed in the regulations, which is a very 

significant change to the Act, Mr. Speaker, and it’s of concern 

that these types of decisions are going to be made without 

consultation by the public and certainly without scrutiny in this 

Chamber. And those are something that the public should be 

concerned about. 

 

So at this point I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s the extent of the 

comments that I want to make on Bill No. 27, An Act to amend 

The Education Act, 1995. And so I would like to move to 

adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 28 — The 

Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This Bill 

is a consequential amendment Act that accompanies the 

enactment of The Education Amendment Act that I just spoke to. 

And at this point, Mr. Speaker, there are not a lot of comments I 

have on this particular Bill. These are just consequential to the 

previous Bill which I spoke to at length, and I know that my 

colleague, the critic, will want to speak to both of these Bills as 

well. So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on 

this Bill as well. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 28, The Education Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 42 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 42 — The 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

Graduate Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m all 

good to go on Bill No. 42, The Graduate Retention Program 

Amendment Act, 2012. I think it’s obviously a very good 

program and one that we had brought in when we were in 

government. This government tweaked it a bit in . . . four years 

ago, and then they’re bringing forward some further tweaks 

which I think deserve some examination. And I know when we 

get into committee that we will have those questions. 

 

But I do want to say that anything that we can do, we should 

always look carefully at, in terms of retaining a well-educated 

workforce here in Saskatchewan. We’re very proud when we 

see that the population is growing but, you know, it’s all sorts 

of people who make up our province. And we like to see the 

babies being born. That’s one way, you know, and people living 

longer. But we also like to see our graduates stay here in the 

province because that’s how our economy develops. And 

whether it’s entrepreneurs or the human services or in health 

care or in the arts, I think it’s very important that we have a 

program to say, we’ve invested in you and we want you to stay 

here and we’re going to help you stay here by investing a little 

bit more. 

 

And so this graduate tax . . . graduate retention program is a 

very interesting program. And it’s interesting to read the 

minister’s speech where he’s talked about how they’re changing 

it so it more accurately reflects the manner in which the 

program benefit is currently utilized because some people 

actually make enough money that they’re paying taxes right 

after they graduate from their program. And when they graduate 

and they’re paying taxes, they’re actually seeing their payable 

tax amount being reduced. So that’s one way. Or there’s others 

who were seeing that it was just being paid back in terms of a 

tax refund. And so I think this is important to allow that ability 

because, you know, when people graduate from a program they 

come out in all sorts of different ways, whether they’re lawyers 

or teachers or whether they’re in the arts, where you’re maybe 

not making as much money, or some high-end programs where 

you actually do come out making a fair wage and you will end 

up paying some taxes. So this reduces that. 

 

So it talks about some of the tweaking here as well in terms of 

removing the requirement for the individual to have the social 

insurance number to appear on the graduate retention program 

paper certificate, that this is already done in different ways and 

that it’s not necessary that that happens. And I can just relate to 

that too. I know forms that we deal with that sometimes ask for 

that and I’m thinking, you know, we should only ask for the 

information that is needed. We shouldn’t be asking for more 

just because what happens, you know, it’s the whole issue of 

privacy and I think it’s some, a responsibility for all of us to 

only ask what is required. And then I think that’s a good habit 

to get into, particularly around privacy issues. And so I’m glad 

to see that, and that this is going to be ready for the 2012 tax 

year. 

 

It is unfortunate though that we see this coming out so late in 

the day as it were, you know, when the minister’s speaking on 

April 24th. I know this is obviously related to the budget and 

therefore couldn’t . . . It has a shorter window than many of the 

other Bills but it does mean that we’re kind of up against a wall 

in terms of asking those who might be impacted on this. I see 

that there has been some consultation in terms of some of the 

groups that the minister has consulted with, with ministries of 

Justice, Attorney General, Finance, provincial comptrollers, that 

type of thing. It would have been interesting though for us to 

have heard from past students, graduates who have actually 

made use of this and say, so how is it? I’m curious. I’m always 

curious. Are there strategies to find out how did it work for 

people who are using this? Was it easily handled? Were there 

challenges? Were there barriers? Were there some people who 

found it very difficult because of where they were working in 

the province? I can’t, you know . . . I don’t know if there was, 

but it’s always something I think would be a good idea, that if 

we can find out those things, it would be a . . . It just helps. It 

just helps. 

 

And I know this government is taking a lot of pride in its lean 

processes, and sometimes we have questions about that. But if 

we could start out by having a very effective lean type of 

application process, that’s very good too. 

 

One of the questions I know I’ll be asking is, you know, when 

you get to the explanation notes, they’re always very interesting 

to read because they’re a little more straightforward. I guess 

that’s why they explain things. But I think that it’s interesting 

that this program, I always thought it was a seven-year 

program. But now it says, “Claiming graduate tax rebate,” and 

section 5(3), “The total amount of all graduate tuition rebates to 

which a qualified individual is entitled shall not exceed $20,000 

in the individual’s lifetime.” So I find that . . . I didn’t realize 

that. I didn’t know that it was all encompassing, that it was a 

lifetime commitment. 

 

Now I don’t know why that would be there. And when did the 

change come from the seven years? Maybe it was four years 

ago. I don’t know. But I’d be curious to know why it’s now the 

individual’s lifetime because I know that the graduate tax 

refund, I mean people graduate from an undergraduate program, 

and they get a master’s or they get a doctorate, seven years may 

be too short of a time. But I’m curious about why that is part of 

the legislation. 

 

And then when I look over to the regulations, that some of 

these, where they’re talking about what they may make in 

regulations, the Executive Council, essentially the cabinet, 

talking about “prescribing programs of post-secondary studies 

as eligible programs,” so they get to set what the program is 

going to be. They don’t have to come back, and that’s not part 

of the legislation. Fair enough. I think that allows flexibility. 

That’s a good thing. And sometimes there’s programs that will 

fall off because people are just not using them, some that they 

want to see as promoting. 

 

Another one, “prescribing criteria that the minister shall 

consider in recognizing a program or post-secondary studies as 

an eligible program.” So there you are. You’re saying that this 

program must meet certain criteria. That’s a good idea. 

 

Prescribing the period within which an application may be 

made and prescribing information to be provided by the 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

application. So that’s interesting that a period within an 

application may be made, but it’s talking about the lifetime of 

the applicant in the legislation. So I think that’s an interesting 

connection. 

 

And providing “additional information that may be set out in a 

tuition rebate eligibility certificate,” again, that hopes to meet 

the privacy issue, and that’ll be interesting to . . . 

 

And the other one is of course prescribing tuition rebate 

maximums — how much is actually available; now it seems to 

be approximately $20,000 — including different tuition rebate 

maximums for different eligible programs and for different 

years of graduation from an eligible program. So that makes 

sense because we know there’s some professional programs that 

are very, very expensive. Of course the earnings are very 

different too, so I don’t know. That will have to be taken into 

account. We don’t see that discussion very much because it will 

be in regulations, and of course we will only see that after the 

fact. And so we do have concerns about that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have many more questions. I know that 

we’ll have questions in the committee about this. And I know 

that we will be welcome to see that go there. But as far as I’m 

concerned, I think that we will . . . I’ve spoken my piece about 

this Bill. And thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from 

Saskatoon Centre has moved adjourned debate. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, I’m 

sorry. The motion before the Assembly is the motion by the 

member from Saskatoon Centre on Bill No. 42, The Graduate 

Retention Program Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — To which committee shall 

this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 42, The Graduate Retention Program Amendment 

Act, 2012 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 43 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I 

appreciate entering into a brief discussion of Bill No. 43, The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012. We certainly have many 

more questions as it relates to the changes that have been put 

forward in this piece of legislation. We have questions about 

how these decisions, how these changes have been derived, 

what’s that consultation process looked like. We know some of 

these have stemmed directly from the provincial election in the 

fall, the part of the mandate I suppose that the government 

earned. So on those fronts, maybe it’s reflective of following 

through on a couple commitments that were made. 

 

What I’d have to say is that it’s rare, in fact, that we see 

decisions and changes coming from this government recently 

that have any resemblance to the mandate that they earned in 

the fall. What we have seen is, in fact, sort of attention and 

priorities and focus of legislation of this government in many 

ways not resemble what was promised in the fall. A couple 

exceptions would exist in this piece of legislation. But certainly 

we’ve highlighted on the floor of this Assembly, and then we 

continue to hear all across this province, the significant 

discontent and disappointment as it relates to some of the 

disconnect from the promises in the fall and the actions of 

government as we move forward, particularly the expenditure 

of millions of dollars, Madam Speaker, on increasing the 

number of politicians in Saskatchewan, something that wasn’t 

talked about at all in the fall campaign, certainly something that 

wasn’t mentioned in the Throne Speech, but something that this 

government’s pushing through. 

 

Now specific to The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012, there 

are a few changes here that will require thoughtful consultation 

and consideration. Certainly there’s an attempt to address one 

area that is important to Saskatchewan people. The concern 

from what we’re hearing though is that the measures brought 

forward in themselves and as not part of a comprehensive plan 

fall significantly short. And in that area, I speak specifically to 

housing, an area that’s certainly emerged as a pressure for 

households all across this province in young people and seniors, 

Madam Speaker, and something that certainly does require 

attention and focus of government. 

 

We see a couple of tweaks in The Income Tax Amendment Act 

here, one that reduces the general corporate income tax rate for 

multi-unit residential projects for rental units. Now this in itself 

may be part of the solution, Madam Speaker, but certainly by 

itself, Madam Speaker, doesn’t deliver meaningfully what we 

need to be aiming to provide to Saskatchewan people. 

 

What I should say is that at this time here in Saskatchewan, that 

all across Saskatchewan, whether in Meadow Lake or in 

Humboldt or in Regina, there has been significant escalation in 

costs of rent. And certainly those increases to rent have far 

outpaced any increases to income for Saskatchewan people, and 

we have a significant disparity and inequity that’s growing. 

When we look at wage increases that have been flat for many or 

for minimum wage earners that are frozen, for many others — 

civil servants and otherwise — that might see a per cent or two, 

what we know is that the doubling or the 100 per cent increases 

or more that we’ve seen with the cost of rent, certainly that’s 

outpaced any earning ability and outstripped arguably quality of 

life, but not just outstripped and taken out of quality of life but 

also placed a burden on many young people, many families, 

many seniors across Saskatchewan but also outstripped the 

ability to save that down payment for that first home. 

 

And I know this program here that’s one of the tweaks that’s 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

mentioned here is a first-time homebuyers’ credit. And we 

certainly support finding solutions — effective solutions, 

broad-based solutions — to address the challenges and 

pressures of renters, pressures of affordability but also that of 

first-time homebuyers in finding that solution to being able to 

make that step into home ownership, make that dream a reality, 

if you will, Madam Speaker. 

 

I’m not sure that this measure itself by way of a policy decision 

is going to be as meaningful and as impactful as it could be. I’m 

not sure that a tax credit that is in essence, in my understanding, 

provided to individuals that have been able to save those dollars 

and then providing them a credit, if that addresses broad-based 

accessibility to Saskatchewan people in a meaningful way. It 

seems that maybe this applies only to those that can already 

save that down payment. And I think if we look at the 

circumstances and pressures on young people and on families, 

it’s actually that ability to save that down payment in an 

environment with the skyrocketing rental rates that we’ve seen 

that have outpaced certainly any increases in earning and really 

outstrip that ability to save that down payment. 

 

I really feel that at the end if these are the only two pieces put 

forward — and that’s all we see from this government at this 

point in time — then certainly this is no meaningful or effective 

solution to bringing forward changes that should be addressing 

something that’s really important to Saskatchewan people. So 

alone these two measures may be part of a comprehensive 

solution, but just standing by themselves, certainly they don’t 

make significant change. But we do look forward to further 

analyzing these changes, discussing possibilities that could 

strengthen a housing plan and actually do some meaningful 

work for Saskatchewan people. 

 

I think that, you know, it’s fair to say that if we spent less time 

in this Assembly — by way of actions of government pushing 

through this legislation that we see government pushing through 

to spend millions of dollars to increase the number of 

politicians — if less time was spent by government on pushing 

forward legislation like that and spending like that that’s not 

wanted, not needed by Saskatchewan people, and put their 

attention and made their priority the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people, we’d be a lot better off. And certainly 

we’d be in a better position to address the challenges and 

pressures of housing for so many across this province. 

 

So a couple of comments as it relates to the housing programs. 

Certainly we would argue that standing alone, as these two 

items, falls far short of being able to be an effective solution for 

Saskatchewan people, and certainly not a comprehensive 

package to address what’s a significant challenge and 

something that we should be focusing on here in Saskatchewan. 

 

A few other changes in this legislation pertain to the research 

and development tax credit. We’re going to be analyzing this 

further and consulting with stakeholders impacted all across 

Saskatchewan and bringing forward good questions and debate 

to committee, possibly looking for ways to strengthen what’s 

put forward here and working in a co-operative manner, if 

offered the opportunity, Madam Speaker. So that’s something 

we’ll continue to be analyzing. 

 

And it would be the same sorts of considerations and 

consultations as it relates to the graduate retention program — a 

program that certainly we’re proud of, as a government, to have 

initiated and to have begun to address some of the challenges 

and pressures of post-secondary affordability and accessibility 

in this province. But again in that, as it relates to tuition and 

education and post-secondary education, what we do see in this 

province in a broader way is growing inaccessibility to those 

programs, increasing costs in a broad way. And I think we have 

to look at the changes that are put forward in that broader 

context and understand that when you have a government that’s 

speaking with legislation making minor tweaks to the graduate 

retention program, we need to understand what those changes 

and impacts are, but we also have to call the government for its 

failure to move in a meaningful way to make sure that 

post-secondary education is attainable and affordable for 

Saskatchewan students, something that we’ll continue to push 

towards. 

 

And I know when we’re talking about tax credits and income 

tax changes and rebates and all the different pieces that we see 

here, specifically the research and development tax credit, it’s 

fair to say that it provides an opportunity to mention the 

disappointment that we see all across Saskatchewan — whether 

in Swift Current or whether in Moose Jaw or whether in 

Estevan or whether in Indian Head, whether in Saskatoon, and 

certainly in Regina, Madam Speaker — as it relates to the 

elimination of the film economy in Saskatchewan by way of 

eliminating the film tax credit and the lost opportunity that it 

represents, the lost investment, the driving away of investment 

in this province, the driving away of entrepreneurs from this 

province, the driving away of creative young workers paying 

income tax here in Saskatchewan, building their lives here in 

Saskatchewan, Madam Speaker.  

 

And this represents a great disappointment and certainly is 

highlighted when we see some of the other tax changes that we 

do here today. And that’s something we’re hearing from all 

across this province. And to be frank, Madam Speaker, the 

voices of Saskatchewan people all across Saskatchewan haven’t 

ceased on this front since budget. In fact I think they have 

emboldened and they’re stronger. And there’s a broader 

recognition across communities, not just in the film industry 

itself, but across communities about the disappointing cut that 

occurred and the hurt that’s felt across Saskatchewan as a result 

of those changes to eliminate the film industry, Madam 

Speaker. 

 

So as we move forward, we certainly have a lot more 

consultation that we’ll be doing on this front. We’ll be talking 

about, with key stakeholders impacted by the changes in this 

legislation. We look forward to the time with the minister in 

committee to clarifying some of the programs, some of the 

changes, looking for opportunities to potentially strengthen 

legislation and programs that have been put forward, Madam 

Speaker. And that’s our role and that’s our opportunity of when 

it relates to housing and a couple of the tweaks that we see here. 

We’re going to be looking at it in a broader sense about have 

we achieved the goal of trying to . . . the meaningful goal of 

making improvements for Saskatchewan young people and 

families. 

 

From a disappointing perspective with just these two items, 

these two tweaks, I believe standing alone we’re going to find 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

that they don’t provide the meaningful response that 

Saskatchewan people deserve and require when we talk about 

taking what’s a strong economy and then making sure that it’s 

improving the lives of Saskatchewan people. And that should 

be our number one focus, Madam Speaker. 

 

We’ll be focusing on the end-user if we will, the everyday 

families that are the young people that are certainly in those 

rental circumstances and that are working so hard in their 

studies and that are working hard to save that down payment 

with the hope to be able to purchase that first home. And we’ll 

make sure that we study the balance of how we’re doing as a 

province and how this government is moving forward. But 

certainly it’s fair to say that I have great concerns that the two 

measures that have been put forward will fall short in bringing 

that meaningful change that Saskatchewan people are desiring. 

 

But at this point in time, we have a lot more consultation with 

stakeholders, as I say, that have been impacted with families 

and young people that are being impacted. We look forward to 

carrying that forward in an informed way to committee, looking 

for ways to strengthen legislation, looking for ways to advance 

the voice of so many across this province and make sure they’re 

front and centre in the legislative changes and public policy 

discussions here in this province. And that’s what we’ll be 

looking to do. 

 

At this point in time, we do look forward to discussions at the 

committee level. We do have good questions that we’re going 

to be seeking answers from the minister. But at this point in 

time, we’ll be moving this to committee, or supporting this 

being moved to committee and undergoing the important work 

on behalf of Saskatchewan people at that point in time. Thank 

you very much, Madam Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The question before the 

Assembly is the motion by the member from Regina Rosemont 

on Bill No. 43, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — To which committee shall 

this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Madam Speaker, I 

designate that Bill No. 43, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 

2012 be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 37 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 37 — The 

Tourism Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 

pleased to enter the debate today on Bill No. 37, The Tourism 

Saskatchewan Act, An Act respecting Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

I think one of the big things . . . Well what this Act will do, 

Madam Speaker, it will take Tourism Saskatchewan which is 

currently a sector-driven, membership-driven, arm’s-length 

organization and pull it back under the control of the provincial 

government. So Tourism Saskatchewan will no longer be an 

arm’s-length entity, but it will become a Treasury Board 

Crown. And as a New Democrat and a social democrat, 

generally speaking, obviously we think Crown corporations are 

a good thing. But one of the big things that stands out, there are 

definitely problems with this Bill, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

I think one of the biggest problems that stands out is the process 

behind how this all transpired. Just a couple short months ago, 

Madam Speaker, this wasn’t even on the radar. I think one of 

the things that really stands out is this government, this current 

government, tends to have a we-know-best policy or that seems 

to be their guiding principle, that it doesn’t matter what the 

issue is. If the governing members think it’s a good idea, it must 

be a good idea. 

 

But you know what? I think that there are a whole bunch of 

people out there, more than a million people, more than a 

million people in Saskatchewan who are impacted by all kinds 

of policies and decisions that would not agree that a 

government’s guiding principle should be we know best. 

Because the reality is, when you create, when you create public 

policy, Madam Deputy Speaker, the reality is you should be 

creating policy that’s connected to people’s realities, to the 

people who know, who are doing the work on the front lines, 

and know what’s working and what’s not working. 

 

And in fact there was a tourism review actually a few years ago. 

And one of the recommendations actually on page 35, one of 

the key areas of agreement among all parties to this review is 

that Tourism Saskatchewan should remain an arm’s-length 

body, which is quite the opposite of what is transpiring in this 

piece of legislation, where we’re taking Tourism Saskatchewan 

and moving it from an arm’s-length body and putting it under 

the control of the provincial government. So I think again a big 

problem with this government is its inability to consult with 

people who . . . or not just consult, but after the consultation 

process has finished, wrapped up, actually listen to what the 

consultation has or what folks have had to say. 

 

One of the things . . . It’s interesting that the rationale for this 

Bill . . . So this government has a guiding principle of we know 

best, but what they tend to do when it comes to legislation or 

policy is they, on one hand, pick and choose. If something suits 

this particular issue, they’ll take this approach. And if 

something else doesn’t quite suit . . . It might have been a 

survey, and they like the survey in this case if it backs up their 

guiding principle of we know best. But if the survey says 

contrary to what this government believes, then oh we don’t 

believe in surveys; we’ll throw that beside the wayside, Madam 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

A good case in point actually is a piece of, another piece of 



April 30, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

legislation amending The Education Act that is before this 

legislature right now. In The Education Act . . . It was actually 

based on a Tourism Saskatchewan, the amendment is based on 

a Tourism Saskatchewan recommendation where people in the 

industry wanted the school year to start after the September 

long weekend. And there was actually a fairly small sample 

size, Madam Deputy Speaker. About 300 people, I believe, 

responded to that survey. And so the government actually took 

that survey and thought it was a good thing and said, you know 

what, we’re going to implement that. 

 

The irony about that Bill was that they took the Tourism 

Saskatchewan piece of that and ignored the entire education 

sector, Madam Deputy Speaker, whereas in this case, they have 

another survey before them. Actually Tourism Saskatchewan 

surveyed its members. And more than twice the number of 

people responded to, or close to twice the number of people 

responded to this survey about Bill No. 37 moving Tourism 

Saskatchewan completely under the government. And about 70 

per cent of those individuals thought it was a bad idea, actually. 

 

So again we have a government who picks and chooses. We 

like a survey in this case, so we’re going to say that surveys are 

great. But here’s a survey that doesn’t agree with our 

we-know-best policy, and we are going to ignore that survey. 

 

So that’s a big problem, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you’re 

governing, that you believe that you know best and that your 

citizens and those who are working in various sectors don’t 

have the answers — the CEO, the board of directors, the folks 

who are actually working in the industry. It’s a huge problem if 

we ignore all those people who are doing that good work. And 

it’s a huge problem too. Again this flies in the face of the 

review where the review actually recommended keeping 

Tourism Saskatchewan as an arm’s-length board. 

 

I think the other thing that’s troublesome is, again this speaks to 

the government deciding that when something makes their case, 

they’ll use it. In this case, we have the minister actually who, he 

says here, I’d like to quote: 

 

And the review highlighted that this province is an 

anomaly in Canada. Mr. Speaker, we’re taking best 

practice from across the country. It’s well worth noting 

that every other jurisdiction in Canada has the tourism 

functions in either an agency of the Crown or delivers it 

directly through a ministry. 

 

So in this case, Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister has 

decided to look all across Canada and make the argument, well 

you know what? This is what we should be doing. 

 

But in the case of the film employment tax credit, Madam 

Deputy Speaker, every other province has a film employment 

tax credit. And this government has decided, well we know 

best. And we are going to pick the story that fits our narrative, 

and in this case, we don’t want the film employment tax credit. 

For whatever reason, we don’t think the film industry is worthy 

of incenting development. We don’t like 70 per cent of the 

funding coming from out of province, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

This is what this government is saying. And they have chosen 

to use the arguments that, well every other jurisdiction is doing 

that and we don’t want to be part of that game. 

So on one hand, on one hand, Madam Deputy Speaker, we have 

a government who wants to talk about what other jurisdictions 

are doing and get in line and be lockstep with other provinces. 

But on a very important issue, this government is choosing to 

ignore what every other jurisdiction is doing, Madam Deputy 

Speaker. So I think that is a huge problem. 

 

So when you have a government, when you have a government 

whose main or chief attitude is, we know best, that is hugely 

problematic, especially when it comes to consultation, 

especially when it comes to consultation, Madam Deputy 

Speaker. I know that the executive director of Tourism 

Saskatchewan, actually the CEO, didn’t see this coming. This 

was completely out of nowhere. You would think if you wanted 

to be transparent, which is what actually the tourism review 

called for was transparency. And the minister responsible got 

up and said, we’re very happy that we committed to the 

principles of the review which included transparency. Well you 

know what, Madam Deputy Speaker? The CEO of Tourism 

Saskatchewan had this to say: “We felt quite blindsided. We felt 

quite blindsided.” So that doesn’t sound like transparency. That 

does not sound like consultation. In fact it’s quite the opposite. 

 

So you know what, Madam Deputy Speaker? I think some of 

the big problems with this Bill and with this government in 

general is its desire to try to shape a narrative just to fit its 

we-know-best attitude, Madam Deputy Speaker, which is a 

problem when you’re creating public policy that should be 

surveying people in Saskatchewan and trying to achieve the 

greatest good for all of us. 

 

So with that I know that I do have colleagues who will plan on 

wading into the debate with Bill No. 37, The Tourism 

Saskatchewan Act, and I know when it gets to committee we’ll 

have many more detailed questions about how the government 

could have possibly got to this point in time. 

 

Oh, you know what? Actually I do have one more comment. In 

this Act, in part III, section no. 13, I just want to point out that 

right now this piece of legislation says the board is to consist of 

not more than 11 directors appointed by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. I think a problem with that is the Bill 

doesn’t stipulate who those 11 directors are, from which sectors 

or where they’re going to come from. Are they going to be 11 

cabinet ministers? Are they going to be 11 MLAs? Who are 

these people who are going to be sitting on this board, Madam 

Deputy Speaker? 

 

And I think not laying this out creates a bit of a problem 

because it leaves a government open to people saying, well are 

you just going to try to get your own folks on this board? What 

is your agenda with respect to this Bill? So I would like to 

highlight that this Bill does not clearly illustrate from which 

sector and the folks who should be sitting on this council. So 

with that . . . Or on this Treasury Board Crown, pardon me, 

Madam Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with that, as I said, I do have colleagues who would like to 

continue to speak to this Bill, and I know that we will ask many 

questions in committee. So with that I would like to move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — The member from 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2012 

Saskatoon Riversdale has moved adjourn debate on Bill No. 37, 

The Tourism Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the . . . is 

the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. In order 

to facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Ms. Tell): — This House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:41.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1319, 1320 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1319 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1319 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1319 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1320 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1320 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1320 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1320 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1320 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1321 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1321 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1321 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1321 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Success for Saskatchewan Golfer 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1321 

 100th Anniversary of Huskie Athletics 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1322 

 French-Language Film Festival in Saskatoon 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1322 

 Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1322 

 Saskatchewan Book Awards 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1322 

 Emergency Medical Care Milestone 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1323 

 Partnership Supports First Nations Workers 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1323 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1323 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1323 

 Agricultural Programming and Supply Management 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1325 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1325 

 Support for Northern Housing 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1326 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1326 

 Support for Children in Care 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1326 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1327 

 Accommodation for Ministries 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1327 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1327 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1328 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1328 

 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1329 

 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1329 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1329 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1330 

 Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1334 

 Bill No. 42 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1335 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1336 

 Bill No. 43 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2012 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1336 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 1338 

 Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1338 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


