




















































Hansard: April 26, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 36A  THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1293 

 April 26, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s an honour for me to be able to introduce to you and through 

you to all members of this Assembly, some very special guests 

who have joined us in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce His Excellency Andrea Meloni, the ambassador of 

Italy to Canada, as well as Mr. Fabrizio Inserra who is the 

consul general of Italy in Vancouver. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province has a long and very beneficial, 

mutually beneficial relationship with the people of Italy. In fact 

Italy is one of Saskatchewan’s top 10 trading partners. In the 

last five years, on average, our province exports to Italy have 

surpassed $225 million. Sixteen per cent of Saskatchewan’s — 

no surprises here, Mr. Speaker — 16 per cent of 

Saskatchewan’s durum wheat exports go to Italy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re honoured to have these gentlemen 

here with us today in our capital city. I have a chance to meet 

with the ambassador and the consul general just a little bit later 

this morning. We do seek to improve the relationship we have, 

the already very positive relationship we have with the people 

of Italy in terms of commerce and other opportunities that we 

can explore together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also point out a bit of a warning for His Excellency, if I 

may today here in the legislature: in about two weeks from 

now, my wife and my mother-in-law are going to take a two 

and a half week tour of Italy, and I fear the country will never 

be the same. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these very distinguished guests to the Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too, on 

behalf of the official opposition, would like to welcome His 

Excellency, the ambassador from Italy. I hope your stay in 

Saskatchewan is great. And obviously you have a very beautiful 

country and certainly, from our perspective, we’re very glad 

that you’ve chosen the province to visit. And of course we 

always want to encourage investment and opportunity and 

partnership. So I too want to join the Premier in making sure 

that your visit here is great and that you feel very welcome. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I take great pride in being able to introduce to you and 

through you and to the rest of the members of the Assembly, a 

group of 23 grade 7 and 8 students from MacNeill Elementary 

School in the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. They 

are here today with their teacher Mr. Scott Bansley. 

 

MacNeill School is a wonderful school with great students and 

staff. I will be meeting with the students after question period to 

answer any questions they may have. And I hope they enjoy the 

proceedings today and will be enlightened by them. So thank 

you very much, and please everyone join with me in welcoming 

this group of very smart, very intelligent, good-looking students 

from MacNeill Elementary School in Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to members of the Assembly, I’m very 

pleased to introduce in your gallery somebody that is, I think, 

no stranger to this Chamber or to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re joined by the president of SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], David 

Marit. Mr. Marit is also a councillor of the RM [rural 

municipality] of Willow Bunch, which the member for Wood 

River and I have the honour of representing. It takes two of us I 

guess, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to specifically acknowledge the work that 

Dave Marit and the SARM board does on issues that are of 

interest to the province right now. Specifically, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to acknowledge SARM for the work that they’re doing in 

conjunction with the government on issues of illegal drainage, 

which I know is a great concern for the SARM board, and 

we’re doing some good work together. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the work that the 

SARM board has done on an issue that I think is of great 

importance to this province, and that is the changes that we’re 

seeing from the federal government when it comes to the role of 

the Department of Fisheries and Oceans in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I know that this has been a great concern for a 

number of years to the municipalities that SARM represents. 

And we’re very pleased to see some movement on this issue, 

and we look forward to working on these issues further in the 

future. 

 

So I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming Dave 

Marit to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to join the minister in welcoming the president of SARM, 

Dave Marit, to the legislature. It’s always great to see him in 

the House, and we appreciate his leadership from rural 

Saskatchewan. He does such a great job and we value that. So 

welcome to your legislature. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, to the rest of the Assembly, I want to introduce 

two very powerful women, Donna Pasiechnik and Donna 

Ziegler. They are with the Canadian Cancer Society. Tomorrow 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

is Daffodil Day, and we’re going to hear a little bit more about 

that in a member’s statement. But we had the opportunity, for 

those that got up early yesterday morning, for a breakfast here 

in the legislature to hear more of the concerns from certainly 

the Cancer Society on some of the changes that they think we 

should pursue. 

 

I can tell you in the four and a half years that I’ve had the 

pleasure of being the Health minister, I’ve had a number of 

meetings with both of them. And they are very, very strong 

lobbyists and, Mr. Speaker, when they speak about an issue, 

you can tell the passion in their voice. So I want all members to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly and through that 

welcoming, thank them for all the great work that they do to 

save lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the minister in welcoming Donna and Donna to the 

Assembly. Certainly they are not strangers to those of us in the 

Assembly because of the strong advocacy work that their 

agency does throughout the year on an ongoing basis. So thank 

you so much for the good work that you do. 

 

And with it being Daffodil Month, I know many of us have 

been recognizing this for the last period of time here in the 

Assembly. And we do know it’s an important day, an important 

time of the year for the work of the volunteers and the 

supporters throughout the province. So thank you so much for 

being here today. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — It’s my pleasure to table the 2011 annual 

report of the Children’s Advocate. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 

statement regarding the National Day of Mourning for workers 

killed or injured on the job. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has asked for leave to make a statement. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to agree? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

National Day of Mourning 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 28th 

marks the National Day of Mourning for workers killed or 

injured on the job. This day of remembrance commemorates 

those who have been injured or killed as a result of their job and 

the families and friends left behind. 

 

This annual event marks the day the Canadian Labour Congress 

first declared the National Day of Mourning in 1984. April 28th 

was chosen because it was on that day in 1914, the first 

comprehensive workers’ compensation act in Canada received 

its third reading. 

 

The Day of Mourning gives each of us the opportunity to renew 

our commitment to promoting, creating, and maintaining safe 

and healthy workplaces. On March 26th, 2012, I expressed our 

commitment by writing to over 5,600 occupational health 

committees and imploring them to redouble their efforts in 

creating safe workplaces. I also sent all members of the 

legislature National Day of Mourning pins at the beginning of 

April. 

 

On Saturday we will join with more than 100 other countries 

around the world to grieve the loss of sons, daughters, mothers, 

fathers, brothers, sisters, and spouses. Although we will not be 

here in the legislature, I ask my colleagues to take a moment to 

pause and think about the lives lost in Saskatchewan and to 

attend the various vigils being held by labour councils across 

the province. To remember and honour these workers, the 

Canadian flag on Parliament Hill and the flags at the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Building will be flown at half-mast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, too many people die each year from work-related 

incidents and illnesses. This year the Workers Compensation 

Board accepted 37 claims for people who lost their lives to 

work in Saskatchewan. The names of those we honour today 

are being read into the official record and will be inscribed in 

the national registry at the Canadian Labour Congress in 

Ottawa. I would ask that all members please rise while I read 

the names of those who lost their lives. 

 

Ray Behnke Lyle Krueger 

Denis Huet Ronald Kessler 

Brian Schafer Robert Berrns 

Bill Calcutt Paul Cruse 

Robert Ediger Dale Waithman 

Andre Gagnon Jim Wiebe 

Clinton Walker Patrick Charles 

Richard Wyatt Philip Rondeau 

Robert Traill Gerhard Vogt 

Donald McGonigal Richard Chudyk 

Orville Thiesen Brian Lewis 

William McDonald Stephen Butler 

Carl Lucyshyn Joshua Crooks 

Ward Wallaker John Woodhouse 

Dennis Lucier Sophia Petroutsakos 

Meryl Brissaw Frank Sabo 

Robert Mills Velma Jewsbury 

Vittorio Varaschin John Stadnyk 

Giovanni Marchiori  

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I express my 

deepest sympathy to the workers’ families and loved ones. 

 

Today we also remember those who have lost their lives due to 

farming and ranching incidents. On average each year, 14 

people die as a result of incidents on farms and ranches. These 

individuals are not included in the Day of Mourning statistics; 

however, it’s imperative that we remember them as farm 

fatalities account for nearly one-third of all workplace deaths in 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to commemorate this day I ask that when all 

members’ statements for the Day of Mourning are done, we 

observe a moment of silence in this House. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I ask leave to make a statement regarding 

National Day of Mourning. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave to make a 

statement regarding National Day of Mourning. Is the 

Assembly in agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the official opposition caucus, I want to join with the 

minister in expressing our deepest sympathies to the families 

and friends of those who were lost to senseless workplace 

injuries in 2011. When we hear that list of names, we are filled 

with a deep sense of regret. We regret that people have lost 

their lives at work in service to a job, and most of these deaths 

need not have happened. 

 

The Day of Mourning is a painful day and an important one. 

This year, 37 families will hear their name of their lost loved 

one read out aloud. The echo of those names should be a toll, a 

reminder that we need to keep striving to make workplaces 

safer, a reminder that failing to prevent a preventable workplace 

death is unacceptable, a reminder that one is one too many. 

 

Sadly I take note of one name on that list. Jimmy Ray Wiebe 

was killed on a job when he was working alone. Jimmy was 

shot during a robbery. The shock and pain and sorrow his 

family and friends have suffered is incomprehensible but shared 

by 37 families this year. From that sorrow, Jimmy’s best friend 

found purpose. Aaron Nagy began the call for Jimmy’s law. 

And we have introduced Jimmy’s law Bill because it would be 

a real tangible step to protect lives at work because the cost of 

small safety improvements are nothing compared to the cost of 

a life. 

 

The 37 lives we are mourning today are a reminder that 

workplace accidents and deaths come from varied threats. 

Workers have contracted cancer from working with asbestos, 

have been victims of industrial accidents, or have died during 

the commission of crimes in their workplace. None of these 

deaths are acceptable. Many of them are preventable. 

Unfortunately, some of them predictable. 

 

The goal of zero deaths is not a political one, nor is it too far 

away to reach. Let us not go away from this Day of Mourning 

events only to return a year from now and do it again. Let’s see 

that there’s light and opportunity for change, and let’s do better. 

Let’s build a safer Saskatchewan in every workplace. And let’s 

agree that our work will not be done here until there’s not a 

single name read on the Day of Mourning. 

 

In the memory of 37 workers who’ve lost their lives at work in 

our province this year, I join my colleagues in a moment of 

silence, reflection, and renewed resolve to address occupational 

health and safety in their memory. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Please rise for a minute of silence. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. 

 

[10:15] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. We know that 

in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

workers. 

 

We know that positive statistics show that convenience store 

and gas station robberies are down by one-third since 1999 

largely due to increased safety practices including two people 

working together on late-night shifts. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as 

it relates to the reporting and accounting of our provincial 

finances. The prayer of that petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling on the Sask Party government to 

support the Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present the 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating a challenge that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Day of Mourning 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Soon 

the flags at the Assembly will be flying at half-mast to 

commemorate Saskatchewan workers injured or killed on the 

job. As this year the Day of Mourning takes place when the 

House is not sitting on April 28th, I am rising in this Assembly 

today to honour the workers and families who have suffered the 

anguish of workplace injury or even death. 

 

It saddens me, Mr. Speaker, to report that since last April 28th, 

37 people have died on the job in Saskatchewan. Furthermore, 

this province continues to have the second-highest injury rates 

in the country. These stats are staggering and simply 

unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as MLAs, it is crucial that on this day we commit 

to acts and the notion in support of good occupational health 

and safety practices. It is the responsibility of everyone 

involved in the workplace to control health and safety hazards 

on the job. It is our responsibilities as members of this 

Assembly to support workers’ rights and safety using the tools 

at our disposal. 

 

One death is too many. We can and must do better not only to 

ensure that our workers and loved ones are safe, but to honour 

those whose lives have ended far too soon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I encourage my fellow members and 

residents to light candles, don ribbons, and observe moments of 

silence to remember lives lost due to work injuries and deaths. 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that my 

colleagues consider and reflect upon how we can all work 

together to prevent workplace illnesses, injuries, and deaths in 

order to establish safe workplaces for all. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Daffodil Day 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

speak today about the Canadian Cancer Society’s annual 

daffodil campaign. On April 27th people wear a daffodil pin 

representing support of the fight against cancer. Donations fund 

research, inform and support Canadians living with cancer, and 

prevent cancer through advocating strong health policy. April 

27th is the day most Canadians wear their pin to recognize 

those fighting this terrible disease and reflect on those who 

have passed away as a result. Because the House does not sit 

tomorrow, we show our recognition today. 

 

In 2011 more than 173,000 Canadians and approximately 5,200 

people in Saskatchewan were expected to be diagnosed with 

cancer, and it may claim the lives of almost half of that number. 

Our government has taken action to strengthen cancer care for 

Saskatchewan people and support screening programs for 

prevention and early detection of cancer. 

 

In our four and a half years in government, Mr. Speaker, we 

have increased the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency’s budget by 

76 per cent. And this year we have invested nearly 140 million 

to meet the needs of cancer patients. These important 

investments offer access to new drugs, the latest treatments, and 

more timely access to our dedicated health professionals. More 

importantly, they save lives. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing cancer patients and 

victims, including those we have lost as well as all those who 

support those fighting cancer in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Grocery‟s Grand Opening 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise with 

some happy news in the House today with a very good-news 

story about the opening of the Ngoy Hoa Asian Foods outlet on 

the corner of Albert Street and 9th Avenue. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 

the Cau family of Regina is opening its doors to a larger 

location. The family business has been serving local customers 

at their first location on 11th Avenue for over two decades now. 

It’s a mainstay of that particular neighbourhood, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The store will provide western groceries as well as a wide 

variety of ethnic foods such as Japanese, Korean, Philippine, 

Burmese, Thai, and western dishes to name a few. This is a 

reflection of an increasingly diverse immigrant population in 

the heart of Regina. 

 

On this occasion, Mr. Speaker, I wish to draw attention to the 

compelling story of the Cau family. The family came to Canada 

after fleeing the deadly Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia 

during the 1970s. The family and their eight children made their 

way to Canada after escaping the refugee camp and walking to 

the Thai border, losing a family member along the way. Theirs 

is an extraordinary tale, and it’s quite inspiring. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I am delighted for the Cau family and the 

residents of north central Regina who will now have easier 

access to a wider variety of groceries. And I think we can all 

draw encouragement from the Caus’ story of hope. I would ask 

my colleagues to join with me in congratulating the Caus on the 

opening their new store and for their contributions to the city of 

Regina. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Students Win at Regional Science Fair 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Wilkie’s McLurg 

High School is proud today of three very talented students who 

competed and won at the recent northwest Regional Science 

Fair held in Macklin. The competing schools included Jonas 

Samson Junior High School from Meadow Lake, Macklin 

School, Maymont Central School, Wilkie’s McLurg High 

School, and North West Central School from Plenty. 

 

In total, 30 projects were presented, with McLurg students 

Chelsea Gruber, Allison Cey, and Rachel Mamer winning the 

top awards. Chelsea and Allison won with Stack ’em Up, a 

psychology-based project testing participants’ mirror neurons 

and their ability to imitate other peoples’ actions. Their results 

showed that watching a skill being performed prior to attempted 

imitation of the skill was a major advantage compared to those 

who were only given basic descriptions. 

 

Rachel won with her project Have We Been Doing it Wrong 

All Along? She did extensive testing to determine whether it is 

more advantageous to turn on grain aeration fans at night than 

during the day. Her hypothesis was that night aeration was 

more effective because there is less humidity in the air at night 

than during the day. These young ladies should be very proud 

of their achievements and have stated that they intend to refine 

their experiments prior to the next competition. 

 

I invite all members to join me in applauding these bright 

minds. They have made us all very proud. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Seed Sorter a Technological Breakthrough 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise in the House today to highlight an exciting new 

technological development in agriculture for the province of 

Saskatchewan: a new state-of-the-art seed sorter imported from 

Sweden and installed at the Feed Research Centre in North 

Battleford. 

 

The BoMill TriQ computerized seed sorter, now located at the 

University of Saskatchewan Feed Research Centre in North 

Battleford, is the first of its kind in all of North America It uses 

infrared light to analyze individual seeds to determine protein, 

starch, and hardness far more accurately than the human eye or 

by weight measurement. It can sort up to 3 tonnes per hour, so 

it has great potential for commercial use. Another advantage is 

that it can identify fusarium, and those fusarium seeds can be 

removed before the farmers seed, thus potentially reducing 

infestation of crops and spread of disease. 

 

The total cost of this machine and related infrastructure is 

approximately $506,000, and it was funded through the 

Western Economic Diversification, the Alberta Crop Industry 

Development Fund, and the Saskatchewan Ministry of 

Agriculture research development fund. This order will enable 

producers to recapture up to 70 per cent of product that is now 

downgraded to feed. Because of this, Western Canadian grain 

producers may increase the value of their grain by as much as 

$320 million per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is truly a great breakthrough in providing 

value-added processing right here in Saskatchewan, and 

especially exciting in my own constituency of The Battlefords. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Pie in the Eye Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on April 

14th the Spiritwood arena committee organized an event called 

the Pie in the Eye to raise money for the new arena in their 

town of Spiritwood. 

 

In the weeks leading up to the event, people could purchase 

votes at 5 cents each to select their candidate to be on the 

receiving end of a pie. Fifteen people with the most votes were 

the lucky recipients guaranteed to receive a pie in the eye. Not 

being selected in the voting process did not remove the 

possibility of your involvement. 

 

Throughout the evening there were wild card pies auctioned off 

to the highest bidder who was then able to select from the 

crowd who they would give their purchase. In the name of good 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

fundraising, these pies quickly rose in value with one topping 

out at $1,100. I did hear a rumour that a certain campaign 

manager from this last year’s provincial election was on the 

receiving end of not one, but two pies throughout the course of 

the evening. Aside from one very expensive husband and wife 

pie feud, the most tense moment was when one bidder chose to 

pie his mother-in-law. A final tally of the evening displayed 

that in the span of only four hours, the community of 

Spiritwood raised just shy of $34,000 for their new arena. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with very low overhead, a little ingenuity, and a 

lot of community spirit the Spiritwood arena committee turned 

this evening into another very successful rural Saskatchewan 

event. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — l recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Students Heading to Canada-Wide Science Fair 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to congratulate students from the city of Regina that have 

won the opportunity to represent our city and our province at 

the Canada-Wide Science Fair in Prince Edward Island this 

May from the 12th to the 19th. These students have advanced 

from their local school competition in Regina to the regional 

fair, and now are on to the competition at the national level. 

 

There are students from Campbell Collegiate, Regina Huda 

School, and two students from my constituency of Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley — Kaylee Hayko of Winston Knoll and 

Jason Pasetka from Winston Knoll. These students will be 

competing against approximately 500 students from across 

Canada. 

 

I had the opportunity to speak with Jason, and he’s pretty 

excited about participating in this science fair. He will be 

participating in the innovative technology category. His project 

is titled Free Energy. It uses a small circuit to collect energy 

from the air. This project uses only an antenna and a circuit that 

he has constructed. Using this he was able to prove it works and 

it charges batteries. 

 

I would like to ask all members to join me in congratulating all 

of our students that will be travelling to Prince Edward Island 

and wish them the best of luck at the national competition. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Children in Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Children’s 

Advocate report has revealed some alarming statistics about 

foster children in Saskatchewan. The number of foster families 

is declining and the number of children in care is still higher 

than in 2007. Under the Sask Party government, we’ve seen a 

20 per cent drop in the number of families who are opening 

their homes to foster children. With the high numbers of 

children in care and fewer families to help them, existing foster 

families can be overburdened. 

 

To the minister: what supports is the minister putting in place 

for foster families to ensure they have the capacity to care 

safely for children and youth? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question because it’s a very important one. I 

think the member opposite should also know that the decline in 

the number of foster families isn’t something that’s happening 

just in Saskatchewan but it is happening nationally. 

 

But I can tell you that the number of foster homes with children 

with more than four have decreased by 51 per cent in the last 

five years, and the number of children that are living in foster 

homes with more than four children has also decreased by 57 

per cent. We’ve made sure that our foster families have, the 

Foster Families Association has been given funding to increase 

or look for more foster families. We’ve also made sure that we 

can provide more training to our foster families, like the CPR 

[cardiopulmonary resuscitation] first aid training that’s 

necessary. Mr. Speaker, we have also ensured that we have as 

many homes as possible by increasing the number of beds for 

youth — 397 more beds since we became government. And, 

Mr. Speaker, an exciting stat is there’s a lot more families, 

extended families are taking children than before. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Children’s 

Advocate says in his report, “We remain deeply concerned 

about children and youth living in foster homes that may not 

have the capacity to care for them safely.” The Children’s 

Advocate acknowledges the child welfare system is in 

transformation and welcomes it. But in this time of change, he 

says we will still need to ensure children are moving to homes 

where we can be certain the standard of care is better, not 

worse. In light of these concerns of the Children’s Advocate, 

what extra measures is the minister putting in place for 

monitoring and supervision of children and youth in care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Again I thank the member for the 

question because it is a very important one, and it’s one that we 

recognized early. 

 

In December of 2010, the Premier put together the committee 

that deals with children and youth. So we have all the ministries 

of people, human services ministries working together, and we 

made sure that there was funding available for issues outside of 

the ministries by supporting, investing another $74 million in 

the last two years for the child and youth agenda. 

 

We’ve increased funding to child and family services by 133 

per cent since we became government, and we signed 

agreements with First Nations and Métis organizations to 

ensure that there’s input from them as we go forward in our 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

transformation. 

 

We also are looking at the Act and we’ve asked social workers, 

as early as last night at a conference I was at, to make sure that 

we have their voice in doing the transformational change that’s 

important. Our goal is to not apprehend children, but to support 

families. And that’s our goal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Children’s 

Advocate states, “We believe that the standards for 

investigating reports of abuse or neglect in foster homes should 

be no less than the standards for biological homes, and 

preferably higher.” The reality is this is not the case. There is a 

difference in how rigorous the investigations are when it comes 

to allegations of abuse in a biological home versus a foster 

home. The Children’s Advocate says these standards should be, 

again, at the very least equal. 

 

Will the minister commit today to implement the 

recommendation of the Children’s Advocate when there are 

allegations of abuse in a foster home? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we do have a very 

thorough review of what happens with our children when 

they’re in the care of government. And of course we are always 

open to more suggestions in what we can do. But, Mr. Speaker, 

one of the things that we have to do is make sure that children 

in our care is not just seen as an issue for the people in Social 

Services, but across government. And that’s why my colleagues 

that sit around the table with the child and youth committee 

know that we must be dealing with it in a comprehensive way. 

 

I’m looking forward to the . . . I know that the Foster Families 

Association was very happy with our announcement last year 

for a mandatory training and mandatory CPR. They also know 

that they have our ear when it comes to changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I assure you we’ll work harder, but as the child 

advocate says, we are doing great work, and I understand 

there’s more work to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Human Rights Commission 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a recent opinion 

article from the Leader-Post, three experts in human rights law, 

namely Ken Norman, professor of law at the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mary Eberts who’s the Ariel F. Sallows Chair of 

Human Rights at the University of Saskatchewan, and Alex 

Neve who is secretary general of Amnesty International Canada 

raised several questions regarding “ominous developments” in 

the Saskatchewan human rights system. 

 

They are concerned that the disenfranchised and downtrodden 

will be further marginalized due to lessened access to basic 

human rights. In their view the actions of this government have 

“seriously eroded” a well-respected model. To the minister: will 

you heed the expert opinion and revisit the direction you have 

set the commission on? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, our Human Rights Commission in 

Saskatchewan is one of the leading entities in Canada in this 

area. We are proud of the work that they do. Under the 

direction of Chief Commissioner Arnot, we have introduced 

new legislation which has been passed, which introduces four 

pillars that will underpin the work that’s being done — 

mediation, referral to the Court of Queen’s Bench for matters 

that would be heard previously at tribunals, systemic advocacy, 

and public civics programming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we support those initiatives. We will work with 

the commission as they implement those changes. We believe 

that those are progressive and that they will serve not only our 

province but will move our province as a model for other 

provinces, and we think we will do very well with this model, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is these pillars that 

these authorities have described as concerns. There are three 

major concerns that they identified. One is that this government 

abolished the Human Rights Tribunal and that complaints must 

now be heard in court, which is a much more costly approach. 

Secondly, the gatekeeper, the Chief Commissioner, now has 

absolute discretion as to which complaints will be taken 

forward. They say this step backwards will stifle marginalized 

victims of discrimination. And thirdly, complainants are being 

channelled toward mediation without an adequate framework to 

back them up. 

 

To the minister: does he agree with these authorities and will he 

heed their concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government, the average time for a hearing 

to take place was, in 1996, 49 months; in 2007 the average time 

for a complaint to be heard by a tribunal was 20.5 months. The 

goal was to have it down to six months. The goal was never 

met, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely essential that something be 

done to restore the credibility of the human rights process. We 

have taken that step under the direction of Commissioner 

Arnot. We will work with the Court of Queen’s Bench to 

ensure that that happens. 

 

We also believe in mediation, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

has introduced legislation to require mediation to take place in 

matrimonial matters. We think it is an appropriate way for early 

resolution of human rights matters as well. We are supportive 

of mediation and alternate resolution, and we will continue to 

advocate those things. And under the direction of the Human 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

Rights Commission, we think we are moving forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not mediation that’s the 

issue. It’s the fact that there is no proper framework to back it 

up. These experts point out that the United Nations has called 

upon governments to not only promote human rights, but to 

protect them. Commissions are expected to engage with 

marginalized groups. This should have been done three years 

ago. To the minister: will you now properly engage 

marginalized groups, re-establish the independent tribunal, and 

fund it adequately so that victims and minorities are protected 

from human rights abuses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

wants us to go back to a system that had some issues with 

public credibility and go back to wait times of 20.5 months and 

49 months, the answer is simply not. Mr. Speaker, we will 

move forward in a manner that has a great deal of public 

respect and credibility. The Court of Queen’s Bench is well 

recognized and will be very capable of dealing with these 

matters. 

 

With regard to impoverished or marginalized people, Mr. 

Speaker, we will have systemic advocacy, the things that the 

commissioner has undertaken and is working well in that area. 

We are reaching out to people in a manner that was never done 

before. We have a great deal of confidence and respect for 

Commissioner Arnot and the direction that he is taking the 

commission. 

 

We think we are well received and that our province is a leader 

in Canada, and we will support that. And we will never go back 

to the days of having a complaint take 49 or 20 months to be 

heard. It is simply unacceptable. That is the legacy that was left 

by those members opposite and we don’t support it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will closely 

watch the amount of time it takes for these to proceed through 

the court process and keep track of those. So we’ll see how it 

goes on that line. 

 

The authorities further point out that leadership in human rights 

enforcement in Saskatchewan seems to have moved from the 

commission itself to the office of the Chief Commissioner 

alone. Some commissioners have left because of this disturbing 

trend. Further there are no longer any in-house legal experts at 

the commission. The commission paid six times more in legal 

fees in last year than that of 2010. They’re paying outside 

counsel at the rate of $375 an hour despite fewer cases going 

forward under the new court regime. 

 

Will the minister take steps to ensure the commission gets 

proper in-house legal expertise, saving taxpayers’ money and 

ensuring victims of human rights abuses have access to in-depth 

expertise to advance their cause? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I understand the in-house 

counsel that worked at the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission has chosen to retire. We accept that decision. Mr. 

Speaker, in the interim, I understand that a number of files were 

turned over to the private bar, including some that were going 

to the Supreme Court of Canada so outside expertise was 

needed in any event. Mr. Speaker, the commissioner advises us 

they will be rehiring and ensuring that they’ve got adequate 

in-house counsel so that they can deal with things in the most 

cost-effective and efficient manner, Mr. Speaker. That is good 

management and that is what the Human Rights Commission 

will do. 

 

We support the work that they do. They have minimized and 

reduced the timeline that it takes. They are using mediation, and 

we are strongly supportive of mediation. It is controlled and 

directed by the commissioner. We have a great deal of 

confidence in the commissioner, and we do not feel that there is 

any issues that are there. We will be monitoring it closely, as 

we would any new program in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Accommodation for Ministry and Support for 

Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night in the 

Human Services Committee, the Minister of Advanced 

Education refused to provide transparency to the people of 

Saskatchewan when it comes to the additional dollars his 

ministry will be shelling out to move into the posh Hill Tower 

III offices in Regina. 

 

In this fiscal year compared to last, his ministry will be paying 

nearly $1.2 million more to lease the exact same office spaces, 

with one exception, Mr. Speaker. For six months of this fiscal 

year, ministry offices in Regina will be moving from their 

Hamilton Street location to the new Hill Tower III. My question 

to the minister: why has he signed off on spending 21 per cent 

more for lease expenses to move into these posh offices? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Government Services has made a commitment to lease 

approximately 56,000 square feet of the new office space 

downtown. Now that’s less than 26 per cent of the building. 

The new tower will also mitigate office space shortages that are 

within the city of Regina. We have less than 2 per cent vacancy 

rate for commercial real estate. With that, that really does cause 

a squeeze on renewing of leases and the cost of leases. 

 

The member opposite seems to think that if a person stays 

within the space and their lease comes due, it would be 

renegotiated at the same price. He’s incorrect. We have 

knowledge and have been renewing leases in other facilities 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

that in fact are over 50 per cent more. Mr. Speaker, that is the 

real issue here — 50 per cent more for the same space. So thank 

you very much for the question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced Ed can 

duck these questions all he wants, but it doesn’t change the fact 

that he is signing off in his budget for his ministry, Mr. 

Speaker, paying through the nose for premium office space. 

 

Last night we learned that the Minister of Advanced Education 

will be paying millions more per year in order to move from the 

Hamilton Street location to the Hill Tower III location. On an 

annual basis, Mr. Speaker, this could amount to more than $2 

million and, Mr. Speaker, despite millions of dollars more 

being spent per year, Mr. Speaker, they’re actually moving to a 

space that has less square footage than currently used in the 

existing space on Hamilton. Mr. Speaker, he sat silently last 

night to these questions, but how does it make sense, Mr. 

Speaker, to pay so much more for office space when it’s 

actually less space than the ministry is currently using? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 

the member opposite for asking the question, but he was 

referring to the wrong ministry. Government Services is 

responsible for the leasing of the office facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are seeing, as I said in my previous answer, an 

increase of over 50 per cent in our lease renewals. So are other 

larger tenants throughout the city. In reality, today Regina has a 

very tight commercial marketplace. So if AEEI [Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration] were to remain at 

Grenfell, they would be seeing a substantial increase. So we 

have a mandate to reduce the footprint of office space. 

Previously that government opposite thought nothing of having 

300 or 350 square feet per FTE [full-time equivalent]. Our 

mandate is 200 square feet, and we are meeting that. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the extravagance doesn’t stop 

with the huge amounts more that the minister is paying for 

Advanced Ed offices to move to the new spot. Last night, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister could not confirm whether or not his 

ministry would be paying for the leasehold improvements on 

the building. And, Mr. Speaker, the minister could not confirm 

whether or not his ministry would be paying the moving 

expenses to move 160 employees from the Hamilton location to 

the new, posh office space. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the same minister who just short-changed 

the universities in their operating grants. This is the same 

minister, Mr. Speaker, who put $100 million of debt onto the 

University of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, last night he 

confirmed it was a long-term lease in the new spot, but would 

not state how long. 

 

My question to the minister: for how many years will the 

Ministry of Advanced Education be located in the new, posh 

office buildings? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to speak about 

our track record for supporting post-secondary institutions and 

our students. Mr. Speaker, it’s been $3.5 billion invested in our 

post-secondary system under the leadership of our Premier and 

under this government. Mr. Speaker, with specific reference . . . 

He just made reference to our universities. Mr. Speaker, with 

specific reference to the University of Saskatchewan, this year, 

Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan is receiving a 

$304 million investment, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 47 

per cent increase over 2007, Mr. Speaker, the last year that the 

members opposite were in power. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this year we see that the operating increase 

and dollars overall for the University of Regina, there has been 

a 7.3 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. What we see is that there’s 

more than $100 million invested at the University of Regina. 

These are record investments for our post-secondary institutions 

and for our post-secondary students, Mr. Speaker, so that they 

can succeed in their studies right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the secrecy and the extravagance 

is counter to everything the Sask Party promised that they’d be. 

Not only, Mr. Speaker, are they willing and happy to spend 

millions more on more politicians, Mr. Speaker, but they’re 

also happy to shell out millions. They run to the opportunity, 

Mr. Speaker, to shell out millions on more expensive office 

space. 

 

Last night the minister refused to provide details around the 

moving expenses associated with moving 160 of his employees 

from the one location to the other. My question to the minister: 

in addition to the lease expenses, what’s being budgeted to 

move his 160 employees from one location to the other? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to talk 

about the $890 million that we’re investing to help support and 

sustain the post-secondary students and system that we have. 

I’m delighted to speak about the Saskatchewan advantage 

scholarship, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to be moving forward. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also happy to talk about the Saskatchewan 

innovation and opportunity scholarship that’s already rolling 

out and benefiting students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m delighted to talk about how new dollars are being invested 

in student financial assistance, delighted to talk about the 

support that more than 30,000 of our graduates are getting from 

the graduate retention program, Mr. Speaker. That’s making 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

and ensuring, to help ensure that our students aren’t simply 

studying in Saskatchewan but staying in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. We see that because they’re helping to ensure that 

we’re at a record population — more people working in 

Saskatchewan, more people working full-time in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. And we know how important our young people is 

and will continue to be for the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are the kind of investments that we’re going to 

continue to make in our post-secondary system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has not explained 

why he’s spending $1.2 million to move into office space that’s 

smaller than what’s currently being used. The minister did not 

just answer the question about those moving costs associated 

with the move. The minister did not answer the question as to 

whether or not he will paying the leasehold improvement 

expenses, his ministry will be paying. The minister is ducking 

these questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is the same minister who just hiked tuition on university 

campuses. This is the same minister who just passed on $100 

million of debt to the University of Saskatchewan. This is the 

same minister that has shortchanged our Saskatchewan 

universities in their operating grants. Mr. Speaker, this is the 

same minister that just reduced the number of civil servants in 

his ministry. He has millions for posh offices in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, but he doesn’t have money for the things that really 

matter. 

 

My question to the minister: how can he plead poverty when it 

comes to the issues facing Saskatchewan students, 

Saskatchewan post-secondary institutions, but he has millions 

to burn on posh office spaces? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 

a terrible track record when it comes to post-secondary 

education, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on tuition alone at the 

University of Saskatchewan under the members opposite, 

tuition went up 99 per cent, Mr. Speaker. At the University of 

Regina, tuition went up 88 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And at 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], Mr. Speaker, it went up more than 250 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we are hearing voices from students across 

the province. In fact from Lakeland College, we’ve received 

some thank you notes, Mr. Speaker. I quote one, Mr. Speaker: 

“I’m very honoured and touched to have been selected and I 

cannot express my deep appreciation for your generosity in 

supporting me on reaching my dream of becoming a nurse.” Or, 

Mr. Speaker, “It’s always nice to hear that there are people out 

there willing to contribute to a stronger education.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, our track record, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s in new 

scholarship dollars, whether it’s in graduate retention dollars, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in young people because this is 

investment in the Saskatchewan advantage. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Cellphone Coverage in Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For 

most of this province, people have the convenience of being 

able to use cellphones. Cellphones now are a regular part of life 

in Saskatchewan, but there are thousands of people in my riding 

— in the Canoe Lake area; the Buffalo River area, also known 

as Dillon; English River, also known as Patuanak; and Birch 

Narrows, also known as Dillon — that just don’t have any 

cellphone coverage at all. Cell service is very important in this 

day and age for a variety of reasons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister: why is the Sask 

Party ignoring the people in this region who just want the same 

service as the rest of the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel is 

moving, I would say very aggressively, to expand the area of 

services across Saskatchewan. Approximately 98 per cent of the 

people of Saskatchewan have very good cell service. Of course 

in the North where there is less population base, it’s a little 

more challenging. 

 

However, SaskTel is moving to increase the number of cellular 

towers in the North as well through a very aggressive build-out 

program that they are working on. We have to look at, in terms 

of these types of things, a business case, so it is a little more 

difficult when you have less population base. But nevertheless 

there is more cell towers being installed in northern 

Saskatchewan than there’s ever been. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, there’s always the concern that 

the cellphone coverage issue is not just a safety issue. But it’s 

great for travel. It’s also important to point out to people that 

it’s also great for business. Mr. Speaker, we have spoken about 

the safety aspect. We have spoken about the isolation factor. 

And it’s also, cellphones are also a very valuable business tool. 

In this modern age, cellphones are a key factor at being 

successful in many businesses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the minister please ensure, in terms of a hard date, as to 

when cell coverage will be improved soon in the northern part 

of our province so that the business community and the people 

that can travel in safety could have the same level of service 

that the rest of the province takes for granted, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, SaskTel is 

moving aggressively to provide a level of service to 

Saskatchewan residents. It frankly is the envy of Western 

Canada and perhaps even Canada. There was an article out 

recently that indicated the services that SaskTel provides in 

Saskatchewan are much greater than any other province in 

Western Canada to rural residents. It is something that we’re 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

quite proud of with respect to SaskTel. They’re increasing their 

spend in northern Saskatchewan. A number of locations have 

been added to the cellular tower build-out for this year, and we 

will certainly be doing that. 

 

One thing we will not be doing through SaskTel is something 

that your government did in the past, which was lost money 

hand over fist in outside-of-the-province investments. All you 

had to do is look at the money that you lost: in Nashville, $6.7 

million on that little venture; Clickabid, $3 million there; 

another $5.6 million lost in Soft Tracks entertainment; $90.8 

million lost in Navigata. Just think, Mr. Speaker, if we had 

those resources . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed for question period. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 351 through 379. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 351 to 379. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Balanced Budget 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

very pleased to join in this debate today. And later on, at the 

end of my speech, I’ll be moving a motion that says: 

 

This Assembly commends the Saskatchewan Party 

government for passing the only balanced budget in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to start off by giving kind of an 

overview of Canadian budgets that have been tabled throughout 

the last past couple of months. I’d like to start by speaking 

about the Canadian budget deficit situation most jurisdictions 

are facing, themselves, right now. For the 2012-13 budget year, 

all Canadian provinces except for Saskatchewan are running 

deficits, as well as the federal budget. The federal budget 

estimate is a deficit of $21.1 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go through a list of the Canadian 

provinces right now. Ontario’s budget estimate is a deficit of 

$15.2 billion. Quebec’s budget estimate is a deficit of $1.5 

billion. Alberta’s budget estimate is a deficit of $900 million. 

BC’s [British Columbia] budget estimate is a deficit of $968 

million. Manitoba’s budget estimate is a deficit of $460 million. 

Prince Edward Island’s budget estimate is a deficit of $74.9 

million. New Brunswick’s budget estimate is a deficit of $182.9 

million. Nova Scotia’s budget estimate is a deficit of $211.2 

million. And last but not least, the budget most recently tabled, 

Newfoundland and Labrador’s budget estimate is a deficit of 

$258 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a lot of numbers, but to narrow it, to put it 

in perspective, the collective combined federal and 

jurisdictional Canadian deficit for 2012-13 is $40.5 billion. 

Except for one province, Mr. Speaker. The standout is 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Saskatchewan government tabled a budget with a $15 

million surplus, and the only provincial balanced budget in 

Confederation. Mr. Speaker, there is 70 million that will be 

transferred to our Growth and Financial Security Fund, which 

will bring us up to $750 million by the end of the year. And this 

is important, government spending was, on the operational side, 

was below a 4 per cent increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the Saskatchewan Party was first elected in 

2007, debt paydown was totalled to $3 billion indicating that 

we have a strong plan for the future. We’re understanding the 

world financial situation, and we have a solid fiscal preparation 

for today and to encourage future growth, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s a big part of our Saskatchewan advantage budget — 

encourage future growth and ensure that we can have 

investments in our province going forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about international debt 

crisis. We know we do not live in a bubble, Mr. Speaker. There 

obviously are jurisdictions near to us that can affect our 

financial situation. We could absolutely be influenced by global 

financial pressures and the fiscal mismanagement of other 

countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we can do is put our province in the best 

financial situation possible and looking forward to a future, 

ensure that we have sustainable spending, ensure that we can 

weather any storms that may come on the horizon. What we can 

do is improve our province’s competitiveness, improve our 

province’s credit rating, which we were the only jurisdiction, I 

think, in the country had improved credit rating in the last 

couple years, Mr. Speaker, to a AAA credit rating. That was 

never done before. That’s the first time our Saskatchewan 

province has ever had a AAA grading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the governments of the world do not see things 

this way regarding finances. Some have allowed their finances 

to be spun so far out of control; they are no longer in a position 

to correct their own financial mess. And this can be seen in the 

situation that we see in Greece right now. Mr. Speaker, the 

OECD [Organization for Economic Co-operation and 

Development] has records of each government’s current deficits 

and debts. Mr. Speaker, the situation is not encouraging. Most 

jurisdictions are running deficits, including Canada. Some of 

the countries of the highest debt to GDP [gross domestic 

product] ratios are Greece, Ireland, the UK [United Kingdom], 

the US [United States], and Italy. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, 

The Economist global debt clock is tracking world debt that is 

changing constantly. Currently over $39 trillion, Mr. Speaker, 

moving constantly upwards, more and more debt, further crisis, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while we’re on the topic of debt, Mr. Speaker, and 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

unsustainable funding, maybe we should take a look back at 

what happened on November 7th, 2011. Mr. Speaker, 

apparently the NDP and especially their Finance critic didn’t 

get the message that deficit spending needs to become a relic of 

the past. Once again in last year’s election, the NDP promised 

what they could not deliver — a promise, a platform that’s 

architected by the Regina Rosemont member that said, do you 

know what? We can deliver whatever you want. We promise to 

increase debt in our province. We promise to carry on the 

worldwide trend of budget deficits and fiscal carnage, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the fall of 2011, the NDP made over $5 billion of promises 

to the people of Saskatchewan — $5 billion worth of promises. 

And you know what this promise would have made? This 

platform that was created by the member from Regina 

Rosemont promising $5 billion worth of spending, it would 

have created — you know what, Mr. Speaker? — this massive 

debt would have resulted in a massive deficit.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP would have been elected and if 

they would have tabled their first budget, like we tabled our 

first budget, with their spending promises, they would have 

tabled a budget with the distinction of being the second largest 

deficit in the country, Mr. Speaker. Their budget would have 

been the second largest deficit in the country with all the 

promises they made, and the people that they tried to convince 

that deficit budgeting and promises, that unfulfilled . . . would 

have put our province with the second highest deficit in the 

country. And that is worth . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is that bad? 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Yes. For the member from Regina 

Elphinstone, that’s a bad thing. That’s a bad thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan realize this. And 

he said, you know what? I’m not going to go back to a time 

when our province is having deficit, when our credit rating is 

being decreased. We do not want our vote bought with our own 

money, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the people of Saskatchewan 

said on November 11th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know, being in this Chamber, I try to listen to as 

many of the speeches that I can, and you know, the member 

from Regina Rosemont went on quite a little rant there a couple 

of days ago. And I thought I heard a couple of things that I 

wasn’t too sure about, and I don’t want to speak on something I 

don’t know, so I went back and took a look into Hansard on 

what the member from Regina Rosemont said. And it was a 

little confusing to me at the time, but I’m going to read it out 

loud so we can have a little conversation about it, when he was 

talking about, on April 24th, he’s talking, “What do they have 

against . . .” I quote, Mr. Speaker: “What do they have against 

investment, Mr. Speaker? What do they have about diversifying 

our economy, Mr. Speaker? Why can’t we choose to be more 

than less.” And this is a statement the member from Regina 

Rosemont made about our government wanting to . . . why 

can’t we be more than less.  

 

And it’s a statement that really got me thinking about 16 years 

ago and the NDP, the NDP’s promises of trying to do things 

better in 2011, 1999. And I remember I graduated around that 

time. A lot of people were leaving the province, were leaving 

the province. And it was interesting . . . And I’ll go on to one 

more quote from the Regina member from Rosemont. And he 

said: 

 

And I think it’s careless. I think it’s reckless. I think it’s 

disrespectful for any member of this Assembly to dismiss 

the hurt and challenge that is being caused to so many in 

this province that are looking at being displaced from their 

own province, that are looking . . . How are they going to 

earn the dollars they need to provide for their family and 

where are they going to do so? And sadly many of those 

individuals are having to choose outside Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is coming from an NDP member? 

Coming from an NDP member, why are we driving people . . . 

our province? And this was probably the most unbelievable 

statement I’ve heard in the Assembly so far by the member 

from Regina Rosemont. Why are we driving people . . . when 

our province has the highest population ever? Really? You’re 

driving people out of our province when our population is 

growing, and you’re trying to figure out how people are going 

to make ends meet when we’re making, on our weekly average, 

is making more money in this province than anywhere before, 

any time before? 

 

And I think about driving people out of our province. Well I 

think about my sisters, my brothers, all my friends in high 

school that had to leave this province because they couldn’t 

make any money under an NDP government because they had 

no idea how to create investment opportunities in our province. 

The member said, why don’t we want investment in 

Saskatchewan on this side of the House, when we’ve created an 

investment climate so people are coming from all over not only 

North America but the world to come to Saskatchewan now 

because they think it’s the best economic climate for investment 

right now in the world. And the member says, why don’t we 

want investment? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’d have to ask that same question is, 

where was their investment in agriculture for 16 years? 

Growing up in rural Saskatchewan, what did they do to help 

farmers? What did they do to help municipalities, Mr. Speaker? 

Claw back $600 million from them so that they had to . . . and 

off-load all their responsibilities, so they could . . . tax revolts 

all over the province and . . . [inaudible] . . . this group of 

members from across the floor, this nimble nine now across the 

floor, who I don’t think they understand that, Mr. Speaker, 

people do actually remember stuff after November the . . . after 

2007. They never want to talk about anything when they were 

in power because they don’t want to take responsibility for their 

record, basically, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, reading a book called The Unfinished 

Canadian, I ran across a statement called the tall poppy 

syndrome. And I was wondering . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s that? 

 

Mr. Steinley: — It’s one of the first times I heard it, the tall 

poppy syndrome. And it’s a case where, Mr. Speaker, many 

people who . . . You look over a field, and you see a couple of 

the taller poppies, and you say, you know what? That just 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

doesn’t look right. We like it to be more even. And it says that 

people, instead of having the opportunity to grow and reach and 

become the best you can, it’s basically a statement about 

resentment and jealousy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anybody that’s doing well, anybody that is doing well and isn’t 

mediocre, mediocre, Mr. Speaker, they instead of trying to 

grow our province, instead of trying to allow people the 

opportunity to become the best that they can, they cut off the 

tall poppies, Mr. Speaker. They cut off the people that are doing 

the best and they say, you know what? If we want everyone to 

be equal, instead of giving the opportunity for you to grow, 

become the best you can be, we’re actually going to cut the feet 

out of the people who are doing well so that they come back 

down to everyone else. It’s unbelievable. 

 

And I think it was a race. And for 16 years, Mr. Speaker, it was 

a race to the bottom. It was a race to be mediocre. And then you 

would say, why can’t we be more than less? They are the actual 

architects of being less, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has never 

had an opportunity to grow under the NDP and right now 

people are . . . Instead of cutting the legs out of people, the tall 

poppies in our province, Mr. Speaker, we are allowing a 

framework, a climate for people to become more than they can 

be, Mr. Speaker, becoming the best that they can be, rising to 

the occasion, giving an opportunity to be the tall poppies . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you very much, Nancy, sorry, 

the member from Martensville. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I’d just like to clear the air. I know the 

member from Regina Rosemont, he spins . . . he talks about our 

spin. But then he goes on diatribes about completely things that 

are legitimate in his world, his world. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to clear the air and bring the member from Regina 

Rosemont a little bit back to reality. I’d like to kind of welcome 

him to the new Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible] . . . and show him 

some of the Saskatchewan advantages, with our budget did 

come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will compare apples to apples right now, 

and I will compare one administration to another. And I think 

that’s fair, you know, people have records. Administrations 

have records. Some don’t want to talk about them, but you 

know, they have the 1990s records. And we have our records 

from going on from ’07 to today, which I think we’re pretty 

proud of, and things have been going pretty all right in 

Saskatchewan. And the 53,000 people that moved back home 

and moved here, I think, think things are going pretty well as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 1990s . . . We’ll go about a 10-year frame 

because we’re going to be able to say, Mr. Speaker, and per 

capita in the 1990s Saskatchewan’s income, disposable income 

per capita was $2,500 below the national average, Mr. Speaker. 

And the member from Rosemont talks about, why can’t people 

make money now? And I guess, well we don’t got to go on that 

record I guess. 

 

And right now, Mr. Speaker, today the per capita disposable 

income is the second highest in Canada, second highest in 

Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, and I think job creation records, job 

creation records have a lot to do with if people want to move to 

your jurisdiction and lots of things have . . . People, if you can’t 

find a job, you’re basically not going to stay here. That’s what 

happened with my friends, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And right now . . . In the 1990s, job creation, second worst 

ahead of Newfoundland in the 1990s, second worst record in 

job creation. And, Mr. Speaker, right now and today in 

Saskatchewan we’re at 5.1 per cent, the lowest unemployment 

rate in Canada. And I think that speaks to the hard work of the 

people of Saskatchewan and their entrepreneurial spirit, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the population growth which . . . Throughout the 

1990s, I know many, many people left. Many, many, many 

young people left because they didn’t have the opportunity here 

because they got their feet cut out from under them by the 

former NDP government, but below the national record on the 

Prairies, Mr. Speaker — their population growth. And, Mr. 

Speaker, our population has an all-time high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish I had more time to speak on the balanced 

budget, the only balanced budget in Saskatchewan, but right 

now I’d like to move the motion, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly commends the Saskatchewan Party 

government for passing the only balanced budget in 

Canada. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved the motion: 

 

That this Assembly commends the Saskatchewan Party 

government for passing the only balanced budget in 

Canada. 

 

I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

enter into debate here today, Mr. Speaker. That was an 

interesting speech that was written by the Premier’s office here 

today that, you know, the member, a new member, he’s 

probably going to learn but maybe that’s the last speech he’ll 

read here that’s been written to him, written for him by the 

Premier’s office. But pretty interesting because I don’t think 

that’s the approach that member would normally take. 

 

What I find rather interesting here today is, of course, a speech 

like that that’s been put together, the message that’s been put 

together from the Premier’s office, is an awfully interesting 

choice by this Premier, to basically boast and to poke fingers in 

other partners in Confederation, to do so on grounds that are not 

correct. It’s an interesting sort of attitudinal shift that we see in 

this government and certainly doesn’t represent that of 

Saskatchewan people. This boastful approach that attacks its 

neighbours and partners in Confederation puts together a case 

that doesn’t compare things in an apple-to-apples comparison. 

It’s rather interesting. 

 

You know, and members talk about the new Saskatchewan. 

Well I would hope that in the new Saskatchewan where we 

should all be proud, we should all be proud as in Saskatchewan 

people, in the hard work, the sacrifice and the work to build out 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

a strong economy, to build up some strength in our revenues. 

 

[11:15] 

 

I believe it’s our time to stand up with a sense of humility and 

confidence to both Canada, but the rest of the world. Instead we 

see sort of this immature, silly, sort of reckless, boastful 

approach of government, and it doesn’t represent the place of 

Saskatchewan people, the mindset of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Saskatchewan people are a proud lot, and it’s a time for us to 

have a humble pride as to the record of our province and our 

place in the world. And what we see instead is a very . . . a 

government that’s out of step with Saskatchewan people, that in 

fact is taking an arrogant approach to how they go about things. 

What the time here is in Saskatchewan . . . I hear a member 

shouting across, “It’s finally our turn.” 

 

Well you know, it is our turn here in Saskatchewan to be able to 

make improvements. It is our turn to take a humble pride as to 

our place. It is our time to take some confidence, and to make 

decisions in a deliberate fashion that improve people’s lives and 

improve the lives of communities. And it is our time to 

certainly continue to be who we are as Saskatchewan people 

with a sense of humility, a care for one another, and to stand up 

to the rest of the world, certainly with pride. But that kind of 

boastful, silly, immature arrogance that we’re seeing from the 

government opposite doesn’t represent, doesn’t represent who 

Saskatchewan people are. 

 

And you know, it’s an interesting approach that, you know, that 

they heckle across, say, well it was finally our time. It’s not our 

time to poke neighbours, neighbouring provinces, partners in 

Confederation in the eye. It’s not our time to be silly and 

reckless with what we’re putting forward. It’s our time to work 

towards the best interests of Saskatchewan people, and certainly 

not our time to play these sorts of silly games and that sort of 

approach. 

 

The fact that that speech came out of what I would suspect is 

the Premier’s office and given to that new young member to 

provide here today is too bad. And anyways it seems to me that 

it’s probably a bit of a set-up, and certainly it’s reflective of 

what we’re hearing from government. We’ve seen members on 

a daily basis jump up and poke different provinces in the eye, 

Mr. Speaker, as opposed to standing up with a sense of pride, a 

sense of place, and to say, yes, we have some things in 

Saskatchewan that are going well. And this is how we’re 

working towards our goals that matter to Saskatchewan people. 

And you know, and I guess what this gets to is the arrogance 

we see from the government and that disconnect from what 

everyday families across Saskatchewan are talking about and 

what they care about. 

 

You know, we see a government boast, when they don’t even 

report their finances the same way as the rest of Canada, and do 

so in a way to manufacture some sort of story that they’d like to 

tell. And we can only I guess point to the fact that every year at 

budget time the Finance minister and the Premier and members 

opposite jump up and talk about budgetary balance, and then 

the record of course is something entirely different. In fact three 

years running, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a government that their 

record has been of deficits: in 2009-10, a deficit of $173 

million; in 2010-11, a deficit of 145 million; and in 2011-12, a 

deficit of well over $300 million. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw North who we know struggles 

with these matters should be corrected by the Minister of 

Finance who admitted the other night in estimates that, yes, last 

year he said he had a balanced budget. And yes, by the end of 

the year it was well over $300 million in deficit. And he had 

raided the Crown corporation, hiking up rates for Saskatchewan 

people to pay for his budget. 

 

It gets to the point that, of an article here in The Globe and Mail 

on March 17th with the title, “Conservatives preach the gospel 

but forget the chapters,” Mr. Speaker. “They say they want 

smaller government, lower taxes and balanced budgets, and 

then they don’t deliver,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is what we see here again. They talk about budgetary 

balance. It doesn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. In fact, you know, 

even when we, as I talk about recording our finances, of course 

they’re done in an inappropriate fashion. We have auditor’s 

report after auditor’s report. The independent Provincial 

Auditor, non-partisan auditor, highlights the lack of budgetary 

balance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we see this sort of, these boastful, silly, immature 

antics from the government opposite instead of taking a proud 

place in Canada, in the world, at a time where in the new 

Saskatchewan we should have some self-assuredness, where we 

should have some confidence, but we should continue to carry 

ourselves forward with a level of humility. 

 

And what we should be doing in the new Saskatchewan is 

utilizing that confidence and that assuredness to make decisions 

that make a difference in people’s lives. Whether you’re up in 

that region up around Humboldt where there’s decisions being 

made around mining operations, what we need to move forward 

up there with is a deliberate plan that makes sure we’re meeting 

the needs of the region and residents, not these silly antics in 

here of being boastful and poking other provinces in the eye. 

That’s not the approach Saskatchewan people appreciate. 

 

Just the same, Mr. Speaker, this is the same government that, 

you know, in the last election went before Saskatchewan people 

with glossy, slick brochures and messages of positivity and are 

delivering something very different. They never talked in that 

election about spending millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, to 

increase the number of politicians here in Saskatchewan at the 

same time as hiking costs for seniors and everyday families 

across this province. That wasn’t contained in the information 

at all. 

 

And Saskatchewan people, just the same as, they want to be 

proud of where we’ve arrived as a province not because of the 

back-patting that we hear from government somehow trying to 

say that this was the doing of that government that put 

Saskatchewan into a stronger position from an economic and 

fiscal position. That’s silly, taking credit for things when it’s 

been hard-working community leaders, organizations, and 

certainly hard-working Saskatchewan people and entrepreneurs 

who have built out the success that we see in Saskatchewan. 

Now it’s a question of how do we build on that success. How 

do we take that success and make sure it’s manifested into 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

positive improvements in people’s lives and communities’ 

lives, in the lives of communities? 

 

Instead we see a government that wants to have this perpetual 

back-patting. And the decisions they’re actually making, the 

focus of their debate in this Assembly, the push of their Bill, is 

all about them, Mr. Speaker. All about them, and adding 

politicians to manipulate boundaries in a fashion that secures 

their, what they believe, electoral fortunes in a more secure 

way. Or to eliminate the voices of youth all across this 

province, discounting the voice of so many across this province, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s all about them and their own political, 

partisan interests, Mr. Speaker, instead of being a humble 

government that earned a mandate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I respect the fact that they won an election. But what the 

point, Mr. Speaker, should be is they should have rolled up 

their sleeves at that point, taken that mandate, worked towards 

those goals. And what we see is something very different. We 

see a government that’s departed from what they promised, 

doing things that are entirely different, doing things that are in 

their own best interests. It’s all about them, certainly not about 

Saskatchewan people. And we see this arrogance that’s 

permeated the benches opposite, and that’s something that has 

really grown quickly and it’s evidenced again here today. It’s 

evidenced in members’ statements. It’s evidenced by the 

approach of the Premier and government. 

 

Saskatchewan people should be proud of our place in 

Confederation, but we should do so with a humble confidence 

and we should do so at home, making sure we’re making 

decisions that make the important improvements, the 

meaningful improvements in the lives of Saskatchewan people 

and communities, Mr. Speaker. That’s what Saskatchewan 

people expect from all of us, and that’s the least we can deliver, 

Mr. Speaker. So certainly, you know, the fact that they’re 

talking about budgetary balance, we’ve seen it before, Mr. 

Speaker. Three times running we’ve seen deficits as their 

record, Mr. Speaker. Should this one be different? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think there’s lots of evidence to suggest otherwise, 

Mr. Speaker. At this point in time, I’ve been pleased to counter 

the motion put forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

honoured to be able to stand in this Legislative Assembly today 

and speak to today’s budget debate. I may also add the 

provincial . . . This is the only provincial budget that is 

balanced in Canada. Mr. Speaker, this budget is about keeping 

the Saskatchewan advantage, keeping the budget balanced, 

keeping spending sustainable, keeping our economy growing, 

and keeping our election promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin with some third party support for 

our balanced budget, TD Economics, 2012 Saskatchewan 

budget: 

 

This year’s Saskatchewan budget features another surplus, 

but it is still quite distinct from last year’s. In contrast to 

Budget 2011, which included a string of tax cuts, this 

year’s new initiatives are mainly focused on improvements 

to government efficiency. Overall, the tone being struck 

this year is of careful management of public finances 

notwithstanding the province’s enviable prosperity. 

 

CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce], Saskatchewan 

budget 2012, provincial budget briefs: 

 

Saskatchewan continues to compare very favourably to its 

provincial peers, boasting a relatively strong economic 

expansion, a healthy budget balance, a declining debt 

burden and negligible net funding requirements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education priorities include First Nation and Métis 

education, assessment of new immigrants, students entering 

into the province’s education system, and child care spaces. Mr. 

Speaker, funding includes 21 approved major capital projects 

and three new school capital projects. Mr. Speaker, our 

government has invested approximately 500 million in 

pre-kindergarten to 12 and child care infrastructure since 2007, 

including 38 major capital, school capital projects throughout 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new education funding distribution model 

provides a fair balance in funding for school divisions across 

Saskatchewan. It includes transition funding to moderate the 

impact on school divisions most affected by this shift due to the 

new model. Mr. Speaker, our government provides the largest 

reduction in education portion of property taxes in 

Saskatchewan history in 2009. As a result, we needed a new 

way of distributing funding to school divisions. Mr. Speaker, 

we have spent the past three years consulting with school 

divisions and other members of the education sector to ensure 

funding is provided in an equitable manner — all this and 

keeping a balanced budget, the only province in Canada, I may 

add, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education and labour force 

development. Our government has invested a record amount 

into post-secondary education and skills training in 2007, with a 

significant support for the First Nation and Métis students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is near and dear to me as I have spent years 

helping to get Aboriginals educated. The most wonderful 

program I was part of developing, after years of working with 

Supreme Steel to develop an ironworkers’ training program and 

with the help from the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration, the program’s first course was 

completed last week. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies started with 14 First Nations students, 

and 13 completed the SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies] ironworkers’ certification program. Mr. Speaker, 

the graduate students started their two-week practicum on 

Monday this week at the zoo, erecting a pavilion in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to the generosity of PCS [Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] potash who donated over 

$52,000 worth of raw steel material for the building. Mr. 

Speaker, thanks to Supreme Steel for organizing and arranging 

this project. Mr. Speaker, Supreme Steel donated over $55,000 

in labour to fabricate the steel trusses, beams, etc., for the 

pavilion. Mr. Speaker, thanks to Q-Line Trucking who donated 

flatbed trailers for moving the material from various locations 

and storing the material for the start of this two-week practicum 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

this week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to the following companies who donated 

their time and equipment as well as labour: International Paints, 

Litz Crane, Hertz Equipment, ModSpace, Construction 

Fasteners, and Prairie Maintenance who supplied and will 

install the roof cladding. This was all for the zoo pavilion which 

is presently being erected. And I intend to go there this week 

and see how the project is going. It was just fantastic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the best part of this whole program is that 

Supreme Steel has offered jobs to each of the 13 students to 

work at the Rocanville potash expansion. SIIT is looking 

forward to running another ironworkers’ certification course in 

the near future. Mr. Speaker, the following is a quote from 

Supreme Steel: 

 

We started erection this past Monday employing SIIT 

Iron Worker Certificate course students for their 

two-week practicum. We also have offered continued 

employment to all the graduates. The program was 

developed through the efforts of the Ironworker Union 

and Supreme Steel, brought to SIIT to deliver. Without 

the assistance of the Hon. Rob Norris, Advanced 

Education, Immigration, the program would not have 

moved forward [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

The program has received assistance from the 

construction industry — Supreme Steel, International 

Paints, Litz Crane, Hertz Equipment, ModSpace, 

Construction Fasteners and Prairie Maintenance (Roof 

Cladding) among others — as well as Potash Corporation 

who donated the raw steel for the zoo pavilion project. 

We have industry support. We have work and we need 

trained workers. And the Aboriginal community have a 

potential workforce. The government helped us deliver 

the program we needed. SIIT is looking forward to 

holding a second and possibly third program. We have a 

good start. 

 

Ross Fraser, General Manager, Supreme Steel, Saskatoon 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spent several years . . . Mr. Speaker, we will 

continue with the programs like rental construction incentive 

and affordable homeownership program and rental 

development program, support for the Habitat for Humanity, 

and we are introducing the Saskatchewan first-time 

homebuyers, all under a balanced budget. Mr. Speaker, since 

2007 housing starts have averaged 5,908 per year, more than 

double the number of annual housing starts in the previous 16 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spent years developing an affordable 

housing program for a local Saskatoon Métis community, 

sitting on various boards representing Métis with the five level 

government homelessness initiative: Saskatoon Housing 

Initiatives Partnership,SHIP; RIC, regional intersectoral 

committee, etc., Mr. Speaker. This Métis group was given the 

opportunity to purchase a 16-apartment building on Avenue Q 

and completed renovating and building with funding from the 

federal homelessness dollars and the city of Saskatoon giving 

tax incentive breaks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the building was completed, 15 single 

mothers were moved into the facility to get them off the street 

trade. And they received counselling, education that they 

required, and help to the next stage they wanted to go, whether 

that be a job or more education, and also helping their kids get 

off the streets, Mr. Speaker. The 16th one-bedroom unit was 

used for the counsellors and entrance security 24 hours a day to 

protect the single mothers and their kids. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was a very touching moment when we 

introduced this facility. Shortly after the building was in 

operation — it was about a year later — I was in a store 

shopping, and a lady came up to me and asked me if I was a 

part of the start of the facility, and I said yes, and she thanked 

me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Métis community group now owns about 120 

affordable housing units, using the homelessness initiative 

dollars to create affordable housing in Saskatoon. These 

buildings, as you will see as you drive around Saskatoon, 

there’s three on 22nd Street that wave the Métis flag proudly 

and also have a Métis card out front. There’s also one just off 

the street, off 22nd, and they are now earning enough to 

continue. And I don’t even know how many more units they’re 

going to get, but as they go, Mr. Speaker, it’s great to see this 

initiative happen. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 

the debate today to talk about a so-called balanced budget that 

this government has tabled last month. Certainly as you know, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not exactly correct. We won’t see 

this as a balanced budget at all, and certainly neither do a 

number of authorities on the issue. 

 

First off we know that the auditor herself has raised some 

questions about the bookkeeping that has been done. And I just 

want to quote from remarks that she provided on December 8th, 

2011. This is in her auditor’s report, and she said this is an “. . . 

issue that has been raised by my predecessors — two previous 

Provincial Auditors [have raised this as well.]” And her 

statement here is, I quote: 

 

It is generally accepted that the annual reported surplus or 

deficit of the entire government is the benchmark by 

which the public measures how good a job a government 

is doing in managing the public purse. Simply put, the 

way that Saskatchewan publicly reports its annual 

surpluses and deficits to the citizens of Saskatchewan is 

“out of sync” with the rest of Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a sad thing that our auditor has to 

point this out to this government, and yet they take no heed and 

continue on with a reporting system that is out of sync with the 

rest of Canada. And how do you think that makes the public 

feel when they see that this is something that our government 

continuously refuses to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

So that’s right off the hop. Before the budget was even released, 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

we had these comments coming from the Provincial Auditor in 

December. And yet the budget that was tabled in March 

continues to use the same reporting method that the auditor is 

critical of. I don’t know what kind of message that sends to the 

auditor, but I think it’s a bad message to send to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There were a number of other comments that were provided 

about this budget. And before I get into those, I think first of all 

I just want to make a few points. The bottom line here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is this is not a balanced budget. So when we 

start at that point — and I’m just laying that as a basis for my 

comments today — this is not a balanced budget. And the way 

the government chooses to present the financial statements is 

misleading. 

 

And given that I’ve made that point, I just want to go on to 

make a few more points about the content of this particular 

budget, this unbalanced budget, despite the fact that there’s 

continuous rhetoric from there saying how it is actually 

balanced. And certainly we’ll know more about how balanced it 

is at the end of the year when we see some of the sales coming 

in on lands that are lower, and potash’s prices are lower in this 

quarter. So we’re certainly watching very carefully, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, what the projections are and how accurate they are, 

that the Minister of Finance and his staff have put together. 

 

So it’s fine and dandy to say it’s balanced. It’s not. And 

certainly even if we take it on faith that it is balanced, we will 

see at the end of the year how accurate and able the Minister of 

Finance was to accurately project the revenues for this year. 

 

Budgets are about choices, and we see in this budget that the 

Sask Party government has chosen more politicians than 

everyday families’ needs. We see a 33 per cent increase on 

seniors’ and children’s drug plan. And we see $240 a year will 

be taken from seniors for hygiene supplies in seniors’ care 

homes. This seems to be a really low blow to people that are 

already suffering financially, and it seems to target people on 

fixed incomes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that simply is unfair 

and unnecessary. It is about a choice that this government has 

made. 

 

We see that post-secondary tuition will increase by at least 4 

per cent, as much as 9 per cent for some students. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we heard the Minister of Advanced Education get up 

this morning and crow about all the things that he has done 

personally for advanced education, and yet we hear from 

university students that they simply cannot afford these 

increases that are ongoing and that they’re hurting. We’ve 

heard other areas where the universities are being challenged 

financially, and indeed there’s $100 million of debt that should 

be on this government’s books, that are now being pushed on to 

the universities. And we can’t get clear answers from the 

minister on any of that. 

 

It doesn’t have to be this way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If we had 

proper fiscal management and smart growth choices, we could 

afford more schools, more improvements in health care, and 

much more. 

 

This is an austerity budget for school divisions as well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The funding formula is broke, and the kids in 

classrooms will still suffer. They say they’re increasing new 

child care spaces, but when it comes to funding for early 

learning and child care, there’s actually a decrease of over $1 

million in the budget. Fifteen positions have been eliminated 

from the ministry, cutting back on valuable civil servants who 

provide the backbone of the work of this government. And 

simply picking a number out of the air, 16 per cent over four 

years, we see the impact on programs. We see the impact on the 

public service, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We see that tens of millions have been cut from the school 

divisions, and we know from school divisions that the budget’s 

one-time $10 million backfill fund will not cover those 

classroom losses. It leaves students, parents, educators, workers 

wondering what’s going to happen next year. It’s not a positive 

thing for them to be anticipating. This government has also 

instructed school boards to find yet more cuts throughout this 

year to save more cash, and this is on the backs of our children, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We see, in terms of justice, that the party . . . the pro-justice talk 

is all slick PR [public relations]. The Sask Party government 

still refuses to estimate a budget for the costs of the Harper 

government’s omnibus crime Bill changes. And that is 

something that I think both the Minister of Justice and the 

Minister of Corrections and the Minister of Government 

Services has to grapple with soon. We know there’s some time 

before the Bill takes effect, but building jails takes a long time 

and certainly longer than it will be for this new Bill to take 

effect. There have been projections made by other agencies. 

And to just say we don’t know, isn’t enough, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

These ministers need to step up to the plate and take a serious 

look and if they’re able to budget for the upcoming year, they 

should be able to make a reasonable estimate as to the costs of 

the new crime Bill, in terms of what the types of mandatory 

sentences will be, how many crimes are occurring on those 

levels right now, and what the impact of the mandatory 

minimum sentence will be. It’s a simple matter of projection. 

There are actuaries that can do that kind of work, and their 

refusal to do so at this point in time is irresponsible. 

 

In terms of seniors, as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we see seniors taking a real hit in this budget. And certainly 

those who have serious medical issues and multiple 

prescriptions, it’s exacerbated for them, and as we know many, 

many seniors are on fixed and limited incomes. Food is going 

up. Their rents are going up astronomically. They are making 

choices about medication, shelter, and food every day that 

seriously impacts the quality of their life. And we don’t see any 

movement from this government to assist them. In fact we see it 

going the other way. They’re being punished with additional 

costs for prescriptions that simply won’t help them at all. 

 

We’re talking about, for the average senior, pharmacists are 

estimating it’s an additional 180 to $240 per year. We haven’t 

talked about, for a while, the senior citizens’ ambulance 

assistance plan; there are increases there. We see $240 per year 

being clawed back from seniors living in care for hygienic 

products. That includes soap, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And then of course if we look at the North, there’s concerns 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

there as well. We have the Sask Party government making 

choices that hurt the North. They choose expensive recruitment 

trips over to Ireland at the expense of training and opportunity 

for northern people. They’ve cut the treaty land entitlement 

program by 500,000. They’ve cut the First Nations and Métis 

Consultation Participation Fund by 43 per cent. Strategic 

initiatives are cut. The total cuts in northern and Aboriginal 

affairs is 1.8 million. It’s a 20 per cent cut. What message does 

that send to the First Nations people of this province? 

 

And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think one of the most 

egregious cuts in this budget, with a very ideological approach 

that absolutely makes no sense, is the cuts to the film 

employment tax credit. We see people packing up and leaving 

now as a result of that decision. There’s been a three-month 

reprieve, but we see no active way yet from either the minister 

responsible for film employment tax credit or the Premier in 

terms of how this is going to move forward and how we’re 

going to keep a healthy film employment tax credit, or film 

industry in the province. 

 

And you know, we see all kinds of business risk management 

plans for other ministries. We see all kinds of supports for other 

industries. But for some reason this particular industry’s singled 

out, and I think it’s a shame. And it’s a really unfortunate 

message from this government that they refuse to accept the 

way this industry is managed and are indeed destroying it in 

this province. And it’s destroying part of our culture. It’s 

destroying part of who we are. And it’s ruining a lot of young 

people’s lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think it’s shameful. 

And this is something this government should be embarrassed 

about and should reverse. 

 

So at that point, I think I’m very happy to have pointed out a 

few of my views on this budget. And if time permitted, I would 

have a lot more to say. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is an 

absolute pleasure to participate in today’s debate on the only 

balanced provincial budget in the Dominion of Canada. Our 

Saskatchewan advantage budget is all about being fiscally 

responsible so that our Saskatchewan Party government can 

continue to support and sustain programs Saskatchewan people 

value — programs such as health, education, and support for 

those needing a hand up — all the while creating a strong 

business-friendly climate so that entrepreneurs and corporations 

can create jobs, jobs that help people enjoy life and raise a 

family, jobs that provide an income so we can contribute to our 

communities. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, allow me to read an excerpt from BMO’s [Bank 

of Montreal] Saskatchewan budget analysis: “Overall, 

Saskatchewan continues to exhibit responsible spending 

behaviour despite boasting one of the more favourable fiscal 

and economic backdrops in Canada.” Our government has 

delivered a balanced budget. It is balanced in the General 

Revenue Fund; it is balanced in the summary financial 

statements; plus the Growth and Financial Security Fund will 

maintain a balance of $756 million. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, please tell the people of the province that 

they are the reason we have a combo of balanced budgets, 

reduced debts, lower taxes, a growing economy, and a 

tremendous quality of life. Saskatchewan people share our 

vision that Saskatchewan is the best place in Canada to live, to 

work, to start a business, to get an education, to raise a family, 

and to build a life. To do this, our Saskatchewan Party 

government identified four goals: (1) sustaining growth and 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people, (2) improving quality 

of life, (3) making life more affordable, and (4) delivering 

responsive and responsible government. 

 

Sustaining growth and opportunities is supported when our 

municipalities are provided with a full percentage point of the 

PST [provincial sales tax] as promised. We have heard how the 

NDP want us to go back, back to the guessing games of the past 

when municipalities never quite knew what their budgets would 

be. 

 

Education is another tenet for sustaining growth and 

opportunities. This budget introduces a new education funding 

formula and increases K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

funding to help with the transition to the new formula. As a 

result all school divisions will see a funding increase ranging 

anywhere from 1.7 to 14.4 per cent. Under our new funding 

formula, the component that supports community schools has 

increased by over 4 per cent and now stands at more than $258 

million. The vulnerability portion of this funding formula will 

use the same kind of socio-economic indicators as before, such 

as low income, single parent families, and now immigration to 

estimate the level of student vulnerability within each school 

division. The model provides this funding in an unconditional 

way. 

 

Sustaining growth and opportunities will continue via our 

graduate retention program that provides a combination of 

non-refundable and refundable tax credits to post-secondary 

graduates. There is $172.4 million of targeted funding for First 

Nations and Métis peoples. This is a $4.7 million increase from 

last year’s budget. 

 

Our Saskatchewan advantage budget is committed to improving 

quality of life. The patient-first initiative will continue. This 

budget provides 98.2 million more dollars to the regional health 

authorities, an increase equal to 3.5 per cent more than last 

year. Those that need to deal with cancer will be supported via 

$138.8 million to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. This 

includes an increase of $16.9 million in funding so that the 

Cancer Agency can continue to provide a high-quality service 

that includes drugs, operational, and medical costs. In addition, 

$4 million has been committed to expand the colorectal 

screening program province-wide. 

 

Quality of life has increased for 123 First Nations and Métis 

journeypersons. This is double the number of First Nations and 

Métis journeypersons from ’06-07. Since last year there are 

5,900 more First Nations and Métis peoples with an increased 

quality of life because they are employed in family-sustaining 

jobs. This provincial balanced budget increased funding for 

disabilities program by another $26.4 million. This is part of the 

308.8 million more dollars that this government has provided 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

since taking office in ’07. 

 

The Saskatchewan assured income for disability program will 

receive an increase of $17.8 million so that up to 10,000 adults 

with disabilities will have an improved quality of life through 

access to this program. Many people have shared with me how 

this program has improved the dignity and quality of life for 

their loved ones. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, last fall if I heard it once, I heard it a 

thousand times: the people of Northcote want a safer 

community. Well we have the Community Mobilization 

partnership, the first of its kind in Canada. This innovative, 

multi-agency partnership of community agencies, schools, 

health care, and social service agencies, First Nations workers, 

and police is creating a new way to make our community safer. 

This Community Mobilization partnership is getting at the root 

causes of crime and helping to prevent so many young people 

from going down that dangerous path. It is helping our youth to 

be a part of the thriving, safe community we all so much want. 

Our Saskatchewan Party government’s election platform 

committed to supporting the expansion of this Community 

Mobilization partnership. 

 

Our government is delivering on its commitment to improve 

quality of life in Saskatchewan through significant increases in 

programs and services for the province’s most vulnerable 

people. Making life more affordable is another goal that this 

Saskatchewan advantage budget addresses. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, with the tax changes from past budgets that the 

Saskatchewan Party government delivered, a family of four 

with $50,000 in annual income pays less than a quarter of the 

taxes that the NDP charged them. That means this family of 

four now has a tax savings of $2,638 each year. 

 

Child care spaces in Saskatchewan will increase in this next 

term of office. There are $46 million for child care operating 

which includes a $2 million increase and a $4 million child care 

capital to create 500 new child care spaces. We are committed 

to making life more affordable for low-income seniors. To help 

seniors keep pace with the cost of living, this budget provides 

$3.3 million, 24.2 million total to increase the senior income 

plan for singles and couples. 

 

Let’s compare the first four years of Saskatchewan Party 

government to the last 16 of the NDP. The seniors’ income plan 

benefit was doubled in our first term of office. In 16 years 

under the NDP, there was no change to the $90 per month 

seniors received. This year under the Saskatchewan Party 

government, the senior income plan benefit will increase to 

$240 per month. That’s $2,880 per year. It will triple by the end 

of this term to $270 per month, compared to the $90 per month 

the NDP provided to seniors. 

 

In a growing economy, Mr. Speaker, and with the largest 

increase in population since 1956, there are 65,000 more people 

now than in ’06. Rental housing continues to be in demand. The 

Saskatchewan Party recognizes this need and introduced the 

Saskatchewan advantage housing plan in the ’11-12 budget. 

This budget supports that plan with a further $3.7 million for 

the rental construction incentive and affordable home 

ownership programs. With these programs and other initiatives, 

the province could add up to 10,000 rentals to the market, 2,200 

new entry-level homes, and 650 student residences. 

 

To help people with the cost of a new home, this Saskatchewan 

advantage budget is introducing the first-time homebuyers tax 

credit which will provide up to $1,100 in non-refundable tax 

credit. In addition the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will 

provide $1 million to Habitat For Humanity to help an 

additional 20 low-income families achieve home ownership. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s support the only provincial balanced 

budget in all of the Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

very pleased to stand and respond in this particular debate. I 

want to first of all recognize the fact that . . . You know, I want 

to pay tribute to our Finance critic who’s done a remarkable 

job, Mr. Speaker, in making sure that he’s able to wade through 

all the rhetoric and wade through all the information, Mr. 

Speaker, to bring the true state of Saskatchewan’s finances to 

the forefront. And, Mr. Speaker, it was an amazing job as I 

watched on budget day as the Minister of Finance presented his 

budget, and our Finance critic, Mr. Speaker, stole the show. 

 

The tone in which the Finance critic brought forward the 

information, the tone in which he had the entire room very, very 

quiet, Mr. Speaker, and the hard messages that he delivered to 

the people of Saskatchewan with a packed House I think 

resonated with every person that was in the Assembly that day 

and those that may have been paying attention to the 

proceedings of the budget speech, Mr. Speaker. So that’s why 

it’s important that people out there know that the Finance critic 

has done a remarkable job to bring forward the actual truth 

about what is happening with our finances. And that’s 

something that people ought to be very, very wary of in terms 

of what is being presented by the government and certainly 

what the critic has to say. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to assist in this regard as I watched 

some of the rookie MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] bring forward some of the information that they had. 

And I’m going to help, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 

backbenchers. They’re not getting any help from their front 

bench, so I’m going to explain how this works. Okay. First of 

all under their budget book, which is the ’12-13 budget 

summary, 2012 to 2013, now I’m going to ask all the three 

members that spoke, the member from Prince Albert and from 

Regina and from Saskatoon, I think . . . Now what you want to 

do is take this book — it’s called budget summary — and as 

you go through the different pages, it really explains what’s 

going on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want them to particularly pay attention to the budget 

summary book, page 60. They go to that, they get that book and 

go to page 60. And for all those three members, once you’re at 

that page 60, what it does, it shows you a very good graph. It 

shows you a very good graph, and the graph talks about . . . The 

headline of the graph says, public debt of the General Revenue 

Fund as of March 31. Now in that particular General Revenue 

Fund, the public debt, for those three members that spoke about 

their so-called budget or balanced budget, go to that particular 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

page, Mr. Speaker, and in that page it shows the debt of 

Saskatchewan increasing, Mr. Speaker. Like you don’t have to 

follow your notes. Follow your own book that was presented by 

your own Finance minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So once you’re on page 60, it shows a graph. And I’m just 

going to show this to the people that are listening. And here’s 

the graph, Mr. Speaker, and it shows that debt is gradually 

increasing. These are their own documents. So once they’re on 

page 60 of this book, their own book, then go to where it says 

public debt of the General Revenue Fund. And then it shows, 

Mr. Speaker, you look at 2012, what’s happening with the debt? 

It’s going up, Mr. Speaker. Look at 2013, the overall debt’s 

going up. Look at 2014, their net debt is also going up. 2015, 

the net debt’s also going up. And of course, Mr. Speaker, 2016, 

the debt is still climbing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for those members that 

want to sing from their song sheet, perhaps you should park that 

song sheet that you’re given to read from. And don’t deviate 

from the words, I understand is what they’re being told, and 

like a good backbench, they’ll do that. But what you got to do 

is you got to kind of shift through all the information, shift 

through all the information, and don’t take the New Democrat’s 

word for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m suggesting today that you take your own budget book. It 

says, budget ’12-13 budget summary, and this is on page 60. So 

once you go to page 60, Mr. Speaker, the rookie MLAs, they 

can have a look at the debt and you can see the debt is gradually 

rising under the Saskatchewan Party. So where do they get 

these balanced budgets and all the different issues that they 

raise today, Mr. Speaker, is totally beyond us as caucus, and 

totally beyond a lot of people out there, especially the 

Provincial Auditor who says, we need to reflect properly what 

the debt of Saskatchewan is overall. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

simply not doing that. 

 

So for the rookie MLAs that spoke about this particular Bill, I 

would suggest . . . or this particular motion, I would suggest 

they go to their own budget document, page 60, which clearly 

shows that the deficit and the debt’s actually increasing over 

their watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I think it’s important that people out there realize that 

there is a problem with debt, Mr. Speaker. And our critic from 

Finance done a remarkable job, not only on budget day but with 

the media, and with a number of different organizations out 

there that spoke about and know about and are aware about the 

debt challenge that the province has. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s important is that the one thing I 

would say, the one thing I would say that’s very, very 

important, is that people have to be aware of what’s going on. 

And you don’t have to take the New Democrat’s word for it, 

you don’t have to take the Saskatchewan word for it. All you’ve 

got to do is go into two different areas, Mr. Speaker, their own 

budget finance book which clearly shows that the debt is rising. 

And the second point you can ask — and this is the really 

qualifying point that I want to make — the second person that 

you could ask is the Provincial Auditor. And the Provincial 

Auditor has not looked at this budget in any way, shape or form 

as a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. In no way, shape or form 

does he characterize this budget as balanced. 

 

[12:00] 

 

And it’s unfair, Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely unfair that you 

have rookie MLAs that don’t look at their own book, they’re 

explaining to people what is going on. Their job is to make sure 

that they change the channel from the reality of our increasing 

debt as opposed to telling the people out in the province exactly 

what is going on with the debt. They try and gloss over it, as 

they’re being told, gloss over it with all these other 

announcements, Mr. Speaker, that’s been going on for years. 

 

Now I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that no matter what 

happens, no matter what happens, as I mentioned, this 

information is in their own document. It’s not an NDP 

document, Mr. Speaker. This information is within their own 

document. And the challenge that they have, Mr. Speaker, is 

they have to report correctly in their own documents what 

exactly is happening. They can’t control the Provincial Auditor, 

and they can’t control the facts. So what they try and do is they 

try and control rookie MLAs that are sitting in the backbench, 

that really don’t have much influence as to how things operate 

and how things work. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to make a long story short, you know, I 

wanted to make sure that I take the time as an opposition MLA 

to coach and to encourage the backbench MLAs from the 

Saskatchewan Party to get factual information. Don’t just 

simply read what is handed to you. If you want to be able to be 

an effective MLA, even as a rookie MLA, research your facts. 

And the first place I would suggest they look is on page 60 of 

their own budget document, Mr. Speaker, of their own budget 

document that clearly shows that the debt is increasing under 

their watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for them to say that they have a balanced budget is 

absolutely ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. And many people outside 

the NDP ranks certainly have qualified what we’ve been saying 

all along, and that includes the Provincial Auditor, that this is 

not a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. No way, shape, or form is 

this a balanced budget. And that’s what the important lesson I 

would want to explain to the new rookie MLAs. 

 

And it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that they keep saying this. 

Because as you say this more and more to people, then you 

begin to realize that (a) that the information is not factual; and 

(b) there’s people out there that you’re explaining all this thing 

to, they’re going to have expectations of you. So if all this 

money is out there and you’re on a balanced budget, then we 

want more things like the Prince Albert bridge or perhaps 

money for the Métis Nation to properly run their election in a 

timely fashion, Mr. Speaker. All these issues that are out there, 

it doesn’t seem to have any positive effect when it comes to this 

particular government supporting those issues or addressing 

those needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I would encourage those members that spoke about 

their balanced budget, speaking from their song sheet, to take 

their own document that they have presented to the public and 

simply look at page 60 of the budget summary book which 

clearly shows in that graph of how the deficit is actually 

increasing year after year after year under the Sask Party watch, 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s a shame because it took a lot of work 

to bring our budgets under control and to make sure that we 

have proper finances for the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 

Questions? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

pose a question to the member for Prince Albert Northcote and 

that is this: does she believe that adding three more politicians 

to the Legislative Assembly fits in with the needs of the seniors 

and the young families in her constituency? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you to the member 

opposite for the question on how our Saskatchewan budget 

cares. Let’s talk about it for a second: caring about a balanced 

budget, a budget that balances the need for infrastructure, 

infrastructure that cares about our people. Our Saskatchewan 

advantage budget cares about seniors and the senior income 

plan: 24.2 million in total to increase the senior income plan for 

singles and couples. A balanced budget that cares about 

students and school funding: $1.74 billion in total school 

operating funding, a 5 per cent increase. 

 

Let’s talk about a balanced budget that cares about our health: a 

$16.9 million increase to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency for 

drug, medical, and operating costs, new patient referrals, 

chemotherapy treatments, and mammograms. Let’s talk about a 

balanced budget that cares about our highway system, investing 

$2.2 billion over four years. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Saskatchewan is 

the only province with a balanced budget this year. That means 

that we are able to provide needed services to the people of this 

province while ensuring that our fiscal house is in order. 

 

To the member from Athabasca: which budget do you prefer? 

The balanced budget the Saskatchewan Party delivered on 

March 21st, or would he have preferred the massive deficit 

budget based on $5 billion worth of NDP election giveaways? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let me reiterate that their 

budget is not balanced. And this is information that we got from 

the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. The document shows, 

their document clearly shows that the deficit under that Sask 

Party is increasing year after year after year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the point is the premise of the question is based on their 

perception that their budget is balanced. And I would advise the 

member from Shellbrook that your budget ain’t balanced, sir. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, the 

back-patting motion that was put forward here today of course 

is silly. We’ve seen this each year, and then of course 

something entirely different occurs. When they say they’re 

going to balance the budget, it’s been deficits the last three 

years. But in that budget we have seen increases to prescription 

drugs. We’ve seen the takeover of Tourism Saskatchewan 

which was led by industry. We’ve seen the elimination of the 

film economy, driving away individuals living and working in 

each of our constituencies, and investment. And we’ve seen on 

the floor of this Assembly the continued push to spend millions 

to increase the number of politicians. 

 

I guess my question to the member from Walsh Acres: does he 

seriously think that this is in the best interests of his 

constituents? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — I’d like to thank the person across the way for 

the question. I appreciate it. And any time I can stand up and 

talk about balanced budget, the only balanced budget in the 

country of Canada, I am very proud to do so. 

 

And you know what? I’ll say that the people of Walsh Acres, 

you know what they voted for on November 7th? They voted 

for a balanced budget, sustainable spending, and they voted 

against the architect of a $5 billion deficit that the member for 

Regina Rosemont would have put forward. They voted against 

a budget that if those members would have won, a budget that 

would have caused us to have the second-highest deficit in this 

country. And the people of Walsh Acres voted to have a 

forward-looking government that created growth, created jobs, 

and created a chance for people to succeed right here in the 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to the member from Rosemont, why did the 

member from Rosemont state on April 24th that we are 

“driving away investment and workers”? 

 

Saskatchewan has strong growth prospects and is leading the 

nation on employment and has the only Canadian provincial 

balanced budget. Why does the NDP heap doom and gloom 

predictions while the major economic indicators point to 

growth and prosperity for our Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And I’m pleased to respond to that 

question. And I would highlight certainly in Moose Jaw and 

Regina and all across Saskatchewan, the decision to kill the 

film economy in Saskatchewan, to drive away investment in 

this province, entrepreneurs in this province, workers in this 

province, has been a sad decision by this government.  

 

It’s choosing, this government’s choosing to be less instead of 

choosing to be more, and this has impacted the lives of 

individuals in Moose Jaw and Regina and all across 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

Saskatchewan. And it’s impacted our economy because 

certainly the member opposite should know that Moose Jaw, 

that certainly car sales and retail sales and hotels and 

restaurants have boomed in many ways in part from that film 

economy. To drive away that economy at a time where we have 

some strength in our resource economy and to choose to kill 

that sort of investment, drive away that investment, those 

workers, is purely ideological, doesn’t reflect common sense. 

It’s certainly not in the best interests of constituents of Moose 

Jaw or the people of this province. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question for the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. And I 

want to quote here, Mr. Speaker. Quote: 

 

Those changes that have, I think, set the table for the feast 

that we’re grateful for today, those changes were made by 

the government of Mr. Calvert, the hon. member that we 

salute today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does that member agree with that statement? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — I’m not sure I understood that statement you 

made, but as far as this government goes, we have a balanced 

budget. And there’s not much I can say to that question because 

I don’t remember hearing that statement. I personally know that 

we do have a balanced budget, and I think if you look at those 

charts and read them a little bit better, you’ll understand what 

they’re actually saying. 

 

We are the only province in Canada to have a balanced budget. 

And if you watched channels like the SUN, you’ll understand 

that they talk about Saskatchewan as being the place to be now, 

not in other provinces, but Saskatchewan is the place to be 

because we have a balanced budget and we have created 

numerous, numerous, thousands of jobs. We have over 60,000 

people have moved to this province. Why? Because it’s the 

place to be. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. To the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana: for 16 years the NDP clawed back 

millions from towns, villages, and RMs. And they cancelled the 

GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] program. The member 

from Lakeview stated on March 22nd, quote: “One of the things 

they could have done is look at some of the initiatives around 

agriculture and municipalities.” Why does the NDP not support 

adequate funding for municipalities and agriculture especially 

after 16 years of neglect and underfunding by the former NDP 

government? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 

what we’re talking about here is whether or not this is a 

balanced budget. That’s the motion that’s before us. And of 

course my colleague from Athabasca showed how the debt is 

projected to increase over the next few years, and my colleague 

from Regina Rosemont has indicated numerous times that this 

is not a balanced budget at all. And certainly our Provincial 

Auditor is suggesting that the accounting method that’s being 

used is flawed and we’re not in sync with the rest of Canada. 

 

So until we get that straight, I don’t think there’s any point 

listening to much more from that side until they get their 

finances in order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess I want 

to be more specific to the member and a good, young, new 

member from Walsh Acres. But again it goes directly to this 

point of driving the expenditure of millions of dollars to 

increase the number of politicians in this province. How does 

this serve the best interest of his constituents? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate getting to ask, 

having another question asked of me by the member opposite. 

And I thank you; he’s a good, young member too. He has a few 

things to learn as well, and one might be to how to get a 

campaign platform in place that doesn’t drive a province into 

debt by $5 billion. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I think he’s a nice, young guy. And I 

think that if he does a little more work and does a little more 

work on his financial background, I think he’ll realize that 

people don’t want to have to be paying debt off into the future 

because of unsustainable promises and trying to get votes with 

their own money. And I think that the longer that he is able to 

be in this Chamber, I think with a little more experience, he’ll 

get . . . And I’m learning as well, Mr. Speaker. And I think I 

look forward to us being in this Chamber together for a long, 

long time — me on this side, him on that side. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] . . . answer 

that question, and it was very nice of him to ask it to me. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time has expired for the 75-minute 

debate. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS‟ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 601 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 601 — The Jimmy’s Law 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s with a certain sense of solemnity that I rise to talk about this 

private members’ Bill here today. I don’t know if you want to 

weigh in on this conversation that’s going back and forth across 

the floor, Mr. . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order, order. There are 

conversations taking place across the way, and I am having 

difficulty hearing the member from Regina Elphinstone. I 

recognize the member from Regina Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am rising 

today to talk about Jimmy’s Law, and the private members’ Bill 

that has been brought forward by the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. But this of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Perhaps if members want to participate in the debate, they 

could, you know, there are turns for folks to get up and 

participate in this debate. 

 

But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that in terms of The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, in terms of why this Bill 

was brought forward, is a situation that faces too many people 

throughout this province in terms of dangerous working 

conditions. And this particular Bill is named for Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who was working alone at a gas 

station in Yorkton on June 20th, 2011 when he was murdered. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of what we see as the 

regulatory regime, the law in other jurisdictions in Canada, 

there is a friend of Jimmy Ray Wiebe who in fact discovered 

the body of Mr. Wiebe when he came by to visit him that 

morning, and that individual was moved to action. And that 

individual is a fellow by the name of Aaron Nagy. Now Aaron 

looked across the country, Mr. Speaker, and had seen 

legislation regulation had been brought forward in British 

Columbia in response to a similar circumstance where an 

individual named Grant was murdered working the late shift, 

working what is commonly referred to as the graveyard shift, 

Mr. Speaker. And that the British Columbia government was 

able to come forward at that time with changes to the legislation 

and to take steps to ensure better safety for those individuals 

that it’s up to them to be working that shift. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in a lot of ways we pay attention to 

occupational health and safety, and I think the fundamental 

lesson at the base of efforts around occupational health and 

safety is that nobody should have to do a job where it’s a 

potential for loss of life or limb. And again no law is fail-safe, 

no law is completely . . . It won’t result in 100 per cent 

elimination of the risk factors that are experienced, but there are 

changes that can be made that make for the situation to be more 

or less dangerous. 

And certainly there are examples brought forward where if 

there are two individuals on the job . . . There’s a very tragic 

circumstance in the community of Kyle in the not-too-distant 

past, Mr. Speaker, where two people being on the job, that 

wasn’t a deterrent. But that, I don’t think is a reason not to 

proceed with this in terms of (a) either calling for barriers or the 

ability of workers to control entry and exit from the building; or 

(b) having that additional staffer alongside during that 

late-night shift. 

 

So I want to talk about what is specifically called for in the Bill. 

And I want to talk a bit about the work that has been done by 

the member from Saskatoon Centre — he’s very passionate 

about this issue, Mr. Speaker — and who has done a lot to 

advance this cause and has done a lot to advance the concerns 

of people that normally aren’t centre stage of the public affairs 

in this province and the people who are in that circumstance 

where they’ve got to work the late shift at various places 

throughout this province and gas stations and convenience 

stores. 

 

And I know that, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure you 

can think of a number of places in your constituency where this 

would apply. And I can certainly think of places in the 

constituency of Regina Elphinstone-Centre where this applies 

as well, be it stores on Dewdney or 5th Avenue or downtown or 

Albert or Broad Street, places where late at night, if you’re 

alone on that job, it can make for that 11 to 6 in the morning 

shift, make those seven hours feel like an awfully long time, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again we’re here today to talk about occupational health 

and safety and putting those safeguards in place for workers to 

ensure that risk factors such as this are mitigated, that we’re 

taking as many steps as possible to improve the chances of 

things going right in the workplace as opposed to things going 

horribly wrong, as was the case with Jimmy Ray Wiebe. 

 

So in the preamble it states that: 

 

WHEREAS Jimmy Ray Wiebe of Yorkton was 

working alone at a gas station on June 20, 2011 when 

he was murdered; 

 

WHEREAS in memory of Jimmy Ray Wiebe, all gas 

station, convenience store and other retail store workers 

working overnight need some form of protection other 

via a fellow co-worker or protected barrier: 

 

THEREFORE HER MAJESTY, by and with the advice 

and consent of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: 

 

Now it goes through the different sort of short title sections, 

Mr. Speaker, but first section, of course, in terms of the 

amendments being proposed to The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act is that they add in section 2, amending: 

 

3 The following clauses are added after clause 2(gg): 

 

“(hh) „late night hours‟ means anytime between 

11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; [and that clause] 

 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2012 

(ii) „late night retail premises‟ means a gas station 

or other retail fueling outlet, convenience store or 

any other retail store where goods are sold directly to 

consumers that is open to the public during late night 

hours.” 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, for myself, you know it depends on 

the night, but there are different places in my constituency I 

know that have taken the steps to put up the barriers, to provide 

those controls. There are also situations where that second 

employee is on staff or is on the shift. And I know, talking to 

different people that have this circumstance, there is a real 

concern. And you know, I thank, I’m very thankful, Mr. 

Speaker, that I have never been held up at the end of a knife or 

at the end of a gun. But I’ve talked to people who have had that 

experience, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the kind of trauma that is 

involved in that for people that have got through it is concern 

enough, Mr. Speaker, let alone the kind of ultimately tragic way 

that the life of Jimmy Ray Wiebe was ended. 

 

So I know that again these are people that are often as not first 

and foremost in terms of the concern of public affairs in this 

province. But they matter, Mr. Speaker. Their concerns matter. 

The unsafe circumstances in which they are doing their job 

should be a concern for this House. 

 

And I’m not saying that it isn’t, but I’m saying that this is one 

set of proposals that is worth consideration, that has been 

brought in for other jurisdictions. And is this the final word on 

making the employment circumstances safe 100 per cent of the 

time and completely foolproof for employees across 

Saskatchewan? It’s not. But is this something that has had a 

beneficial effect and has increased the odds for things to go 

right in workplaces on that late night shift? It definitely is, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think when you’ve had the chance to talk to people that 

have been in this circumstance . . . And I know that my 

colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, not just being 

passionate about this issue but having gone to talk to people in 

the communities of Moose Jaw, in North Battleford, I believe, 

Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and with plans . . . and having started 

in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, the concerns that he has given voice 

to for those individuals I think is admirable. And I think that we 

would do well to listen to the concerns that are being given 

voice to by the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

And I think we’d also do well to know that when many of us 

. . . Session is a busy time, and, you know, there’s all the 

demands on the day and the night that we experience. That 

when many of us were, you know, tucking into bed and looking 

to get a full night’s sleep before we got back to the legislature 

and did this all again — I’m sure that the Deputy Speaker, his 

day probably starts about 5:30 when he goes for a run around 

the lake or something like that and getting ready for the day — 

but when many of us were tucking into sleep to get ready to get 

the sleep for the, get the rest for day to come, the member from 

Saskatoon Centre has been out talking to those late-night 

workers and those people who are out there on the graveyard 

shift. 

 

And again the word that he comes back with is one of 

appreciation for this issue being raised in the legislature, in the 

people’s legislature, Mr. Speaker. He comes back with the 

interest that they have on the progress of measures that can 

improve their circumstance. And it comes back with the 

concern that they have, not just for themselves but for others. 

 

And he comes back with some pretty, pretty, in some cases, 

shocking stories, Mr. Speaker, about . . . I know one place, one 

establishment in particular in Saskatoon Centre, which is not 

dissimilar to Regina Elphinstone-Centre, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of places where there’s a fair amount of late-night traffic and 

people working that late-night shift, talking to individuals 

where having been through the store after a robbery has 

occurred late at night and again not . . . This isn’t some kid 

sticking a bag of chips in their jacket, Mr. Speaker. It’s people 

pointing various sorts of firearms, various sorts of shotguns. 

 

I’ve never had a gun pulled on me, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been very 

fortunate in that regard. But again I’ve talked to people who 

have had that experience and how traumatic that is. And I think 

of those people when I talk to my friend and colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre about just how traumatic that is for people 

that have been put through that. And then in one circumstance, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, where just very recently people that the 

member from Saskatoon Centre had been talking with and 

giving attention to their situation had not just been held up the 

one time but were held up again. And if you can imagine the 

kind of frustration and trauma and fear and anger that is visited 

upon a person that is held up at the point of a gun or a knife, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty frustrating for those individuals. 

 

And again one thing that comes back in a uniform way, Mr. 

Speaker, is appreciation for this issue being given voice in the 

legislature and definite interest in the progress of this Bill and 

support for the fact that this is something that we can do to 

make those odds just a bit better for people across this province 

that have to work the late-night shift to pay their bills and to 

keep bread on the table, Mr. Speaker, and a roof over their 

head. 

 

So the other thing that comes back, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

interesting detail that in many workplaces they’re ahead of the 

legislature. They have already taken steps that resonate with the 

measures prescribed in this suggested piece of legislation. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this is common sense in so many different 

ways. And it’s not being put in place because it’s a 100 per cent 

guarantee that nothing will happen, but it’s something that 

improves the safety and security of people working the 

late-night shift. 

 

The problem is, Mr. Speaker, if it was 100 per cent coverage, 

that would be one thing, but that is not the case. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, I think what we do as legislators in this place, there 

are things where we can point the way forward to where there 

are best practices or better practices to be brought to bear. I 

think it’s incumbent upon us as legislators to give those 

proposals fair hearing. And if it’s worked in other jurisdictions, 

and if it’s working in situations right here in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, then why wouldn’t we proceed with those measures, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And again there’s so many people I know that work that 

late-night shift. You know, I think their level of engagement 

with the political process or with places like the legislature . . . I 



April 26, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

think one other thing that the member from Saskatoon Centre 

has encountered, talking to people on the late-night shift, is 

surprise — surprise that somebody is taking the time and is 

there to say that this is something that should be cared about; 

this is something that should be looked after. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of different reasons why 

people do things in public life, but I know the kind of 

commitment and the kind of passion that the member from 

Saskatoon Centre has brought to this is very much reflective of 

the concerns of his constituents and people that he’s talked to 

that have been brought forward, that have been subjected to the 

kind of things that this legislation seeks to prevent, but also 

responding again to the work of a friend trying to memorialize a 

friend and the way that Aaron Nagy is trying to take the tragic 

circumstance of Jimmy Ray Wiebe’s death on the night of the 

early hours of June 20th, 2011, trying to take that circumstance 

and make something good come from it for people right across 

this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve yet to hear a convincing argument 

why this doesn’t have merit in terms of improving the safety 

and security of people working the late-night shift. If the 

argument is that this doesn’t work in 100 per cent of the 

circumstances, then if that is the bar with which we’ll be 

evaluating legislation across the piece, Mr. Speaker, then I 

think we could close the doors on the legislature and go on our 

way because that kind of a guarantee, Mr. Speaker, is virtually 

impossible to ensure. 

 

But what we can derive from this, Mr. Speaker, is, does this 

improve or does it make worse the safety and security 

circumstance of individuals working that late-night shift? And 

we think that the record and we think that the common sense of 

it shows that the barrier or the controlled access to the exit or 

entry of a building, and that having two people on the shift late 

at night, makes a pretty compelling case, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 

on the reasoned, sort of policy side of this initiative. 

 

But I think we do well again today to remember that when 

people die in the workplace, we should learn what is the lesson 

from that. And we should think about the kind of trauma that 

rolls through friends and the family and the community 

involved when a tragic death like this occurs. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, what we should be doing is looking to 

the example set for us by Aaron Nagy living up to, you know, 

taking the tragedy of his friend’s death and trying to make 

something good come from it for others. We think that that’s an 

example that’s something we should pay close attention to and 

that should inspire us to action. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that others will want to participate in 

this debate and that there has been other commentary provided 

on it but I realize that there are other activities in the House to 

be prepared for, and at this time I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 601. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:34.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1293 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1293 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1293 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1293 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1293 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1293 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1294 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 National Day of Mourning 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1295 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1295 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1295 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1296 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1296 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Day of Mourning 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1296 

 Daffodil Day 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1296 

 Grocery‟s Grand Opening 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1297 

 Students Win at Regional Science Fair 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1297 

 Seed Sorter a Technological Breakthrough 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1297 

 Pie in the Eye Fundraiser 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1297 

 Students Heading to Canada-Wide Science Fair 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Children in Care 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

 Human Rights Commission 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 

 Accommodation for Ministry and Support for Post-Secondary Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1300 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1300 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1301 

 Cellphone Coverage in Northern Saskatchewan 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1302 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1302 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1303 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Balanced Budget 

  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1303, 1313 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1305, 1313 

  Parent ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1307, 1314 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1308, 1313 

  Jurgens ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1310, 1313 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1311, 1313 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1313 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1313 

  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1314 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS‟ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 601 — The Jimmy’s Law Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1315 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


