




















































Hansard: April 16, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 29A  MONDAY, APRIL 16, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1021 

 April 16, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce 16 members of the University of 

Regina cheer team that are here in the House today. The U of R 

[University of Regina] cheer team recently won gold in the 

collegiate coed division at the Sea to Sky International 

Cheerleading and Dance Competition in Vancouver, yet another 

significant achievement for this program and for the University 

of Regina and of course for Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d also like to congratulate Kristen Slinn and Jenna Jelinski on 

their selection to Team Canada’s cheerleading squad. This is 

the first time that students from the University of Regina have 

been selected to the national cheerleading team. Kristen and 

Jenna will be heading to the national training centre in 

Mississauga, Ontario to begin their training for participation in 

the ICU [International Cheer Union] World Championships 

which will be held later this month. Kristen and Jenna, where 

are you? Congratulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the entire cheerleading 

team, accompanied by their coach, Tom Rath, and athletic 

coordinator, John Papandreos, on their accomplishments, and I 

ask the members of the Assembly to join. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to also participate in 

this introduction on behalf of myself and all members of the 

opposition in the legislature, but I think especially you, Mr. 

Speaker, as well, given that we both, Mr. Speaker and I both 

had children playing volleyball at the University of Regina. 

And we were pleased a number of times to have the 

cheerleading squad participate around some of the volleyball 

events. 

 

But I want to specially congratulate you as a team on your gold 

medal in Vancouver, and congratulations to Jenna Jelinski and 

Kristen Slinn for your special role as ambassadors of 

Saskatchewan as you participate on the national team. I also 

want to congratulate Thomas Rath. I had many cases against his 

father in court, and I’m happy to hear that he’s on the basketball 

and volleyball court with his cheerleaders rather than in the 

courts with his father. And most especially I want to say 

welcome to John Papandreos who is the athletic coordinator. 

He’s somebody that I’ve, I guess, known his whole life. And his 

mother worked with me at MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman. His 

father was a very able painter who worked on our house for 

many . . . a long time, and John and his family have been 

important people in our family over the years. So it’s a real 

pleasure to welcome the whole team and bring these special 

greetings, and especially to you, John. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — With leave to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave for an extended 

introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of this House, I would like to introduce 

Reagan Seidler who has been . . . He spent, I guess, since 

January with me. He is one of the interns in the Saskatchewan 

legislative internship program. And we wrap up here together, I 

think, at the end of the week before he moves on to join the 

Sask Party and the governing caucus. But I’d just like to say a 

few things about Reagan. 

 

Reagan is from Regina and he studied at Campbell Collegiate in 

the International Baccalaureate program. Some of his . . . I’d 

have to add too that his CV [curriculum vitae] is more full than 

many people twice his age. He’s really quite a remarkable 

young man. In 2008 he won the provinicials in debating and 

then had the opportunity to represent Saskatchewan at the 

CanWest national public speaking tournament. In that year he 

was also awarded the top Crown Prosecutor Award at the Court 

of Queen’s Bench mock trials. He was the leader of the 

opposition that same year at the model legislature. He was 

recognized by the Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate 

Association as the youth volunteer of that year. 

 

He also has an extensive background in music, Mr. Speaker. 

While attending Campbell, he was the VP [vice-president] of 

the award-winning chamber choir. He was a tenor section leader 

in the beginner concert choir and a member of the school’s jazz 

choir, the Classics. He began teaching piano and voice 

professionally in high school at the Long & McQuade Academy 

of Music. And then he came to Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and 

attended the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], and he 

continued to teach piano . . . or teach as a volunteer for the 

Heart of the City program. He is a U of S student at St. Thomas 

More right now, completing a Bachelor of Arts with a major in 

econ and minor in political studies. And among his academic 

honours, it includes the Roy E. Lloyd Scholarship in 

economics, the Knights of Columbus Leadership Award. He 

has been on the dean’s list and twice published in student liberal 

arts journal In Media Res. 

 

He’s also been involved in student politics, Mr. Speaker. He 

recently finished a term as the president of the St. Thomas More 

Students’ Union where he enacted widespread change including 

a constitutional division of powers and the development of the 

student union’s first strategic plan. 

 

For me, my experience with Reagan has been, as my intern he’s 

. . . I was new to having an intern. There has been never an 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

opportunity in my life where I’ve had a chance to have a mentee 

or an intern and so I wasn’t quite sure how this was all going to 

work. So my goal was to help him understand Saskatoon 

Riversdale and some of the challenges our community faces — 

and many communities in Saskatchewan — but also to see 

some of the strengths that many community organizations and 

individuals have. 

 

And so Reagan’s put up with me and we’ve talked about 

everything and everything, and he’s tackled every task, whether 

it’s been helping make bannock and soup at St. Mary School or 

attending meetings, or actually last week we had an opportunity 

to do a ride-along with the Saskatoon Fire and Protective 

Services. 

 

Reagan sees absolutely everything as a learning opportunity, 

and the good thing for Reagan, he’s very able to change gears 

quickly. So I might have had him on one task one minute and 

the next moment we’re on to something else, and that’s the 

nature of the job. And he was very willing and eager to go with 

the flow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the one thing I have to confess: I’m not really a linear 

thinker. I tend to be a bit all over the map. But Reagan was 

always eager and willing to put up with me being all over the 

place and eventually getting to the place where we needed to be. 

So I will really miss Reagan and I know the Sask Party member 

who will have the opportunity to work with Reagan will fully 

enjoy their time, his time with Reagan in the next few months. 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome Mr. 

Reagan Seidler to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. 

 

We know that there are positive stats that show convenience 

store and gas station robberies are down by a third since 1999, 

largely due to increased safety practices including two people 

working together on late-night shifts. And other provinces such 

as British Columbia have brought in several safety precautions, 

including working behind protective barriers like locked doors 

and protective glass. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

pleased to stand up and present a petition today. Mr. Speaker, 

the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to recognize that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve the very best in protection services 

as it relates to forest fire policy; and in so doing cause the 

provincial government to immediately implement a full 

review of the Saskatchewan wildfire management policy, 

as it has been years since this program was last assessed. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that presented this petition are 

from La Ronge and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to present a 

petition to this legislature about stopping the increase of the 

number of politicians in Saskatchewan and making sure that 

young people are included when constituency boundaries are 

created. So the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to not increase the number of politicians in 

the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly and to continue 

including those individuals under the age of 18 in the 

determination of constituency boundaries. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this is signed by people from Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to education in our province. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes; 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by good folks of Weyburn, 

Kisbey, and Regina. I so submit. 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of seniors in the province who are 

calling on the Sask Party government to support the 

Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

2012 Paragon Awards 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

April 5th I had the honour of attending the 13th annual Regina 

& District Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards. It was a 

fantastic evening to celebrate greatness and achievement in our 

business community. 

 

This year the 2012 Business of the Year was awarded to a 

business located in the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley. The 2012 Business of the Year is Brandt Industries. 

Now we should not be surprised by Brandt’s achievement at the 

Paragon Awards. It was only last December that Brandt 

achieved a milestone of $1 billion in annual revenue. This is an 

accomplishment rarely achieved by Canadian companies. 

 

Brandt Industries is among an elite group of platinum members 

of Canada’s 50 Best Managed Companies program. Brandt 

Industries has continued to grow and move forward in global 

economic hard times. Brandt is one of Canada’s largest 

privately owned companies under the leadership of Mr. Gavin 

Semple. They have become a global industry leader. Companies 

like these will assist our government in keeping the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

I would ask all members to join with me to congratulate all the 

Paragon Award winners. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

Hampton Village Easter Extravaganza 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday my daughter and I 

had the pleasure of attending the Hampton Village Easter 

Extravaganza, which was organized by the Hampton Village 

Community Association in my constituency. It was great to see 

hundreds of community members out at the event, enjoying the 

pancake breakfast, the Easter egg hunt, and a whole range of 

children’s activities. I want to congratulate the community 

association on organizing such a successful event and thank 

them for all the work they do to bring community members 

together and to advocate for their community. 

 

As all members of this Assembly will know, I have been 

continually pushing for a school to be built in this rapidly 

growing community so that the children of Hampton Village 

can go to school in their own community rather than going to 

already packed schools in other neighbourhoods. Judging from 

the number of babies and young children at Saturday’s event, 

the need for a school in this community is continuing to grow 

substantially. All that is needed to proceed with a school is for 

the Sask Party government to commit the necessary resources. 

So once again I’m calling on the government to do just that. 

And hopefully the Easter Extravaganza can soon be held at the 

Hampton Village school instead of the Dundonald School. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

New Moose Jaw Hospital 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Friday I, along with the member for Moose Jaw North and the 

Minister of Health, had the privilege of attending the official 

unveiling of the location of the new Moose Jaw hospital. 

 

The new $100 million facility will be located along the 

Trans-Canada Highway in Moose Jaw’s north end, next to the 

Western Development Museum. The announcement of the 

location for the new hospital moves the project one step, one 

more step towards a new state-of-the-art facility to serve the 

health needs of Moose Jaw and the surrounding area. 

 

This new facility will have 74 beds and 58 flexible spaces for 

procedures. It will use lean methodology and a cellular design 

which allows for a very flexible use of space. The design and 

project management approach of the new hospital is aimed at 

providing a patient-first facility with the space being easily 

converted to accommodate patients’ complex needs and 

minimize the need to move patients from place to place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our health system is undergoing a profound 

transformation, involving all of our health partners. Along with 

the strong support of our government, the leaders in 

Saskatchewan’s health system are making improvements in 

how health services are delivered to better serve patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the city of Moose Jaw and the Five Hills Health 

Region for their tremendous work on making the new Moose 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

Jaw hospital a reality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Ehrlo Outdoor Hockey League 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, although this winter’s 

weather was far from traditional, I’m pleased to announce that 

the great Canadian tradition of outdoor hockey was very much 

alive in our city this past season. The Outdoor Hockey League, 

also known as the OHL, is a very successful program run by 

Ehrlo Sport Venture. This program removes barriers to hockey 

for children by providing it at no cost and at local rinks. I’ve 

had the pleasure of being a coach and I’ve witnessed first-hand 

the value of accessible sport to children. 

 

This year over 250 children participated in the OHL, and not 

only in Regina as the program has grown to include Saskatoon 

and Prince Albert as well. In Regina Rosemont, I want to 

acknowledge the devoted volunteer coaches who stepped up 

this year, specifically Josiah Jordan, head coach, as well as 

Shannon Cattell, Hailey McCrystal, Stephen Kenney, Mark 

Piccair, and Mike Kalika. 

 

It was a fantastic season, concluding with a wrap-up tournament 

where fun was had by all. I want to thank the league director, 

Laura Logan, Ehrlo Sport Venture, and its donors — RBC 

[Royal Bank of Canada] and KidSport. Together we look 

forward to next year when the league celebrates its 20th season 

supporting children and youth in our province. I ask all 

members of this Assembly to join with me to recognize and to 

thank all that make the Outdoor Hockey League such a 

meaningful program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

TheatreFest in Yorkton 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saturday night I 

had the pleasure of attending, along with my wife, the 78th 

annual TheatreFest celebration hosted this year in Yorkton by 

the Yorkton Paper Bag Players. Seventy-eight years, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s an amazing achievement. It’s an example of 

commitment, determination, and the Saskatchewan spirit. 

 

Yorkton is incredibly rich in culture, making it and the Sacred 

Heart High School theatre the perfect stage for this year’s 

events. It was great to see the passion that the organizers, 

volunteers, theatre groups, and audiences have for 

community-based theatre. Mr. Speaker, community-based 

theatre brings culture into our lives and exposure to the arts. 

This contributes to making Saskatchewan a better place to live. 

 

Cultural events bring revenue into our communities, and the 

economic spinoffs support local businesses, organizations, and 

community projects. Participation in cultural activities inspires 

community involvement and pride. It shapes our identity and 

the way others see Saskatchewan. Our government is 

committed to fostering artistic excellence, creative expression, 

and access to arts for all people in Saskatchewan. I would like 

members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating all the 

groups and individuals who not only won, but were nominated 

for awards at Saturday’s TheatreFest 2012. It’s an incredible 

achievement and shows the commitment, determination, and 

talent of community theatre. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Recognition of Police Services in Regina 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today and recognize the great service provided by the members 

of our Regina Police Service. I had recently had the privilege of 

joining a city of Regina police officer on a ride-long. We left 

the city police station at 4 p.m. on Friday, March 30th, and our 

shift concluded at 4 a.m. the following morning. Accompanying 

the officers gave me the opportunity to not only experience 

what it is like to carry out the task of a police officer, but this 

first-hand experience showed me the types of struggles and 

difficult scenarios our police and city citizens face every day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we responded to several calls that showed me the 

dangerous side of their duties, from a possible gun sighting to a 

large party where several fights broke out and local residents 

called in with concerns. I was in awe with the professionalism 

and calmness under fire that our local officers showed when 

handling these calls. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the near fatal stabbing late Sunday night of a 

Toronto city police officer demonstrates the risk that officers 

undertake every time they put on their uniforms and badges and 

help to serve the public. I would encourage all members of this 

Assembly to join me in applauding the great work of our police 

forces nationwide and especially here at home, and thank the 

officer who provided me with a very insightful ride-along 

experience. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Remembering Archbishop Michael Bzdel 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as we commenced our Easter break last week, the sad news 

arrived of the passing of Archbishop Michael Bzdel, Ukrainian 

Catholic Archbishop Emeritus of Winnipeg and Metropolitan 

for Ukrainian Catholics in Canada. 

 

Father Michael was born in Wishart, Saskatchewan and was the 

11th child of 14 children of the late Theodore and Eudokia 

Bzdel. Following his primary schooling in Wishart, he attended 

St. Vladimir’s College in Roblin for his secondary education. 

Following further studies, he was ordained to the priesthood on 

July 7th, 1954, at St. Mary’s Church, Yorkton, by Bishop 

Andrew Roborecky. His pastoral ministry would include the 

parishes of Yorkton, Ituna, Roblin, Winnipeg, Saskatoon, and 

finally back to Yorkton in the mid-1980s. 

 

On March 9th, 1993, Father Michael was ordained as 

Archbishop of Winnipeg and Metropolitan of Ukrainian 

Catholics in Canada, a position he held until his retirement in 

January 2006. As Metropolitan, he was a member of the 

Permanent Council of the Canadian Conference of Catholic 

Bishops, served on various CCCB committees and participated 

in the ninth Ordinary Papal Synod of Bishops in Rome. 

 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

On behalf of my wife, Gail, my colleagues in the Government 

of Saskatchewan, and my colleagues here in the Chamber, I 

extend our sincere condolences to his family, friends, and the 

Ukrainian Catholic Church of Canada on the passing of this 

remarkable man of God. At this time of Pascha, may the 

promise of the risen Christ be a comfort to all who grieve. 

Memory eternal. 

 

[The hon. member spoke a phrase in Ukrainian.] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Electoral Representation 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and his caucus have 

had time now after they’ve returned from Easter break, and 

during this time they had a chance to listen to their constituents 

talk about spending millions of dollars to add three more 

politicians to this legislature. Our caucus heard from people 

who thought the government shouldn’t be forcing seniors to 

spend more money on health care just so the Premier could add 

more politicians. 

 

Can the Premier tell us if he or any of the government MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] heard from anyone, 

other than themselves, who said it is better to spend millions on 

more politicians rather than on seniors and families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The goal of 

the redistribution exercise, and it’s mandated in our legislation, 

is to ensure that we have as close to equal number of 

constituents and voters in our constituencies as possible. We’ve 

had a variety of numbers that we have had over the past four . . . 

number of people that we’ve had in the legislature. In the 1975 

and ’78 elections, we had 61 MLAs. In 1982 it was 64. In ’86 it 

was 66. So it has gone up and it has gone down. 

 

We think this is a fair, reasonable, and proportionate approach 

to this. There are now at the present time some significant 

variations between the constituencies in our province. We are 

going to go through the process to try and equalize this. We 

have a boundaries commission process that is in the early 

stages, and we look forward to that process to ensure that we 

are able to rebalance and equalize and do what is necessary to 

give the voters an ultimately very democratic process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I saw the Premier shaking 

his head no, that he hadn’t heard from anybody, even though 

the minister didn’t answer my question. 

 

So even though we were away from this building, the issue was 

still being talked about in the media. One member of the press 

gallery called the plan to add three more MLAs the “stupidest” 

decision the Sask Party government has made. In fact the only 

voice in the paper last week supporting the idea of adding three 

MLAs was that of the member from Cypress Hills who wrote a 

letter titled “More MLAs Needed.” That’s not what 

Saskatchewan people are saying. Why is this Premier pushing 

forward on spending millions for more MLAs if there’s no 

support for it outside of his own office? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we take strong exception 

to the issue of the additional cost. There’s an additional cost of 

$225,000 per MLA. However, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

government that has taken great steps to reduce costs already on 

the cost of government. We have reduced the cost of 

communications by $5 million per year, over three and a half 

million dollars per year on cabinet minister travel. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a far cry from the amount of money that was spent by the 

members opposite when they were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that takes costs and 

expenditures very seriously. We want to ensure that we will 

deliver to the voters of this province good value for the money 

that is spent on MLAs. We want our MLAs to be accessible to 

the members of their constituency and so that they do not have 

to travel excessive distances. We know that in the far North we 

make a statutory exception so that the two members from the 

far North do not have to have members that travel too far. We 

will continue to follow that practice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — The Premier has even admitted that instead of 

hearing that people want more politicians, his own supporters 

have said that they are against it. Even one of his own ministers, 

the Minister of Municipal Affairs, said last week in committee 

“We never campaigned on more MLAs. We never talked about 

that.” 

 

Will the Premier admit that this is an unnecessary expense that 

no one wants and immediately revoke the plan to add more 

politicians? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, at the time of the last 

election, the constituency of Cumberland had 8,726 eligible 

voters. The constituency of Athabasca had 6,511, in spite of the 

fact that the member from Athabasca wanted one day to 

increase the number and was very supportive of that. My own 

constituency of Saskatoon Southeast had at the last election 

16,343 voters. 

 

I want to be able to look those people in the eye at the time of 

the next election and say to them, I wanted to ensure that I took 

every step to see that your vote counted just as much for 

somebody in the North, somebody else elsewhere in the 

province, and to do what is right to ensure that we have a 

democratic and fair process. Saskatoon Centre in the city of 

Saskatoon — and I see the member over there nodding — had 

just over 7,000 voters. His voters are not worth twice as much 

as the voters of Saskatoon Southeast, Mr. Speaker. 

 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Minimum Wage Rate 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last week 

the Minister of Justice said the following, and I quote, “The cost 

of everything has gone up. Housing, fuel, everything else has 

gone up in the last little while.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, people receiving the minimum wage also 

have to deal with those cost-of-living increases, but for them the 

minimum wage is not going up at all. To the Minister of Justice: 

can he have a talk with the Minister of Labour about the 

importance of cost-of-living increases for minimum wage 

workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. And when the Minister of Justice and the Minister of 

Labour do have a conversation, I can assure you it’s a very 

intellectual, fulfilling conversation and usually not a great deal 

of argument. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell the member opposite that we 

have, over the term of our government in the last term, 

increased minimum wage several times. It has gone up far more 

on a percentage basis during the time of government of the 

Saskatchewan Party than it did under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. A year ago we increased the minimum wage 

to $9.50 an hour and, Mr. Speaker, the Minimum Wage Board 

continues to sit and may well be making a recommendation 

again in the future. It has, during the term of our government, 

gone up well in excess of the cost of living, and we will ensure 

to take every step to ensure that the minimum wage earners, or 

lower income earners, take every step . . . We have removed 

over 100,000 people from the tax roles by virtue of changing 

the tax laws in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well I’m glad the ministers do have these 

conversations, but they seem to miss the key point, the 

cost-of-living increases. And that’s what the report a year ago, a 

year ago, suggested. Its number one recommendation was that 

minimum wage rate be tied to the consumer price index. At the 

time the minister said the government was interested in 

indexing the minimum wage to the CPI [consumer price index] 

and would consider the board’s recommendation. It’s been now 

over a year and this government still has not followed through 

on the report. Why is this minister refusing to implement the 

key recommendation of the report and tie minimum wage to the 

inflation rate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in January of 2012 the 

average weekly earnings were $907.44, the highest earnings on 

record. They’re up 2.7 per cent from a year ago. Mr. Speaker, 

we have the second lowest number of employment insurance 

claimants on a per capita basis at 1.2 per cent. We have done an 

incredible amount, Mr. Speaker, for low-income Saskatchewan 

residents. We have taken 114,000 people off of the tax rolls. 

We have increased minimum wage by a significant amount, Mr. 

Speaker. We will continue with that process. We will continue 

with the recommendations. 

 

At the present time, Mr. Speaker, the minimum wage in our 

province is going up faster than the average cost of living. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with the Minimum 

Wage Board, and we will continue to ensure that the 

low-income workers in our province are well cared for. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the record of the 

Saskatchewan Party government. It has got the third lowest 

minimum wage of anywhere in Canada. 

 

Now we know indexing the minimum wage would not 

skyrocket our rate. In fact if Saskatchewan did increase the 

wage by 2.8 per cent, the current CPI, it would still be lower 

than most provinces, at nine seventy-seven. Indexing allows 

people making minimum wage to at least keep up with the 

rising costs of food and transportation. Will this minister now 

pledge this session to either introduce new legislation or change 

the regulations to annually index the minimum wage to CPI? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there’s nine people left 

over there of a government that had 16 years to index minimum 

wage and did not do it, did not look at it, did not talk about it. 

Mr. Speaker, under this government, minimum wage has gone 

up over 20 per cent during the first four years of our 

government. And this government is looking at it again because 

we want to ensure that low-income people in our province get 

the respect and the dignity that they are entitled to. 

 

We’ve doubled the low-income tax credit. We’ve removed 

114,000 people. We’ve increased funding for housing programs 

for 45 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased shelter rates. 

We’ve increased the number of affordable housing units. We’ve 

taken a great deal of steps to ensure that working people at the 

lower end of the income scale are well-treated and get 

adequately compensated for the work and the contributions that 

they make to our economy, Mr. Speaker — a lot better than the 

members over there did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Plans for Highways Ministry 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Sixteen 

years in power, 14 of those years cleaning up a mess, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year on May 3rd, 2011 in the highways 

committee, questions were specifically asked about phasing out 

of engineering services within Highways. When asked about 

phasing out engineering staffing within the ministry, the 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

minister responded with a simple no. We now know that is not 

the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why was your answer contrary to reports in the 

news last week regarding the further privatization of 

Saskatchewan’s Highways Department and its work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

core services in the Ministry of Highways, the people you saw 

pothole filling last summer, you’ll see pothole filling this 

coming summer. The people that you saw just this past winter 

plowing snow will be plowing snow next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as far as engineering services, for many years 

construction has been done, the engineering part of construction 

has been contracted out, including by the members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker. The big difference, Mr. Speaker, between this 

government and the members opposite when they were in 

government, Mr. Speaker, is that now we’re actually doing road 

construction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the members opposite, people were used to 

slowing down for potholes. There’s still a lot of work to do, Mr. 

Speaker, but under this government people are also getting used 

to slowing down for construction signs, orange zones, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, since taking office this 

government has increasingly contracted out highways 

engineering work, a move that will result in eventual closure of 

labs here in the city and also in Saskatoon. These two labs 

employed a total of 35 full-time design engineers in 2007. In 

2012 that number is expected to be down to 15, Mr. Speaker. 

Departmental representatives have said publicly that highways 

lab closures are not a possibility, Mr. Speaker; instead, they are 

a certainty. 

 

Again, will the minister be straight with the people of 

Saskatchewan? Does the government plan to close the Regina 

and Saskatoon highway labs and continue the privatization 

agenda that affects Saskatchewan highways? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, in many cases the lab work 

that’s done by engineers during construction has been done also 

by consultants who have lab trailers on sites. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to make sure that we’re not duplicating work. In 

many of those instances, if the consultants are already doing lab 

work, we won’t continue. In any case, whether it’s lab 

employees or consulting engineers, Mr. Speaker, when any 

positions that haven’t been refilled, it’s all been by attrition. Mr. 

Speaker, we have compassion for our employees. As much as 

possible, we’ll continue to do it that way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the big difference again between the members 

opposite and this government is the amount of money that 

we’ve actually spent on road construction. Mr. Speaker, when 

we campaigned in 2007 and we said we’d spend $1.8 billion on 

highway work, those members opposite, including the member 

opposite asking the question, laughed at that. We far exceeded 

that commitment, Mr. Speaker. Highways are a priority and 

they’ll continue to be a priority. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says one thing but 

the government actions are another. He needs to focus on the 

question. Mr. Speaker, a history lesson reminds us, cuts made 

by the previous Conservative government in 1983 terminated 

157 workers from Highways. The following year another 237 

more were fired. When the Saskatchewan Party government 

took office in 2007, provincial in-house design, construction 

and lab services involved 238 full-time equivalent jobs, Mr. 

Speaker. The plan for 2012 is to have 112 FTEs [full-time 

equivalent] in these same areas, which is a reduction of 120 

jobs within the Department of Highways. 

 

Will the minister set aside his ideology and instead of spending 

the same or more money privatizing highway jobs, will he use 

common sense to maintain the existing highways labour force 

and represent the people of Saskatchewan fairly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, this government is using 

common sense by making highways a priority for this 

government, something that those members opposite never did. 

Mr. Speaker, I was with the Premier during the campaign last 

fall in Yorkton when we committed to spending $2.2 billion on 

highways over the next four years. Mr. Speaker, I think that 

shows our commitment and how important highways are to this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I noticed the member opposite is reading from the 

story that would be from the Leader Post last week, front page 

story about this issue. But what he’s neglected to read, Mr. 

Speaker, is that it also said this whole issue of using consulting 

engineers more started in 1997 under the Roy Romanow NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the minister loves to point 

towards the government spending on the highways, but more 

money does not necessarily mean improved safety or quality of 

our highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province will eventually be 

forced, we believe, to pay more through their taxes for roads 

which will be less safer, and of course more difficult to ensure 

quality control when you don’t have staff to ensure that. The 

costs and other impacts of outsourcing this work to external 

contractors are escalating, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Has the minister done a thorough investigation to determine 

whether his quest, their quest for privatization is worth the extra 

costs the government will be paying for this privatization? If the 

minister has not done an investigation, is he prepared to do that 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this government’s always looking for efficiencies. In Highways 

we’re always looking for more efficient ways to do things. Mr. 

Speaker, as far as the engineering side of it, using consultants 

has shown to be an efficient use. We’re using them as needed. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s part of an overall growing engineering 

sector in this province. APEGS [Association of Professional 

Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan], the Association 

of Professional Engineers, says that their membership has 

skyrocketed during the last few years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, highways is a priority. We’re always looking for 

ways to be efficient. And, Mr. Speaker, unlike the members 

opposite, highways will continue to be a priority for this 

government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that the 

people of Saskatchewan know that this government has really 

drastically cut a lot of Highways positions. And I go back to the 

earlier statement of having 238 full-time equivalent jobs in this 

particular department. And, Mr. Speaker, for 2012 there’s going 

to be a reduction of 120 jobs. 

 

No question, Mr. Speaker, that we’re asking the question, based 

on the value for dollars, will the minister commit today to ask in 

doing a provincial audit to ensure that his quest for privatization 

is going to be a lot more money, a lot more cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan and that’s why he’s prepared not to do it. Again I 

ask the minister today: will you do a value for money audit 

versus your privatization agenda versus the great work that’s 

being done by the Highways workers throughout the province 

of Saskatchewan? Will the minister commit to that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of things 

wrong with the member’s opposite line of questioning. First of 

all, his comments about consulting engineers: is he suggesting 

that private consulting engineers somehow are not safe, that 

they don’t somehow do an appropriate job? That’s what he’s 

alluding to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as far as value for money, Mr. Speaker, every day 

in Highways we look for more efficient ways of doing things. 

Mr. Speaker, unlike when the members opposite were in power, 

there is a vibrant, growing engineering sector in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re supporting that. We’re going to continue to 

use them as appropriate. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, where 

it’s appropriate, there will be engineers in the ministry for 

oversight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue our good work on highways. 

We’ve come a long way. We’ve got a lot of work left to do. 

But, Mr. Speaker, people of this province are not going to go 

back to those days. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Community Pastures 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the effects of the federal budget 

cuts are hitting Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector hard. There 

could be up to 300 job losses in Saskatchewan as a result of the 

dismantling of the community pastures. This program, 

according to a 2006 study, provides a benefit of $37 million to 

the public.  

 

It’s now been three weeks since the federal budget. My question 

to the minister: can he tell Saskatchewan producers how many 

jobs will be lost in the agriculture sector, what the local 

economic impacts will be, and what other programs will be 

affected? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to thank the member for a question. Mr. Speaker, as the 

member knows and as the federal budget put out, that there will 

be a number of community pastures — I believe 60 community 

pastures that were under federal jurisdiction — that will be 

passed over to the province. What I can commit to today, that in 

my conversations with the federal minister this morning, is that 

this will be done. This year there will be no effect to the 

community pastures across the province. Next year there will be 

five community pastures that will be closed down and 

transitioned to the province, and in 2014 another five, and then 

over the five-year period, the entire project will happen. This is 

also, by the way, Mr. Speaker, happening in the province of 

Manitoba. 

 

What we have committed to with the federal minister is to work 

with the patrons right across the province of Saskatchewan and 

ranchers and farmers right across the province to make this 

transition as smooth as possible and find ways that producers 

can actually either have ownership or leases through this land 

and still continue to utilize it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand from 

officials at the Department of Agriculture that already over 400 

employees in the program have received notices that their 

positions are affected. So that’s quite a large number of 

employees that are already being impacted by this decision. 

 

As the minister indicated, there are more than 60 federal 

community pastures. And as a result of the termination of this 

program, the pastures will be turned back to the province. This 

will almost double the number of community pastures currently 

operated by the province. The minister said publicly he’s unsure 

of whether the province would continue to operate the pastures 

or sell some of them. And he does know that once they revert, it 

will nearly double his ministry’s workload. His own director 

has told the media that he is in panic mode. 

 

Many cattle producers use community pastures because they 

don’t have enough pasture of their own. The pastures are a 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

critical part of their economic success. Around 3,100 producers 

use the pastures, and they graze over 220,000 head of livestock 

and they use over 300 bulls in the pasture breeding program. To 

the minister: if the government sells some of these pastures to 

private individuals, what is the plan to ensure that all producers 

that were accessing community pasture lands will still have a 

place to pasture their cattle? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I can assure the member that we have also spoken to 

the stock growers and the Saskatchewan cattle association and 

producers right across this province, but especially to the 

patrons that utilize the community pastures. Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think this is new to the patrons out there. I think they had 

a feeling for the last year or so that these pastures may be 

passed on to them from the federal government. I think the 

concern is that the land is still utilized for pastures by those 

patrons, and they will be the first to have the opportunity to 

keep those pastures and continue. 

 

I think we have an opportunity right now with the livestock 

sector doing so well in the province of Saskatchewan, and for 

that matter right across Western Canada, that it’s an opportune 

time for the producers to either purchase this land or lease this 

land. But I think for many of the producers out there, the thing 

is that they want to be involved in the process and have the 

opportunity to continue to utilize this land while at the same 

time increasing the number of cattle that we raise in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It does give me some 

optimism that the minister’s prepared to speak with producers 

because I think that’s critical to this process. 

 

The establishment of the community pasture program was to 

rehabilitate lands. They were damaged by farming practices and 

the severe drought of the 1930s. These pastures are some of the 

largest chunks of native prairie left in the world, containing 

some of our most sensitive habitat. We can all agree that 

ranchers are some of the most conscientious stewards of that 

land. However this government does not have a strong track 

record of protecting marginal lands. Indeed it was only two 

years ago the Sask Party government introduced legislation to 

remove 3.5 million acres of Crown lands from wildlife habitat 

protection. 

 

My question to the minister: what assurances can he give that if 

the pastures are sold, these environmentally sensitive lands will 

be protected, the natural habitat will remain, and that the 

taxpayers’ investment in these marginal lands will not be 

wasted? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member had 

been listening closely, my comment or my answer was that the 

patrons will have first chance at this land. That is the same 

patrons that have been farming and leasing this land probably 

for the last 100 years and done a tremendous job of doing it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I’ll tell you what we will not do at the 

first cloud that comes in the sky as the pasture is coming from 

the federal government, as the Leader of the Opposition had 

made the comment here when the budget was out, that he would 

head to agriculture and municipal government across this 

province to find money to put into the film industry to replace 

the grant that was ongoing there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we value agriculture high. We know they were 

neglected for 16 years under the previous NDP government. 

And municipalities were in the same situation; the downloading 

went on for 16 years. That has ended under a Sask Party 

government, and that will remain one of our most important 

issues that we have in this province. And dealing with 

producers is another one where we look after the producers that 

have . . . our patrons of the provincial pastures and federal 

pastures. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 39 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

address our government’s ongoing commitment to ensure 

timely and effective regulation of financial services and 

consumer protection for Saskatchewan people. After these 

remarks I will move second reading of Bill No. 40, The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act is designed to provide the means to 

respond quickly and effectively to market demands facing 

regulation of financial services and consumer protection. It will 

do that by continuing the Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission, SFSC, as a Crown corporation to be called the 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan, 

FCAA. We have changed the name in order to give higher 

profile to the consumer affairs responsibility that is exercised by 

the commission. 

 

This Act accomplishes the transition from the SFSC to the 

FCAA in the following ways: (1) it transfers employees from 

SFSC to the proposed new corporation, (2) it authorizes the 

payment of revenues that now are paid to the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission Fund to the new corporation 

and the payment of the expenses of SFSC by the authority, (3) it 

confirms that the pension and other rights of the transferred 

employees will not in any way be diminished. It also gives the 

authority the corporate powers that it will need to manage its 

businesses in the best interests of Saskatchewan consumers of 

financial services and consumer goods and services. Finally, as 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

a transition measure, it continues the appointments of the 

current commission members and executive director into the 

new authority. This will ensure smooth transition to the new 

corporate status. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a Treasury Board Crown corporation draws on the 

business expertise of a board of directors to assess the needs of 

the marketplace without compromising the government’s need 

to manage the province’s financial affairs. The Act will retain 

the powers and responsibilities of SFSC with the addition of 

new responsibilities for The Real Estate Act and The Payday 

Loans Act. In reality those are administered by the commission 

already, with the responsibility for payday loans being assigned 

to the commission by the regulations and The Real Estate Act 

being historically administered through an arrangement with the 

Ministry of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to allow for the creation of the proposed 

corporation, this Bill amends a number of Acts beginning with 

the repeal of The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission 

Act and consequential amendments to 14 other Acts that refer 

either to the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission or 

The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act or both. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act also addresses the transitional 

requirements necessary to ensure that all rights and liabilities of 

the Government of Saskatchewan are transferred to and 

continued under the authority. Mr. Speaker, it is intended that 

this new authority will be in place by October 1st of this year, 

thereby securing the necessary corporate governance and 

funding structure to ensure the continued delivery of 

exceptional regulation of financial services and consumer 

protection in an independent manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also wish to announce to the Assembly the 

receipt of Royal Recommendation for the following Bill. This 

was not received in time to appear on the order paper, therefore 

I beg to inform the Assembly that Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of Bill 

No. 40, The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act, recommends it to the consideration of the 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this Bill, 

The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved Bill No. 39, The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan Act with Royal Recommendation. I 

recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of 

course on behalf of the opposition I want to stand up and give 

the initial few comments on the Bill No. 39 which is primarily 

An Act respecting the Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan and making consequential 

amendments to other Acts, of course, to try and achieve what 

they want to achieve in terms of redesigning this particular Bill 

and the authority attached to it. 

 

What I think is really important, Mr. Speaker, as I listened to 

the minister’s opening comments, there’s very few details as to 

the number of changes being proposed. As he mentioned at the 

outset, there’s four other Acts that are being impacted and some 

of the Acts that are being impacted, some of the portions of that 

Act may be minimal or there may be other major ramifications 

or major challenges that would certainly create some confusion 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think one of the things that we want to do as an opposition 

is that the Bill itself is fairly comprehensive in terms of the 

authority. And it goes down to list a number of authorities, of 

people that are involved, the executive director and of course 

the commission member appointees and so on and so forth. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is that when 

you look at the consumer protection legislation Act that this 

certainly is, I want the people out there in northern 

Saskatchewan, and of course the people throughout the 

province, to know that these Acts certainly have a lot of 

ramifications and they have a lot of different issues that will 

present themselves to the people on an everyday basis. So it’s 

important to pay attention to these Acts and to make sure that 

we are very thorough in terms of the assessing of the Act, that 

we reach out to different folks and groups and organizations 

that may have some impact of this particular Bill or may have 

some concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now as the minister pointed out, the Act itself has a lot of 

ramification but more so on when you talk about consumer 

protection legislation. It involves The Auctioneers Act, it 

certainly talks about The Payday Loans Act, the charitable 

fundraising businesses association Act, The Collection Agents 

Act, The Consumer and Commercial Affairs Act, The Consumer 

Protection Act, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, The Credit 

Reporting Act, The Direct Sellers Act, The Film and Video 

Classification Act, The Funeral and Cremation Services Act, 

The Motor Dealers Act, The Sale of Goods Act, and of course 

The Ticket Sales Act. 

 

These are certainly a lot of some of the consumer Acts that are 

impacted by this particular Bill. And while we don’t certainly 

want to let people out there participate in the process, we want 

to make sure, make sure that they have an opportunity to read 

what the Bill is actually saying and what impact that this has. 

 

And any time we have the Saskatchewan Party looking at trying 

to protect consumers per se, there’s not a lot of people out there 

in Saskatchewan that would automatically give them any kind 

of a passing grade in terms of trying to protect the average 

citizen and certainly the everyday people that this Act is trying 

to purport to protect. 

 

So I think what’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that you have to 

look at what exactly is being proposed by the minister, and 

certainly what is being proposed in this Bill. Now as you look at 

some of the challenges that I see at the outset, Mr. Speaker, is 

that there is not just one particular aspect of the Bill that’s being 

changed. There’s no, there’s certainly the authority’s being 

expanded. It talks about the responsibility of authority. It talks 

about the capacity to contract, it talks about the Crown agent, it 

talks about the chairperson and of course the meetings and the 

committee members and so on and so forth. 

 

So the Bill itself is fairly, fairly thorough in terms of what it 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

wants to touch, what it wants to involve, and how it wants to 

amalgamate other Acts. And that’s what in itself is certainly a 

challenge for any government to try and undertake in the short 

period of time that we have left in this session, and much less 

with the people of Saskatchewan to understand what exactly the 

Bill involves and what the changes entail. 

 

So I think it’s important that people out there that may have 

some concern on a wide variety of the impacts of the different 

Acts that this Bill involves, that they really want to make sure 

that they get involved with looking at this Bill and see how it 

may impact them or certainly involve them in some way, shape, 

or form. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as the minister explained, the Acts that are 

being, some of the changes that he’s proposing in this particular 

Bill, Bill 39, the details are very sketchy, but the Bill itself is 

fairly lengthy. We’re looking at a number of pages here that we 

have to certainly make time. There’s 26 pages in all. But we’ve 

got to see what other Bills are being brought into this particular 

Act. 

 

And the minister alluded again, as I mentioned at the outset, 

there’s 14 other Acts that are impacted. We need to make sure 

that those 14 other Acts that are affected or impacted aren’t 

changed in their intent as well as a result of this particular Bill. 

And that’s the important part and role of the opposition, is to 

understand these Bills, first of all, take the time to read through 

them and to see how the impact will affect other Bills. And 

that’s a challenge that we certainly have as the opposition and 

some of the things that we will undertake to do as best we can. 

 

I would also raise the issue that there’s a lot of different legal 

people out there that would be involved in some of the impact 

of this particular Bill, and I mentioned a few of them at the 

outset, Mr. Speaker, that whether it’s the car dealers Act or The 

Payday Loans Act, this Bill affects all those particular aspects 

of consumer protection, I guess, and we want to make sure that 

they are there to meet the intent that they’re supposed to meet. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the payday loans particular aspect, I think 

there’s been a lot of changes as a result of some of the federal 

Acts that have been impacted on the country over the last 

several months. I know there’s been a lot of different changes to 

the payday loans Bills and certainly how they administer their 

business. And certainly I think that is one of the areas that I 

think a lot of people pay a lot of attention to. And this particular 

Bill, does it complement that particular aspect of what is trying 

to be done federally or does it compete against it or is it 

contrary to it? These are things that we have to find out, and 

these are some of the things that we would ask the public of 

course to try their best to get involved with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I haven’t seen the previous copy of The Financial 

and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act, the Act 

that would precede this one. And I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, at 

the outset, what changes would be in the original Act versus the 

one that the minister’s proposed today. Was the original Act 

very clear in its intent and its design? Was there any meddling 

in terms of how the commission members may be appointed 

under this particular new Act from the previous Act? These are 

some of the things that we have to assess and also to determine 

overall whether there’s any dramatic or drastic changes from 

the original Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that I think from our 

perspective as an opposition caucus, we want to be very, very 

careful in how we go through these Bills and who we consult, 

and of course the invite to ask for consultation from a number 

of groups is always one of the standing offers that we make as 

an opposition because there are some of the Bills that have 

certainly some serious problems in certain sectors and may pose 

no problems in others, but we need to know those particular 

aspects from each of those groups. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the Act, Bill No. 39, An Act respecting 

the Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

and making consequential amendments to other Acts, I think 

this is a really important perspective. Certainly a really 

important point that we want to make that it has a wide-ranging 

impact. There’s many a thing out there in Saskatchewanland 

that are impacted and covered by this particular Bill, and people 

don’t know right now in terms of their impact on their daily 

lives. They don’t how this may impact them, and we need to 

make sure that we advise the public and certainly use the media 

as best we can to let them know what’s wrong with some of 

these Bills, and we intend to that with this particular Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, it’s important for the 

opposition to look at the Bill and to assess it and to give some 

very brief information as to what we perceive the Bill as doing. 

And as I said at the outset that they’re involving everything 

from the consumer protection regulator, which it talks about all 

the different Acts that this impacts. It talks about an executive 

director. It talks about financial services. It talks about 

mortgages on real property. It talks about lending money. It 

talks about administering pension plans. It talks about dealing 

with the pension funds, insurance, and payday lender, and the 

list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker, about what this impacts. 

 

And as I said at the outset, they talk about mortgage brokers, 

The Pension Benefits Act, The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. All 

of these particular Acts are impacted and affected in some way, 

shape, or form and, Mr. Speaker, there’s not too many people 

that I know in the province of Saskatchewan that has not been 

involved nor impacted by some of the issues that are raised 

under which this Bill is going to have some influence or some 

impact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to point out that it’s also important to know that some of 

the authority granted and continued under this Act, as the title 

would suggest, whether it’s membership in terms of the persons 

appointed by the Lieutenant Governor, in terms of the 

commission members, or whether it’s responsibility of the 

authority, the role as Crown agent, the capacity to contract the 

liability in tort, we need to find out all those particular issues as 

to how this particular Bill is going to function and what each of 

those titles would mean. 

 

I think as well, Mr. Speaker, the organization of the authority, 

the board of directors, how are the board of directors selected? 

That’s one thing that we want to pay very close attention to. 

And the chairperson, and certainly I think some of the minor 

points of the Bill certainly point out is that the meeting dates 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

and how the chairperson is selected. Those are some of the 

things I think in general would certainly go under the auspices 

of normal business practice. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we need to find out the details of how 

the boards are appointed, not necessarily how many times the 

board meet and who the chairperson is and so on and so forth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the division again, going under the direct 

information on the executive director and employees, certainly 

the Bill talks about the authority of the executive director. It 

talks about the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, through you and to you, to 

all the members of the Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a young gentleman who has joined us this afternoon 

— looking forward to meeting with him in a few minutes with 

the Minister of Health — Mr. Lee Ekert. 

 

Lee comes from my area of the province, in fact played hockey 

with one of my sons, and watching him play hockey, and then 

observed as he’s moved forward in his post-secondary 

education. Lee is now recognized as an orthopedic surgeon and 

looking to establish himself in that field of medicine. 

 

Just a couple of things I’d like to point out. Lee is a fellow of 

the Royal College of Surgeons of Canada, July 29th, 2010. He’s 

a specialist certificate in orthopedic surgery, Royal College of 

Surgeons of Canada, June 30th, 2010; licenciate of Medical 

Council of Canada, December 14th, 2006; a Doctor of Medicine 

with distinction, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, May 

26th, 2005. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on for quite a while just to explain to 

you the accomplishments and what Mr. Ekert has done in his 

short life, and I’m sure he’s got a lot of goals that he’s looking 

forward to achieving as well as looking forward to practising 

medicine. And I’m hoping we’re able to do it here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I believe that’s a goal he has set in 

his mind as well. 

 

So to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the members of this 

Legislative Assembly, I’d like to ask you to extend a warm 

welcome to Lee Ekert. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 39 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

just want to continue on with some of the issues raised in this 

particular Bill. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is 

that if this is going to be a Crown that’s going to be structured 

in such a way that it’s going to be independent of the 

government, it’s important to understand what exactly the 

parameters of this particular Bill, and certainly of the Crown, of 

what is being proposed. And this is why it’s important to look at 

the headings and to point out to people that there’s a lot of 

different implications to this Bill and that it’s important that we 

take the time to try our best to understand and to also explain to 

people out there, certainly from the perspective of the first look 

at it, that this is what some of the Bill entails and try and share 

that information as best we can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that there’s also a number of 

issues that we have to look at when we look at this particular 

Bill and what it proposes to do. It talks about responsibility of 

authority or financial services. It talks about powers of authority 

in reference to financial services and general matters. 

 

It talks about panels, Mr. Speaker, and this is what’s the most 

important thing. I’m assuming that these panels that this board 

will be commissioning, or this commission will be putting in 

place, is to ensure that there is proper process of hearing some 

of the concerns and complaints around consumer protection. 

And how often are these panels going to be active? They 

obviously . . . One would assume that they’d have special, 

specific powers within each panel and certainly a specialty 

knowledge of the issues that are coming forward. And how will 

those panels be structured? Is there a particular thought process 

in place now or is it up to the Crown corporation, as is what I 

would suggest would be what this government is after in this 

regard? Would they determine how these panels would be 

structured? 

 

I think it’s also important to talk about the authority respecting 

consumer protection. How wide-ranging is this particular Bill in 

terms of its power base, so to speak? Is there going to be any 

kind of description or explanation of what kind of powers that 

this particular commission or what kind of powers this Crown 

would have? And certainly I think that’s some of the things 

that’s really, really important. 

 

And it talks about joint hearings and consultation. It speaks 

about rules respecting hearings. As long as the hearings are 

intended to be neutral and pure and as simple and forward and 

factual as possible, that’s really important that there is no 

political process or certainly gerrymandering of the process in 

general before the Act is allowed to proceed. And these are 

some of the things that we have to really make sure, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There’s investigation; there’s inquiries and reports. All this is 

identified in the Bill. There is decisions, and certainly quorum 

is part of that too, making sure you have the proper quorum. 

And there’s also provisions set out as to when the authority may 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

act, and that’s what’s really important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s tons and tons of complaints out there over a wide 

variety of goods and services. And this is what’s important I 

think overall, is to make sure that we know and educate people 

as best we can as to what this Bill certainly entails. And when 

the authority is allowed to act and able to do some of this work, 

I think it’s important that we understand that aspect as well. 

 

There’s also conflict of interest. If there’s any kind of a process 

in there or there’s somebody that is in a serious 

conflict-of-interest situation that they have to make sure that 

there’s provisions in there as well, and we’re going to look at 

that with a lot of interest. Non-compatibility . . . I think what’s 

important is that we look at making sure people that are not 

complying with the rulings of this particular commission or this 

particular Crown, that there’s ways and means that we’re able 

to afford them the authority and certainly the strength and 

power to make their decisions compelling. So I think that’s one 

of the points that we would want to raise as well. 

 

This Crown, again that we perceive as being a Crown, that 

there’s disclosure processes, there’s immunity as well because 

obviously there’s many legal ramifications that are part and 

parcel of what is being done here. So you know, is the 

immunity clauses, is there protection in there? Is that adequate 

enough not only for the commission members, for the province 

in general, but is it fair enough to ensure that there’s impartial 

hearings and that the public and certainly the people that are on 

the opposite side of the complaint are able to provide or be able 

to venture forth in this hearing in an unimpeded way? 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously the Minister of Finance will be making 

payments or advancing funds to this particular Crown to deal 

with some of the issues and their costs. That certainly is also 

part and parcel of what the Bill entails. There’s also the 

provision of temporary borrowing. Is that just meant for 

operations or is that meant for hiring legal advice? What’s the 

budget attached to that? Like these are some of the things that 

we really have to pay a lot of attention to. 

 

And they also talk about investments. You know, they may 

want to do some of the investing on their own. And it says here, 

“invest any part of its capital or operating moneys in any 

security or class of securities that is [certainly] authorized for 

the investment of moneys in the general revenue fund pursuant 

to The Financial Administration Act, 1993.” 

 

So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that if they’re allowed to 

invest that they understand the rules very clearly and it’s very 

concise and that this money doesn’t become a savings fund; that 

there is real challenges that they have to meet and they need to 

use that money appropriately, which I’m assuming that they 

will. So if they do have the option to invest some of the monies 

forwarded to them or advanced to them, that they do it in a way 

that is safe, that is secure but more so does not compromise the 

original intent of the money, which is to deal with the 

operations of this Act. 

 

They certainly talk about Treasury Board orders and directives, 

which I think everybody in the government understands what 

that particular aspect’s about, but it’s important that the public 

have the opportunity to explain that. It talks about the audit. It 

talks about the fiscal year. It talks about an annual report. It 

talks about all the regulation in terms of the different Acts that 

would be impacted by this. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think it also talks about some of 

the transitional challenges that they have, whether it’s the 

transfer of employees or some former funds that may be 

available out there under the previous Acts. It also talks about 

limitations of actions in terms of how this particular Crown may 

deal with that particular issue. Again this reference to former 

funds and former employees — that, we have to make sure that 

we pay close attention to. 

 

And one of the parts that’s also part of the Act is the transfer of 

assets and liabilities. And it would be nice to know what 

particular assets were in existence under the previous Act but 

more so, Mr. Speaker, under the liabilities of the former Act 

that this one would certainly get rid of. What were some of the 

challenges in the previous Act? There’s obviously assets there. 

There’s liabilities there. Is there any kind of funds? What kind 

of money are we looking at? And kind of the list goes on in 

terms of making sure that we pay attention to those details. 

 

There’s also the transitional issues. I’m talking about not just 

the members and the directors and the executive director and 

the staff and the funds and the liabilities of the old Act. How is 

that going to transfer as seamless as possible into this new Act, 

and is there any kind of recourse if there’s some challenges in 

trying to do that? These are some of the things I think are really, 

really, really important for people to pay attention to, and this 

Bill certainly identifies some of those issues. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about some of the consequential 

amendments that are required in other Acts and they’ve 

identified some of the Acts. The Credit Union Act, they may 

speak about that or they may speak about that in particular, and 

The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act, 

that’s also impacted and affected here as well. And that’s why 

it’s important for people out there to make sure they pay 

attention to this particular Bill. There’s The Saskatchewan 

Insurance Act that’s also impacted, The Personal Property 

Security Act as I mentioned at the outset, and the travel and 

loans corporation Act. 

 

These are some of the things that I think is really important for 

people to pay attention because it has a lot of wide-ranging 

issues. And if this Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan, as what is being proposed here as a Crown, that 

to do much of the work that the previous Acts have done and 

really begin to cost some serious dollars and have panels and 

hearings and so on and so forth, it’s not just an easy task to 

undertake some of these things, that there’s a lot of work 

attached to it and there’s a lot of implications to other Acts as I 

mentioned at the outset. 

 

So I think it’s important that we have to pay close attention to 

that Bill. It’s very interesting. It’s very interesting when we 

look at the Consumer Affairs Authority that’s vested in this 

particular Bill, as to where this government would go. And 

that’s what’s compelling to us as the opposition because we 

want to make sure we pay close attention to that. 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

What is paramount, I think overall, is to make sure that the 

consumers of Saskatchewan know that the Act is there for their 

protection and that they can certainly utilize it as one of the 

tools that they would employ if perhaps they bought a bad 

product or a poor service. And obviously there is all those 

complaints would be out there forever. But what you’ve got to 

make sure is that if this Act is intended to deal with those 

particular matters and bringing all these other consequential 

amendments, then it’s important, it’s important that we 

understand how that Bill works, you know, and get a good 

understanding of how that Bill works, and to share that with the 

public and make sure that our assessment is bang on in terms of 

what the intent is, and then that way we can get some good 

feedback from the people of Saskatchewan to make sure that 

this particular Bill No. 39 certainly lives up to its mandate and 

fulfills its billing as the minister spoke. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was a bit surprising that the brevity in 

which the minister explained the Act because there’s so many 

different components to it. And you know, it’s important that 

people understand this has a wide-ranging impact, and we need 

to get the details and greater details. And obviously through the 

process we have in the Assembly, we will have time to look at 

this Bill and we will have time to give different groups and 

organizations a chance to look at the previous Bill and this new 

Bill and to see what changes may occur. 

 

And we have grown pretty used to the fact that, in this 

particular Assembly, the opposition is always wary of the 

government’s intent to do something silly and try and hide 

some particular component of theirs in some of the Acts that 

they’re forwarding during this session. And that’s why it’s 

important that we pay close attention to this particular Act and 

all the other Acts. 

 

So I think overall, I’ve explained very quickly what the Bill is 

all about. There’s no question that it is, from our perspective, it 

is the creation of a Crown, and the Crown of course would be 

the Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan. 

This would be an authority on behalf of the consumer affairs. 

And it’s such a huge arena of challenge and need, Mr. Speaker, 

that we’ve got to make sure that what is being designed here is 

not being designed poorly, which we suspect it is, but 

something that is being designed fairly and certainly 

representative of what the people of Saskatchewan want. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on this particular Bill, Bill 39, we certainly 

want to take the time to read it, to understand it, to ask for 

advice from different groups and organizations out there. So on 

that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 39. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 39, The Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 40 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority 

of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012/ 

 

Loi de 2012 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée 

The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 40, The Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential 

Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a consequential Bill to Bill 

No. 39 which just received . . . I just introduced earlier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said when I made the motion for second 

reading of The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act, which is Bill No. 39, our goal is to provide 

the means to respond quickly and effectively to market 

demands facing regulation of financial services and consumer 

protection. This Bill is a companion piece to that Act. Bill No. 

39 consequentially amends 14 other Acts that refer either to the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission or The 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act or both. 

 

This one Bill, Bill No. 40, is bilingual and it amends The 

Co-operatives Act, 1996. The Co-operatives Act, 1996 is a 

bilingual Act that assigns certain duties to the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission. As a result of this amendment, 

it will refer instead to the Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce to the Assembly the receipt of 

a royal recommendation for the following Bill. This was not 

received in time to appear in the order paper, therefore I beg to 

inform the Assembly that Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor, 

having been informed of the subject matter of Bill No. 40, The 

Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2012, recommends it to the 

consideration of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

40, The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — A recommendation has been noted. 

The Minister of Justice has moved second reading of Bill No. 

40, The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

going to take a lot of time here really talking about this 

particular Bill. As the minister alluded to at the outset, I think 

what’s important is that he mentioned that this was the 

companion piece to the Bill that he previously read out, and 

that’s certainly Bill 39, where we talk about the Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 40 certainly is just an Act to 

make a consequential amendment resulting from the enactment 

of the previous Bill that I spoke about earlier. And so it really 

has a lot of impact on the previous Bill. Bill 39 and Bill 40 are 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

really joined at the hip; this is a companion piece. And certainly 

I think what’s important is that people out there know that Bill 

40 is part of a larger Bill which is Bill 39. And I want to maybe 

explain to people out there that may be listening what the 

importance of making sure that we look at these Bills that are 

being forwarded by the government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at Bill 40 and Bill 39 as they are, as 

the minister spoke about, that they are a companion piece and 

that they are going to be working hand in hand to make sure 

that they meet the original objective, which is making sure Bill 

39 is being passed. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is really, really 

important for the people that are listening that as the 

government brings these Bills forward, what they want to 

present as their law or their Bills, and what’s important is that in 

the Assembly they introduced the Bill as the minister has done 

and that the Bill has other amendments or other connections to 

other Acts. 

 

The minister also has to make sure that these Bills are brought 

forward and that there’s consequential amendments made to 

those Acts which are not minor in detail but certainly minor in 

the process. And what we’ve got to do as an opposition is to try 

and make sense of the Bill so we can explain to people out there 

listening in Saskatchewan how the process works. And certainly 

from my perspective, I’ll do my very best to explain that 

because I think the people of Saskatchewan, if you have a more 

active community in terms of understanding how the 

Legislative Assembly works, I think overall that you’ll get a 

more educated and thus a more participatory population over 

time. 

 

So I think what I want to do is make sure that people out there 

know that Bill 40 and Bill 39 are connected. And what we want 

to do is we want to explain to people that as the minister has 

brought up this Bill on behalf of his government, we in the 

opposition have to take the time to, as I said at the outset, to 

really read the Bill and try and see what the Bill is all about. 

 

And this Bill, as I mentioned, is an addition or an add-on to the 

previous Bill and that’s why we call them consequential 

amendments Bill because it does have an effect on other Acts 

that the government has, because there’s hundreds, if not 

thousands of Acts, over the years that each government, 

federally and provincially, may have. 

 

So I think what’s important is on Bill 40, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we attach it, as the minister said, as an attachment to Bill 39, 

that this is really a precursor Bill that has impact on Bill No. 40. 

And that’s why it’s important to tie the two together. 

 

Now I wanted to point out to the people that listen to this . . . I 

know some people in Beauval have this legislature channel in 

their homes and, you know, they certainly have a lot of interest 

as to how this process works and how these Bills work. But as I 

said at the outset, that the government presents a Bill, and this 

Bill has different names and of course has different numbers. 

And the Bill that we’re speaking about is Bill 40, which talks 

about consumer protection.  

 

And of course consumer protection is always about making sure 

that people that buy goods or services, that if those goods or 

services are poor, that they have a recourse in which they could 

go back and say, look, I’ve been ripped off or I’ve been gypped. 

As they often say, I need to find somebody to help me recover 

some of my money or goods that I may have paid in exchange 

for some services or other goods. 

 

So I think what the Bill wants . . . What we’re doing here today 

is trying to explain to people out there that there is a process for 

consumer protection. And this process of course is enacted in 

these two Bills — Bill 39 and Bill 40. And the Minister of 

Justice of course is forwarding this Bill on behalf of 

government that talks about consumer protection and certainly 

consumer affairs, and the authority of this Bill to really begin to 

address all the concerns that people might have out there when 

they do buy goods or when they do buy services. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to read out part of the Bill, Bill 39 that 

is connected to Bill 40. As you mentioned, this is an attachment 

to Bill 39, so both of the Bills are married at the hip, and they 

both impact the people the same way. So it’s just for brevity’s 

sake, as opposed to making the connection for people, we know 

that Bill 40 is an attachment to Bill 39. And what do these two 

Bills mean in its entirety? I hope to explain to the people out 

there that may be listening as to what is necessary. 

 

Now what is known right now in terms of what the process is 

intended for with these two Bills, Bill 39 and Bill 40, now, Mr. 

Speaker, when the people out there in the province of 

Saskatchewan buy a good or buy services, and they feel that 

they’re not have been fairly dealt with, then what the 

government has typically done over time is they’ve put these 

different Acts in place. And Bill 40 is certainly one of the Bills 

that were impacted. And they put in these different Acts, and 

they put in these different authorities and these different powers 

and all these different rules and regulations out there to make 

sure that if there is the case of a complaint, a consumer 

complaint, that there is a process in place and people understand 

how to utilize that process to begin to try and recover some of 

their goods or services that they may have lost when they deal 

with the other party. So I think it’s important for people out 

there to know that there is such a word as consumer protection, 

that there is such a word as Consumer Affairs Authority, and 

that there is a process. 

 

Now people out there, whether they’re in northern 

Saskatchewan or southwestern Saskatchewan, they want to 

know, how does it look? Like is it a person? Is it a department? 

Is it a corporation? Like what exactly is the Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan? And that, I think, is really 

important for people out there to know what exactly is the 

Saskatchewan Consumer Affairs Authority and how it looks. I 

think it’s important that we do all we can to explain as best we 

can to the people in terms of how this works. 

 

So what happens, as we spoke about earlier, Mr. Speaker, is that 

what does this, the consumer, The Financial and Consumer 

Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act, what does it cover? 

What are some of the areas that this Bill impacts? Because 

somebody out there may have bought a car, or somebody may 

have bought a house that’s not in great shape or they may have 

got some services that they weren’t happy with. And as I said at 

the outset, what’s important is that the consumer protection in 

general has legislation or has Acts that they have out there that 

really identifies which areas that the consumers are protected. 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

And this is what’s really important. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And I want to point out that there’s a number of areas that there 

is impact when it comes to consumer protection. And I’ve 

identified them earlier, but it’s important for people to know the 

“consumer protection legislation” means: 

 

(i) The Auctioneers Act; 

 

(ii) The Cemeteries Act, 1999; 

 

(iii) The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act; 

 

(iv) The Collection Agents Act; 

 

(v) The Consumer and Commercial Affairs Act; 

 

(vi) The Consumer Protection Act; 

 

(vii) The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002; 

 

(viii) The Credit Reporting Act; 

 

(ix) The Direct Sellers Act; 

 

(x) The Film and Video Classification Act; 

 

(xi) The Funeral and Cremation Services Act; 

 

(xii) The Motor Dealers Act; 

 

(xiii) The Sale of Goods Act; 

 

(xiv) The Ticket Sales Act. 

 

And they have two other additional Acts: 

 

(xv) any other Act or part of any other Act relating to 

consumer protection that is designated in the regulations; 

or 

 

(xvi) any regulations made pursuant to the Acts mentioned 

in subclauses . . . unless any part of those regulations is, by 

regulation, excluded from this definition. 

 

So what is being said in that really roundabout, fancy way, Mr. 

Speaker, is that all the different Acts that I had mentioned at the 

outset, this particular legislation impacts those Acts. So you 

look at the ticket seller, motor dealers Act — this encompasses 

all those Acts. And what is very clear here as well is that if 

there’s other Acts out there that aren’t identified in this Bill that 

have some impact or effect on this Bill, then they arbitrarily 

include that by way of a note on the bottom of that particular 

section that talks about how they would include those other 

Acts as well. 

 

Now what important to understand, Mr. Speaker, is what does 

consumer protection regulator means. It certainly means, like 

for example, there is a complainant, there’s a complaint, and 

then there’s a registrar that would look after how these issues 

are processed with, as I understand it. And consumer protection 

regulator means the registrar designated pursuant to The 

Auctioneers Act, the registrar appointed pursuant to The 

Cemeteries Act, and the list goes down to the different Acts that 

I had mentioned, Mr. Speaker. And they would certainly be the 

regulator for their appropriate industries or the registrar. They 

would be appointed from the appropriate agencies to act on 

behalf of these associations or these Acts in the case that there 

is some argument. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important that the consumer 

protection regulator also includes any other person who, or 

authority or body that:  

 

(A) is given responsibility or powers pursuant to 

consumer protection legislation; and 

 

(B) is designated in the regulations. 

 

Now what is being said there, Mr. Speaker, in item (A) is that if 

an MLA is given responsibility on behalf of a client to act on 

their behalf, then this Act recognizes that person being given 

authority. That’s what I’m assuming the Act is saying. 

 

And that’s fair enough because MLAs are asked to get involved 

in a number of cases. And they often do; he or she will be 

involved in a wide variety of cases, as you know. And what’s 

important is that this Act identifies that that person is given the 

authority by the person that is arguing the case to act on their 

behalf. This Act recognizes them. And of course they . . . as a 

regulator. And of course there’s a separate section that will be 

identified in the regulation who else may act as a regulator, Mr. 

Speaker, in this process. So that’s what’s important. 

 

And of course the consumer affairs protection commission, if 

you want to use, we often use the word Crown, a Crown 

corporation. But this commission would have an executive 

director, which is important that, you know, obviously the 

executive director would have staff, and they would have 

certainly the authority and the means, financial and otherwise, 

to certainly do what they can to forward the intent of this Bill 

and to protect the interests of the consumer. So there would be 

an executive director that’s involved, and that’s something 

that’s really important. 

 

Now I think financial services, again it’s important that we look 

at the definition of each of these categories of this Bill because 

if you know who’s involved or you know what parties are 

involved and what is meant when they designed this Bill, it 

really gives you a good grasp of how this works and what a 

regulator is, what Acts that this impacts, that there have been 

executive director, the process. It gets confusing after a while, 

but as you explain more and more of the Bill, more and more 

people begin to realize how it works. And that’s the important 

exercise. And the important point that I want to make in today’s 

presentation on behalf of the opposition is that when these Bills 

come forward, we’ve got to pay attention to them and how it 

impacts our daily lives. And that’s exactly what we’re trying to 

do here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I want to point out again under the financial services, 

under the description of the information that the Bill impacts, 

when they speak about financial services in the Act, it: 

 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

. . . means doing any or all of the following things: 

 

(i) carrying on business as a credit union; 

 

(ii) carrying on business as a mortgage brokerage or 

mortgage administrator, or brokering mortgages on behalf 

of a mortgage brokerage; 

 

(iii) administering pension plans; 

 

(iv) investing and dealing with pension funds; 

 

(v) selling or providing insurance or related services; 

 

(vi) carrying on business as a payday lender; 

 

(vii) trading in or advising with respect to securities; 

 

(viii) lending money; 

 

(ix) dealing in or purchasing: 

 

(A) mortgages on real property; 

 

(B) security interests within the meaning of The 

Personal Property Security Act . . . ; or 

 

(C) accounts receivable; 

 

(x) trading in real estate; 

 

(xi) acting as an investment fund manager; 

 

(xii) carrying out similar activity that is designated in the 

regulations. 

 

Now all the Bill 40 is all attached to these definitions, Mr. 

Speaker. Even though it’s a consequential amendment Act, it 

has the effect of the motherhood Bill so to speak. How does that 

affect that? And when you have the definitions of the main Act, 

the consequential amendment Act makes a lot more sense, Mr. 

Speaker. So under the Bill when they talk about that, when they 

talk about financial services, this is what they mean. And I have 

explained that as well. 

 

They talk about executive director. They talk about consumer 

protection regulators — that’s identified here as well — and 

financial services legislation which will be identified in the Bill 

somewhere along the line. It talks about The Co-operatives Act, 

The Credit Union Act, The Credit Union Act, 1998, The 

Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act, The 

New Generation Co-operatives Act, The Payday Loans Act, The 

Pension Benefits Act, The Real Estate Act, The Saskatchewan 

Insurance Act, The Securities Act, and the trust and loan 

corporation. 

 

And what’s also important, Mr. Speaker, again the same 

provision that’s applied earlier: 

 

(xii) any other Act or part of any other Act designated in 

the regulations that: 

 

(A) require financial services; or 

(B) regulates any persons . . . [with], or associations or 

groups of persons that, provide financial services; or 

[the final clause] 

 

(xiii) any regulations made pursuant to the Acts mentioned 

in [the] subclauses . . . unless any [other] part of those 

regulations is, by regulation, excluded from this definition. 

 

So those are the “financial services legislation” definition, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s something that is also part of this Bill. And 

you look at all the different players and how the Bill is 

impacted, you can see it become very confusing to the common 

person. But it really is important for people to understand that 

these are primarily definitions of how the Bill is going to be 

impacted and who is going to be impacted and how is the other 

Acts and how are the other Bills going to be implicated. And 

this is why it’s important that we do the definitions. 

 

The Bills will define clearly which group or organizations is 

meant when they use a certain phrase within the Act. And as I 

mentioned at the outset, that when it comes to “financial 

services regulator,” it includes credit unions. It includes the 

superintendent of insurance, the superintendent of pensions, and 

the directors appointed pursuant to The Payday Loans Act. And 

the list goes on in terms of who the different groups and 

organizations are involved. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, under Bill 40, it talks an amendment to the 

main Bill, Bill 39, the financial and consumer affairs authority 

Act. We wanted to make sure that we understood what authority 

this commission would have, what authority that Bill No. 40 is 

working under right now because it’s a consequential 

amendment to that Act. What kind of authority is it acting under 

now? And a lot of people out there in Saskatchewan may not 

know that, so I want to briefly go through that so they 

understand exactly what is meant when we talk about authority 

of the Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the authority, certainly as I mentioned at the 

outset, this is a commission that’s going to be looking at 

consumer protection, consumer affairs in general. And the 

commission’s authority is continued as the financial and 

consumer authority of Saskatchewan. This authority is a 

corporation. The authority is a Treasury Board Crown 

corporation within the meaning of The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993. The head office of this authority or this commission 

is to be in Regina, and the authority is to have a common seal. 

 

Those certainly are really minor points in terms of the authority 

of the commission, Mr. Speaker, but they’re important that they 

be identified in the Act. And things like being located here in 

the city is really important, that they have their own seal, that 

they are considered a Treasury Board Crown corporation, which 

is an important note to make. And so therefore you have the 

authority continued and the authority identified, and you have 

some of the rules attached to the authority. And that’s why it’s 

important that we read them out. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the membership: 

 

4(1) The authority consists of: 

 

(a) those persons appointed by the Lieutenant Governor 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

in Council; and 

 

(b) one person appointed by the minister. 

 

Now we need to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that both of those 

appointees are done in the fair, consistent, and certainly 

transparent way because obviously you don’t want to have 

someone that’s going to ignore all the consumer affairs matters 

and not really begin a fair process. And that’s what’s important, 

that we raise that point at the outset. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that in this authority, the 

membership of the Consumer Affairs Authority: 

 

Each member of the authority, other than the member 

appointed pursuant to clause (1)(b), holds office at 

pleasure for a term not to exceed three years . . . [or] until 

a successor is appointed. 

 

So the people appointed to this Consumer Affairs Authority 

shall serve in this office for three years minimum or until a 

successor is appointed. The “. . . member of the authority may 

be reappointed for a second or subsequent term,” which simply 

means that they could be reappointed for another term, so they 

could be there for six years at the most. 

 

And the other part of the membership of the authority is, “If a 

member of the authority dies or resigns, the person ceases to be 

a member of the authority on the date of death . . .” or on which 

the death or written resignation is received by the authority. 

And basically saying that somebody resigns, they shall be 

resigned effective as soon as they sign the date of their . . . or 

their resignation from the commission or if they pass away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what’s also important is that: 

 

If the office of a member of the authority appointed 

pursuant to clause (1)(a) becomes vacant, the Lieutenant 

Governor . . . [or the government] may: 

 

(a) appoint another person for the remainder of the term 

of the person . . . [leaving] the office; or 

 

(b) appoint another person for the term mentioned in 

subsection (2). 

 

If the office of the member appointed pursuant to clause 

(1)(b) becomes vacant, the minister may appoint another 

person to fill the vacancy. 

 

So really, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the membership of this 

Consumer Affairs Authority, that it’s important that we know 

that the membership has got rules, and some of the rules are 

clearly identified out in the Act. And it’s important for people 

to have some inkling as to how this new Treasury Board Crown 

corporation would work, and obviously it would be under a 

board of directors, and they have rules about their appointment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the meat of the Bill itself, Bill 40 and Bill 

30, in terms of the authority that they wish to put in place called 

the Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan, that really 

when they have the word authority, what is the responsibilities 

attached to that authority? And the Bill has basically pointed 

out a few things, Mr. Speaker, and I want to share them. It’s 

important to know that the authority of this Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan is responsible to the minister: 

 

(a) in the exercise of the powers conferred on the authority 

and in the performance of the duties imposed on the 

authority for the purpose of administering and enforcing 

this Act, consumer protection legislation, financial 

services legislation and [or] any other Act that imposes or 

confers a duty, power or function on a consumer 

protection regulator or a financial services regulator; and 

 

(b) in carrying out and providing the structure for the 

administration and enforcement of this Act, consumer 

protection legislation, financial services legislation and 

[or] any other Act that imposes or confers a duty, power or 

function on a consumer protection regulator or a financial 

services regulator. 

 

And finally: 

 

(2) The authority to undertake any other activities or 

functions assigned to it by the Lieutenant Governor [of 

Saskatchewan] in Council. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what they’re basically saying is that the 

authority of this commission is to make sure that they do the 

work. They obviously have to respond to the minister. They’d 

be under a particular minister. But their duties are kind of 

identified in a number of different Acts, and basically those 

Acts are part of the main Bill, Bill 39, in which all that is 

identified. So they do have a fair amount of authority. It’s not 

something that is to be abused obviously, but it’s something that 

they have to be fair and impartial to, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

kind of the motherhood statement about the Bill 39 and of 

course the Bill that we’re speaking about today, the 

consequential Bill, Bill No. 40. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is important to note some of the other 

potential authorities that this consumer affairs branch would 

have. It’s a Crown agent: 

 

The authority is an agent of the Crown, and all its powers 

may be exercised only as an agent of the Crown. 

 

All property of the authority, all moneys acquired, 

administered, possessed or received from any [other] 

source and [or] all profits earned by the authority are the 

property of the Crown and are, for all purposes including 

taxation of whatever nature and description, deemed to be 

the property of the Crown. 

 

And I think that’s really important for people to understand that 

this is a self-enclosed entity, and these Bills basically spell out 

that they act as a Crown and they have the status of being a 

Crown agent. And that’s something that needs to be certainly 

explained. 

 

And also: 

 

The authority has the capacity to contract and to sue and 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

be sued in its corporate name with respect to any right or 

obligation acquired or incurred by it on behalf of the 

Crown as if the right or obligation were acquired or 

incurred on its own behalf.  

 

The authority, on behalf of the Crown, may contract in its 

corporate name without specific reference to the Crown. 

 

So what I’m assuming from that particular clause, Mr. Speaker, 

is that this commissioner or this human . . . consumer rights 

authority does have the ability to contract out services. And 

when we talk about being sued or option of suing, that I’m 

assuming some of the contracting services that they would look 

at trying to employ from time to time . . . Because that happens 

pretty regularly in terms of government programs in general, is 

you may be subjected to lawsuits. And what this basically says 

is that you do have the capacity of the contract, and in this 

instance, I would suggest that it’s in the legal context more so 

than any other context, Mr. Speaker. But there’s other areas that 

they may be subjected to as well in terms of some contract 

services that are necessary. I’m assuming that those would be 

part of this explanation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, liability in tort, as we all know that there . . . 

Tort is a legal phrase and: 

 

The authority may: 

 

(a) sue with respect to any tort; and [or] 

 

(b) be sued with respect to liabilities in tort to the extent 

which the Crown is subject pursuant to The Proceedings 

against the Crown Act. 

 

So all that is basically saying, that they have legal parameters 

which they could sue. But they also understand that those legal 

parameters may allow them to be sued as well, and certainly as 

a Crown and a member of the government, that they have some 

overall protection under The Proceedings against the Crown 

Act, and that’s basically how they’ll be governed when they are 

under threat of a lawsuit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how is this board going to be organized? 

Bill 40, how are we going to make sure that the Bill is 

organized fairly and responsible? And there will be a board of 

directors for the authority is being established consisting of 

those persons appointed, as I pointed out earlier, by the 

Lieutenant Governor, and: 

 

The board shall manage the affairs and the business of the 

authority [of this Crown].  

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council shall fix the 

remuneration for members of the board. 

 

Meaning that the board will certainly be paid for some of the 

work that they do and some of the committee work that they are 

subjected to. And they’re also allowed to be entitled to . . . for 

travel, incidental living expenses in the performance of their 

responsibility. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is that one 

of the items here, it says, “A vacancy in the office of a member 

does not impair the powers of the remaining members of the 

board to act.” And that’s basically one of the things I think is 

really important is that as long as you’ve identified quorum, 

which I’ve seen later on in the Act, that if one member’s 

missing from a meeting, they obviously can’t stop the 

proceedings of the corporation or the commission in doing its 

duty because they’re not there. So that basically is spelled out 

here, Mr. Speaker. And that’s certainly something that’s fine. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I point out, as at the outset, that as a board 

you have a chairman. You’d have a structure on the board. 

You’d have an executive. Obviously you’d have members at 

large. And this Act identifies a bit about the chairperson, of how 

the chairperson shall perform the duties. It is explained there 

and, of course, there’s Acts and there’s other different 

regulations that govern the conduct of this particular 

chairperson. And all this basically identifies all those issues. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it also talks about when a chairperson may, 

or any other member of the authority may, act for authority. So 

that’s important to note. That this is not something that you 

want to have, a board in place and give them unfettered control 

and access and action that they can undertake on their own. You 

got to make sure there’s checks and balances, and we need to 

find out what those checks and balances are to make sure that 

there isn’t any kind of particular abuse or conflict of interest. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that they also talk 

about meetings, and I think it’s important that people point out 

that these meetings will be taken at the discretion of the 

chairperson, and that they must notify the board in the proper 

fashion. That’s pretty clear. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve identified which organizations are 

impacted. We’ve identified the purpose of the Act. We’ve 

identified how this consequential Bill No. 39 is attached to Bill 

No. 40. We’ve spoken about the powers of the Act itself. We’ve 

spoken about how the board structure is put in place. We’ve 

spoken about the purposes of a chairperson. How a member of 

the commission may be terminated by ways of resignation or 

death, what happens if that case happens. We’ve covered all the 

bases of the preliminary stuff that’s important part of this 

particular Act. 

 

So we want to make sure that we continue on, on to the next 

aspect which, of course, is the staffing. Because you have the 

entity and you’ve got the legislation that talks about which 

groups are organized. You’ve got the intent of the entity and 

then you’ve got a committee that’s in place or a board of 

directors that are in place and how they are appointed and the 

rules and regulations in relation to that aspect. Now we go on to 

the staff in terms of how many staff have you got, if there’s 

specialty areas that the staff would be involved with. How are 

they supervised? How does this work? And that’s kind of the 

second part of the Act that I think is important that we share this 

with Bill No. 39, the consequential amendment Act to the prior 

or the main bill which is Bill 40, talking about consumer 

protection affairs Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they’re obviously going to hire an executive 

director. And it says . . . They’re quite point-blank that an 

executive director for the authority must be appointed. So 

there’s no question that they will have an executive director and 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

this executive director shall perform the responsibilities and 

may exercise the powers that: 

 

(a) are imposed or assigned to the executive director by 

this Act, the regulations, any financial services legislation 

or any consumer protection legislation; 

 

(b) [the second part that the executive director has 

authority on is] subject to subsection (6), are imposed on 

or assigned to the authority by this Act, the regulations, 

any financial services legislation or any consumer 

protection legislation that are delegated to the executive 

director by the authority; or 

 

(c) are imposed on or assigned by the authority and that 

are assigned to the executive director by the regulations. 

 

So what it’s basically saying, Mr. Speaker, is that the executive 

director is going to be acting on behalf of the board. They have 

their job description fairly straightforward. They know what the 

authority is all about and the executive director represents the 

board in many dealings. And basically what that part of the Act 

is saying is that it is this executive director can act on behalf of 

the board, protected by the powers of the board. And the Act 

clearly identifies that as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it also points out that: 

 

The executive director may delegate . . . any director or 

deputy director any responsibilities or power that is 

imposed on, or assigned to or delegated to the executive 

director. 

 

So what that is saying is that the executive director may, time to 

time, appoint someone or approach somebody on the board and 

ask them to help them represent the commission. That’s 

identified here as well, Mr. Speaker. And obviously, I think, if 

you have a good executive director, then I don’t think you need 

to count on that clause too much in terms of having him go 

outside of the board or to the board when problems persist 

because obviously you’ve got a good executive director. That 

particular problem would be minimized and therefore this 

particular regulation may not be used or may not be necessary 

from time to time. But that’s only on the premise that you have 

a good executive director. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it also talks a bit more about, the 

authority may delegate the executive director any of the 

following responsibilities if the authority is required to perform 

those responsibilities pursuant to this Act. So they can give 

them more, other responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, that 

complements the Act. And it talks about the investigations. It 

talks about responsibility to report to the Lieutenant Governor. 

It talks about hearing any appeals. So those are some of the 

Acts that the executive director may be granted once the board 

makes that decision and once that is deemed to be the right 

thing to do. 

 

In terms of payment, superannuation, and benefits: 

 

The authority shall pay the employees of the authority any 

remuneration determined pursuant to clause 13(3)(b). 

 

And I’m assuming that the clause 13(3)(b), Mr. Speaker, we 

spoke about it earlier, and this basically says: 

 

13(3)(b) determine the respective duties and powers, the 

conditions of employment and the remuneration of those 

directors, deputy directors and employees. 

 

So that’ll be determined under the salary and the executive 

director headings. And that, I think, Mr. Speaker, is very public. 

The Government of Saskatchewan posts the employees and 

their salaries, so it’s not as if it is going to be something that is 

kept secret, that people out there would know what the 

executive director is going . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re also talking about the other added benefits 

of these employees which includes a group insurance plan or 

any other employee benefit program, which I think is important 

to note because this Consumer Affairs Authority, this 

commission, this Treasury Board Crown, it’s important that we 

retain the employees and treat them fairly and consistent as we 

do with other employees. And this Act basically speaks about 

that, and we certainly hope that when they speak about that, that 

they practise what is certainly indicated on the Bill itself. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is you look at the 

responsibility of authority re financial services. It goes on to 

talk about the administration, coordination, development, 

promotion, implementation, and enforcement of policies related 

to financial services. And I think what’s important here again is 

that all the different financial services Acts — whether it’s The 

Securities Act, The Credit Union Act, The New Generation 

Co-operatives Act — all these Acts are clearly identified under 

the financial services legislation which are part and parcel of 

Bill 39 and certainly of the main Bill, Bill 40. 

 

So I think that’s something that’s important for people out there 

to know that, as I mentioned at the outset, here are different 

Acts and different organizations that are involved. Here are 

some of the different players. Here’s how the board of directors 

are selected. Here’s what the executive director does. Here, 

what the powers of the executive director . . . and the list kind 

of goes on. So the Bill breaks it down, and a number of sources 

explains all the different sectors of the Bill that’s impacted, 

whether it’s staffing or board or different legislation that’s out 

there. And we’re almost completed that particular section, Mr. 

Speaker, but it certainly, it’s important to continue that 

explanation. 

 

The Bill itself, The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority 

of Saskatchewan Act, Bill 40 and Bill 39 which are joined at the 

hip, you know, they speak about the authority on financial 

services general matters. And it’s a fairly rigorous process, Mr. 

Speaker. They talk about the powers of the authority in 

reference to financial services in general matters. And the 

powers are fairly straightforward, but they’re fairly important 

for people out there to know. 

 

The authority may . . . And here’s the power that’s explained in 

the Bill: 

 

(a) exercise any of the powers of a financial services 

regulator pursuant to any financial services legislation that 

are assigned to the authority by the regulations; 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

(b) exercise any powers given to the authority by this Act 

or the regulations; 

 

(c) exercise the powers given to the authority by The 

Securities Act, 1988; 

 

(d) exercise the powers given to the authority by The 

Co-operatives Act, 1996, The Credit Union Act, 1998 and 

The New Generation Co-operatives Act; 

 

(e) subject to subsection (2), make grants to any person, 

agency, organization, association, institution or body, on 

any terms and conditions that the authority . . . [approves] 

appropriate, for any purpose relating to its responsibilities 

for financial services; and [finally] 

 

(f) do any other thing that it considers necessary, 

incidental or conducive to carry out its . . . [regulations]. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are fairly wide-ranging in terms of how 

they’re going to operate in terms of the powers as it relates to 

the financial bodies that are out there. They’re fairly 

straightforward, but they’re fairly rigorous, and I think they’re 

fairly strong. And that’s something that’s important, that the 

Consumer Affairs Treasury Board Crown have that authority to 

act under the other financial Bills that are out there so that they 

know that there’s some consistent messages and consistent 

themes in terms of basically sharing the message of the 

consumer protection Bill does have a lot of weight and clout to 

it. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it talks about a number of other issues under 

the financial powers of authority, under the financial services. 

They can also grant money of up to $50,000. The authority has 

assigned any powers of a financial services regulator. And they 

also talk about revenues from fees, taxes, rates, or other charges 

imposed and collected pursuant to this Act, consumer protection 

legislation or financial services legislation are to be paid to and 

are the property of the authority. So basically saying that if they 

have any income of any sort, it becomes the property of the 

authority. And that’s fairly straightforward and par for the 

course in terms of business development, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the things I think is really important and very 

interesting on Bill 39 and Bill 40, which again are talking about 

consumer protection, is the whole notion of the section under 

panels, 17(1). And I think it’s important for people out there to 

know that the minister who’ll be overseeing this particular 

Consumer Affairs Authority or this Treasury Board Crown: 

 

. . . may, by order, establish a list of persons to serve on a 

panel appointed pursuant to this section. 

 

(2) . . . the authority considers it advisable, the chairperson 

may appoint a panel to hear any matter that the authority is 

authorized or required to hear pursuant to this Act, the 

regulations or any other financial services legislation. 

 

(3) If the authority appoints a panel, the authority: 

 

(a) shall appoint at least one of its members to the panel; 

and 

 

(b) may appoint one or more persons from the list 

established pursuant to subsection (1) to the panel. 

 

(4) The chairperson of the authority shall designate a 

member of the authority who is appointed to a panel to act 

as a chairperson for that panel, and while so acting that 

member shall perform all of the responsibilities and may 

exercise any of the powers of the chairperson of the 

authority with respect to that panel. 

 

(5) A panel may not sit concurrently with the authority, 

but any number of panels may sit concurrently. 

 

And of course: 

 

(6) A majority of members of a panel constitute a quorum 

of the panel. 

 

(7) A decision or action of a panel in relation to any matter 

for which the panel is appointed is the decision or action 

of the authority. 

 

And finally: 

 

(8) The chairperson of a panel is entitled to vote on all 

matters before the panel. 

 

So I think what’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that it identifies 

that this consumer protection Act or this Treasury Board Crown 

does have the option of appointing panels. And if they do 

appoint panels, here are some of the rules to hear particular 

cases or specific cases that may be complex in nature, and 

therefore they may seek other advice. And what they’ve done 

here under this particular section is identify that if we do set up 

a panel, here are some of the parameters under which the panels 

will be used. And that section was fairly straightforward, and it 

spoke about some of the rules of the quorum. The chairperson 

may vote and so on and so forth. 

 

Now the other thing that’s really important in this particular 

Act, Mr. Speaker, is the Securities Commission. As you know, 

the Securities Commission in general is considered to be a 

fairly high-profile financial institution. It’s got great presence in 

Saskatchewan. It’s got tons of people impacted or involved with 

what the Securities Commission does in general. And you 

know, in terms of a financial player, it’s one of the most 

recognized institutions across Canada. 

 

So what does this Bill have in relation to the financial, or in 

relation to the powers in terms of how they’re going to respond 

to the Securities Commission? And it says the: 

 

References to Securities Commission or commission 

18(1) A reference in any Act, regulation, order, contract, 

legal process, proceeding or other document to the 

Saskatchewan Securities Commission or the commission 

is deemed to be a reference to the authority. 

 

So basically from what I understand there is that they would be 

connected and impacted as a result of this Act, and so if there’s 

any reference to the Securities Commission, that certainly they 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

would be subjected to how this Act and the commission works. 

 

The second part, Mr. Speaker, is: 

 

A reference in any Act, regulation, order, contract, legal 

process, proceeding or other document to a deputy within 

the meaning of The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Act, as that Act read before the coming into 

force of this Act, is deemed to be a reference to a director 

appointed pursuant to section 13. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to know that any 

references made to the security commission or commissions, 

that there is a good connect and it is a good direct and there is a 

lot of weight and power that this commission would have when 

you deal with the Saskatchewan Securities Commission or the 

national securities commission or other security commissions 

throughout the land. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it certainly talks about the Securities 

Commission in general, and the part that’s really important for 

people out there listening because we spoke about the powers of 

the board. We spoke about how the board is going to be 

appointed. We spoke about the different Acts that are impacted. 

We spoke about how the executive director’s going to be 

selected. We spoke about the roles and responsibility of the 

executive director, how they’re going to be paid, and the list 

kind of goes on as to how this commission is going to be set up 

or this Crown corporation. 

 

Now the big thing is we’ve got the staff in place. We’ve got the 

legislation identified. We’ve got the executive director hired. 

We’ve got the board appointed. We understand how each of 

these organizations are, each of these sections are going to 

interact and make this commission or this Crown corporation, 

this Treasury Board concept work. We’ve now got to ask the 

question, okay, you’ve got the staff, the board, and all the intent 

in place, all the Acts covered. If all the Acts are covered, then 

what exactly does the consumer protection branch do? Because 

you’ve got everything in place now. What do they do? And 

that’s the really important thing, and this is what I think is 

important for people to understand, what The Consumer 

Protection Act is all about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out the responsibilities of the 

authority respecting consumer protection. “The authority is 

responsible for the following: co-ordinating consumer 

protection regulators,” which means all the different 

organizations that represent the real estate or the brokerage 

firms or car salesmen, that they’re going to coordinate all those 

regulators that are representing each of those different sectors, 

that their job is to coordinate these organizations and their 

representatives in a good fashion: 

 

(b) providing for the administration, co-ordination, 

development, promotion, implementation and enforcement 

of programs and policies related to consumer protection. 

 

So that’s pretty straightforward, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

responsibilities of this authority, of this Act. And the other 

issue, the other matter that they’d be dealing with is: 

 

(c) providing for the administration, co-ordination, 

development, promotion, implementation and enforcement 

of programs and policies related to consumer protection 

legislation. 

 

I understand that they have Acts that guide what they do. That’s 

identified here. 

 

(d) performing any responsibilities of a consumer 

protection regulator pursuant to any consumer protection 

legislation that are assigned to the authority by the 

regulations. 

 

Again it’s just a catch-all, Mr. Speaker. And: 

 

(e) performing any other responsibilities respecting 

consumer protection that are assigned to the authority by 

the regulations. 

 

And that’s the important thing is that there’s so many different 

regulations and so many different departments, Mr. Speaker. 

That catch-all, that last clause here, clause (e) is this meaning to 

say, look, we may have missed something under some other Act 

somewhere, so what we want to do under this particular aspect 

is include that in there, saying there is an Act out there that is 

impacted by this consumer legislation. We’re going to put a 

provision in there saying if there’s something out there that we 

have missed that does impact this Act, we’re going to put a 

clause in there saying that if we missed it, it’s still part and 

parcel of this particular Act. So that’s important for people out 

there to know what the powers of The Consumer Protection Act 

and these Bills are all about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it also talks a bit about the authority 

respecting consumer protection. We spoke about that earlier. 

But they do have consumer protection legislation that is 

assigned to the authority of this commission and that certainly 

has . . . You know, there’s a lot of different rules and 

regulations on how consumers are protected because that’s 

some area that we really have to pay close attention. And over 

the years, consumer protection legislation in general has been 

really, really watched very carefully in terms of make sure that 

they’re fair and balanced, and they make sure people out there 

are not being taken advantage of. So, Mr. Speaker, I think we 

want to make sure that people out there understand that this 

group, this commission, certainly has wide-ranging powers. 

And that’s identified here as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now they have responsibilities, and the question you have to 

ask yourself now is if you have these powers, you can make 

grants to any agencies or association or organization. You can 

do some of these things. That’s identified here as well. And 

some of these grants would be up to $50,000. And I’m 

assuming that the grants of $50,000, maybe they get some legal 

or some other advice on cases that may be coming forward to 

the commission. So they talk about that in the Bill as well and 

that’s really important. And it’s really important to note that 

while they have these authorities and they have this role, they 

also have to have the accompanying power. 

 

And under section V, general powers and matters, it says quite 

clearly that: 

 

The authority [Consumer Affairs Authority] may: 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

(a) authorize any person to obtain evidence outside 

Saskatchewan for the purposes of this Act, the regulations, 

any financial services legislation or any consumer 

protection . . . [Acts]; and 

 

(b) for the purpose of obtaining evidence, make any order 

it considers proper for the return and use of the evidence 

so obtained. 

 

So what they’re saying is that if there’s a fly-by-night operator 

came in from Manitoba or from Ontario, that this particular Act 

and this Treasury Board Crown can actually exercise its 

authority and its power of legislation beyond the Saskatchewan 

borders, not only pursuing these organizations or people that 

may have wronged the Saskatchewan citizen, but they can also 

order evidence returned to Saskatchewan. And therefore the 

powers are not just within the confines of our province but 

certainly can reach a long ways. And that’s only fair and proper, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again they talk about a number of different perspectives of 

the Act itself. It talks about the evidence. It talks about joint 

hearings and consultations. And it also talks about the rules 

respecting hearings. Mr. Speaker, some people out there in 

Saskatchewanland may want to know how these hearings work 

because we’ve got staff; we’ve got a board; we’ve got this Act. 

Everything is moving forward. So if I have an argument, if I 

bought a vehicle that was in poor shape, how can I use this 

Consumer Affairs Authority to my advantage? And it says right 

here, basically in terms of how we have these hearings put in 

place, that the authority, the commission: 

 

The authority [Consumer Affairs Authority] may make 

rules: 

 

governing the management and conduct of its business and 

the conduct of the meetings, investigations, inquiries and 

any other proceedings of the authority and its panels; 

 

They’re also: 

 

if authorized by the regulations and [to] subject to any 

terms and conditions prescribed in the regulations, 

governing the management and conduct of hearings . . . 

and 

 

(c) respecting forms, applications and other documents 

required to be used and the procedures to be followed in 

the conduct of its affairs. 

 

So what that’s basically saying, Mr. Speaker, is that they do 

have these authorities, and it’s defined in a wide-ranging kind 

of legal framework, if you will, of some of the other authorities. 

And all this is saying is that this Act is saying that they 

recognize that these powers should be there and are there for the 

authority in general. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it also talks about inquiries and reports, you 

know, and again the authority may do some inquiries. They 

may ask for reports. And this basically authorizes, this Act 

authorizes them to be able to do that, to be able to get the 

inquiries going and reports going. And they’re also allowed to 

do investigations because obviously Consumer Affairs is not 

going to simply assume one party is guilty because you get 

caught in all these different arguments and all these different 

situations and there’s a lot of emotion to that. 

 

So I think what’s important when you look at the consumer 

affairs protection commission or committee, that there will be 

that particular dynamic in many of the hearings, and as fair and 

as open and as complete as can be, Mr. Speaker, what 

sometimes happens is you’ve got to be able to do things like a 

separate inquiry, ask for a specialized report, or do 

investigations. And that’s what’s really important, to make sure 

that your work is thorough. And those particular aspects, the 

Bills themselves are, this Bill basically spells all that out. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it also talks about receiving evidence, that 

“the powers of a commissioner pursuant to The Public Inquiries 

Act” — that’s identified here as well — and they “may engage 

the services of any experts” that the commission may consider 

necessary. So that’s some of the things I think is important, Mr. 

Speaker, that people know that when they have these hearings 

and these panels, that these are the rules governing these 

processes. So we have really what I would consider options that 

the securities or the consumer affairs authority would have at 

their disposal, and while they’re not all spelled out neatly in this 

particular Bill, they certainly make reference to the larger Bills 

that are out there that would give them protection in certain 

areas of trying to undertake their duties. 

 

They talk about decisions and quorums, making sure that the 

majority of the members of the authority are present and that 

they agree with the decision. That’s important to point out. The 

Bill also makes reference to when the authority may act because 

obviously you have a lot of concerns and complaints out there. 

And I think it’s important that that is also made reference in the 

Bill itself. It talks about conflict of interest, to be careful not to 

tread on those, on the very fine line at times, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s something that’s really important. 

 

And there’s also a situation here, Mr. Speaker, that talks about 

non-compellability — which I’m assuming is they’re not 

complying with if the commission makes a ruling or requires a 

person to come forward or a number of other things. Well this 

Bill talks about how the committee, this particular section talks 

about how the committee itself is able to have authority and 

powers to make sure that they can carry out their functions 

designed by this legislation. 

 

It goes on to talk about disclosure, immunity. It talks about the 

financial matters and regulations, as I pointed out early. And it 

talks about, “The Minister of Finance may [be able to] advance 

moneys to the authority out of the general revenue fund for the 

purposes of the authority in the amounts, at the times, and on 

the terms and conditions the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

may determine.” So it goes on to talk about a lot of the financial 

matters and regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I understand as well that this Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority of Saskatchewan, that they also have temporary 

borrowing powers, Mr. Speaker. And some people out there 

may not know this, but the Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan, being a Treasury Board, has the ability to do 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

some temporary borrowing — and I think that’s important for 

people to know that they have to get the approval of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, so obviously that goes through 

cabinet — by way of a bank overdraft or line of credit or any 

other manner that the authority may deem. 

 

And as I mentioned, at the end of the day that I am assuming 

that in terms of temporary borrowing, that it may be for times of 

the year when, for example, when the legislative, when the 

session is on. There are times when, since many of the 

departments are not fully through the budgetary process, they 

allocate their money one-twelfth at a time, a month at a time. 

And in this instance, that might be the case where the Consumer 

Affairs Authority might need temporary borrowing at times like 

this. So I think that’s spelled out there as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I spoke earlier about investments, where they’re allowed to 

invest money if they do have excess moneys available, and that 

action or that issue is addressed here in this Act as well. The 

only advice we have is that if you are allowed to have 

investments out there from the process or from the proceeds of 

your activity that you make sure that they’re not first and 

foremost in the minds of the commission members because they 

obviously have to make sure that they’re there to deal with the 

issue of consumer protection, not consumer investment. So I 

want to make sure that we distinguish the two, and to add a 

cautionary note there, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we 

emphasize that they’re there for consumer protection. But 

nonetheless, the investments option is there and certainly I think 

it’s important that people know that they have that ability as 

well. 

 

They talk about fiscal year, the period commencing April 1 and 

ending March 31st. So it’s not December to December, as some 

people would think, Mr. Speaker. It is clear that the fiscal year 

ends April 1st — or sorry, March 31st — and the new year 

starts April 1st. 

 

It talks about the annual audit, which is fair enough. It talks 

about an annual report which I think is fair enough. So we’ll see 

those annual reports and audits here in the Assembly. And 

that’s something that we will also be paying very close attention 

to, to make sure that there is good benefit for the people of 

Saskatchewan not only in the activities but certainly in the 

function of this Consumer Affairs Authority. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, after the annual report is presented, again I 

point out that there is regulations that are impacting this 

particular Act. Bill 39 and Bill 40, as I mentioned, are certainly, 

they’re joined at the hip so to speak, with Bill 40 being the 

primary Bill in terms of . . . Or sorry, Bill 39 being the primary 

Bill because that is the Bill that’s going to be having the most 

impact, and Bill 40 is the consequential amendment Bill Act. So 

that’s simply something that’s going to be part and parcel of the 

main Bill. But nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that 

people out there know that these are issues that are important to 

all of us and that they take the time to read them and to 

understand them as I have for the last half hour or last hour. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that in terms of actions — 

because there’s been thousands of cases where Bill No. 39 or 

Bill 40, you know, may have been of some benefit to somebody 

10, 15, 20 years ago — there’s always limitations of actions, 

and that’s what’s important. Under this particular Act is says, 

“No action or proceeding lies or shall be commenced against 

the Government of Saskatchewan, any member of the Executive 

Council, the authority or any officer, employee or agent of the 

Government of Saskatchewan or the authority because of the 

enactment of this Act.” So I think one of the things that’s really 

important is that, I’m understanding, a limitation of actions 

would apply, seeing that there should be no actions commenced 

against the Government of Saskatchewan as a result of the 

limitation of actions section. And that’s pretty much 

straightforward again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And under the transitional, transfer of employees, obviously 

this being a new Act, they’re going to look and see how this 

thing is working. And one of the most important thing here is 

under section (2) of that particular point within the Act. It says: 

 

Notwithstanding any Act, law or provision of a contract, 

any transfer described in subsection (1): 

 

(a) does not constitute the abolition or termination of 

any position or job; 

 

(b) does not require any advance notice, including any 

notice that may be required pursuant to any Act, law or 

provision of a contract; and 

 

(c) does not constitute constructive dismissal of any . . . 

[Act] or a breach of contract. 

 

And finally: 

 

(3) If The Public Service Superannuation Act applies to a 

person who is transferred pursuant to this section, that Act 

continues to apply, with any necessary modification, to the 

person while the person is employed by the authority. 

 

And that’s something that is really important to note, Mr. 

Speaker, is that as a result of the creation of this Act, that you 

don’t have 15 staff employed in a different department or a 

different Act, and all of a sudden this new Act comes along, and 

they’re abolishing all those positions and just taking one. I think 

it’s important to know that we need to value our employees and 

that people that have given their lives to the service of 

government have to be recognized not only for their years of 

service but, if they have benefits and pensions that are being 

built up, that they ought to have those opportunities come with 

them to a new site or a new Act that is being proposed here. So 

I think that’s important that that is certainly noted. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would also point out that they make 

reference to some of the arguments in terms of the transition 

under a former fund. So what they got to do is they now have to 

describe what a former fund is. So under the Act, it’s clear that 

what they want to do is make sure that employees aren’t losing 

any benefits from pensions or benefits from any funds that are 

out there. So what they’ve done is they’ve identified what the 

former funds are. And, Mr. Speaker: 

 

(a) “former Act” means The Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Act, as that Act existed before the 

coming into force of this Act; 

 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

(b) “former fund” means the Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Fund . . . 

 

And basically just pointing out that all the Acts that are out 

there prior to this new Act coming forward in terms of funds 

and transitions and description, that they will respect all those 

particular funds that are out there. And I think it’s important to 

know that’s part of the Bill as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s got a lot of information overall in terms 

of the staff itself, of how we think the staff should be treated 

under the Bill. The Bill is fairly certain and direct and 

straightforward in its fashion when it comes to the transfer of 

employees from one entity to another once this Bill comes into 

effect. So we’re just hoping and praying that that is a 

continuation of what the Bill is intended to do because we base 

our Bills and the interpretation of these Bills is based on what is 

written here. 

 

So we hope that there isn’t any kind of suggestion or any kind 

of plan by the Saskatchewan Party to start using new Bills and 

new processes and new Acts to start terminating employees 

along the line. And that’s what’s one of the challenges that we 

have as an opposition is to make sure that as the Saskatchewan 

Party presents Bills to us and pretend to try and change things 

for the better, that they’re not using that as an opportunity to 

terminate employees or not fill other positions that are under 

previous Acts as their way of “modernizing Saskatchewan.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that people out there 

know that there’s always that particular chance that the 

Saskatchewan Party will do that. And our job as an opposition 

is to make sure we watch that. And the Bill itself says that 

they’re not going to do that, Mr. Speaker, but we’ve known 

from time to time that they have done this on a continual basis. 

And it’s something that we have to really pay attention to, and 

that’s why it’s interesting and paramount that we pay attention 

to these Bills as they come forward. 

 

So different organizations that are out there that may have 

impacts on this Bill or may have heard of a rumour or may have 

a concern or may have gone through the Bill itself, it’s 

important that we reach out to you and encourage you to bring 

those issues forward because if you don’t come forward and 

advise us what some of the challenges are, then it’s important to 

note that it would be a great injustice not only to you but to the 

people of Saskatchewan if you don’t come forward. Because we 

want to make sure that what is being proposed and planned 

here, that we in the opposition expose its weaknesses, its 

shortcomings, and its problems, if there are problems out there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a good example of that, the transfer of assets 

and liabilities. Well what exactly does that entail? And that’s 

what I said at the outset in Bill 39 or Bill 40. What assets are we 

talking about? What liabilities are we talking about? It talks 

about the statute of limitations on one hand, but it talks about 

assuming ongoing liabilities on the other hand. How do the two 

issues match up? So obviously there is some legal ramifications 

that we have to look at and understand and try and figure out. 

And that’s the important note, Mr. Speaker, is that that’s the 

conflicting messages and the misinformation we sometimes get 

and the lack of detail that we need here in our opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we look at the 

assets, the whole notion of assets and liabilities. Is it 

equipment? Is it bank accounts? Obviously they consider staff 

not necessarily an asset but certainly a huge addition to the 

department. And since you don’t want to characterize them in 

non-human ways as becoming assets, they’re assets in their own 

way, but how do we describe, identify, and certainly describe 

assets in general? 

 

Transition of members, directors, and executive director. I’m 

assuming the Act, the previous Act, is a new Act. It’s a new 

entity. It’s a new Crown corporation, or Treasury Board Crown. 

And so these guys, the people that are currently working now 

get transitioned over to a new entity created by this Act. We 

want to make sure that that transition is as seamless and 

professional and respective as possible. That’s what’s really, 

really important. And that’s something that the Bill also 

identifies. 

 

And it talks, the Bill talks about the consequential and coming 

into force provision. And as I mentioned at the outset, it has a 

lot of impact and effect on a number of different Bills that are 

out there, and this Bill attempts to identify that. 

 

So I think it’s important for people out there to know is that 

when the government does a certain Bill, as what they’re doing 

here with this particular Bill, and they have consequential 

amendments, and what that means is that if you do a Bill on a 

certain matter, there may be other Acts within government that 

has some effect on that Bill. So what happens is the government 

has to try and figure out how to bring all those pieces together 

and figure out one main Bill that not only respects what other 

Bills are trying to do but coordinates it in a better fashion. 

 

And that’s kind of what it’s trying to do here with the 

consequential amendment Act Bill to the Consumer Affairs 

Authority. And this is why it’s important that we take the time 

to see what the other effects of the other Bills are down the 

road. And are they lessening the impact of those Bills? Are they 

taking away staff? Are they granting different powers? Are they 

reducing authority? And that’s kind of what we had to make 

sure that we follow. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And it’s a fairly good rule, Mr. Speaker, when you have 

ministers that present these Bills and they want to put this new, 

bigger Bill in place of all the other Bills, that they’re forced to 

do all the consequential amendments to that Bill, so basically 

saying that if there’s an impact of this new Bill on other Acts, 

then they have to identify those Acts and bring them forward. I 

think it serves the public well. It certainly serves the opposition 

well because we’ve got to know if they’re going to do a 

particular Bill that reduces the effect of another Bill. And if 

they don’t do that and advise the House of that, then it’s kind of 

not the proper way, it’s not the proper way of doing things 

because quite frankly it’s important that the people of 

Saskatchewan, the opposition and impacted organizations and 

groups out there of any Bill know that there’s some changes 

coming, but you know, everything else that is impacting on this 

Bill is also included. So that’s something that people out there 

have to know. 

 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

So this Bill really goes on to identify which Acts are impacted. 

For example The Securities Act is certainly impacted by this 

Bill. The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act, that’s impacted as well. Mr. Speaker, the 

Consumer Affairs Authority Act is also another Act with this 

same name, probably different intent, but they’re also impacted. 

 

There’s also The Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Act is also impacted. And that’s one of the areas I 

think we need to pay some very close attention to to make sure 

that there’s no changes in that because it’s certainly, it’s nice to 

be able to see some of the venture capital corporations operate 

in Saskatchewan without political interference. 

 

And this Bill also impacts The Mortgage Brokerages and 

Mortgage Administrators Act that is also repealed, and there’s a 

substitution that I think it’s important that people know that 

they do these things, they have substitutions. The New 

Generation Co-operatives Act is amended and in a manner set 

forth as a result of this particular action. Again I go back to the 

whole pension benefits Act. This is also impacted by this Act. 

The Personal Property Security Act, it’s also impacted a great 

amount. The Saskatchewan Insurance Act is impacted. And so 

that’s an important point to note to the people of Saskatchewan 

that all these different Acts, The Trust and Loan Corporations 

Act, 1997, they’re all impacted by what the minister has 

proposed today which is the creation of a Treasury Board 

Crown called the Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan, and that’s what this Bill does. 

 

And I think that’s one of the reasons why, from our perspective 

as an opposition, we go through these Bills as I have for the last 

hour, just explaining to the people out there who may be 

listening how these Bills operate. Because these Bills quite 

clearly are complex in nature, but as you take the time to 

understand them, they’re simple to be able to understand what 

the intent is. 

 

And the main trick in opposition is to make sure you go through 

them as thoroughly as you can, get as many different groups 

and organizations out there that may have some influence or 

may be impacted by this Bill, to get advice from them as well. 

To say, look, this Bill is coming forward. It has all these 

impacts. Are you guys somehow impacted that you want to 

share with us, either on a positive note or a negative note? And 

most times it’s negative. Then we want to know about it so 

we’re able to challenge the government on that Bill and see why 

they made such a horrendous mistake. So I think it’s important 

that people out there know. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this Bill, Bill 39, and most 

recently Bill 40, the consequential amendment Act, that we 

have spoken about the authority, in terms of how we’re going to 

make sure we continue with the authority of Consumer Affairs, 

of how the organization of the authority is structured, of how 

the executive director and their employees are hired and 

selected, and the transition is supposed to be fair and open and 

seamless. And it talks about the financial services legislation in 

terms of how this impacts them. It talks about consumer 

protection. It talks about the general powers and matters and it 

talks about the financial matters and regulations. We spoke 

about the transitional and certainly the repealing of other Acts 

and other matters, and of course the last part was how other 

Acts were impacted. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out again that there’s so many 

different angles to this Bill, and explain it as best as we can to 

try and simplify it as best as we can so the people out there 

know exactly what the Bill is all about. And that’s one of the 

things that I think is really, really important for people out there 

to pay attention to. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think on Bill 39, and certainly most recently 

Bill 40, there’s a lot of questions we have yet to ask. Obviously 

my colleagues have been glued to their seats listening to my 

interpretation of this particular Act and to try and see where this 

Act is going and what this is, you know, all involves. And that’s 

why it’s important that as opposition we explain as best we can, 

we explain as best we can how the Bills are going to proceed 

from our perspective. We provide as much of the background 

information as we can through this particular channel of 

communication. And the most important channel of 

communication, I think though, is getting input from different 

people and different organizations as to how this Bill may affect 

them. 

 

There’s so many moving parts to any Bill, and consumer 

protection is such a tricky aspect of governance that we want to 

pay particular close attention to that admirable plan because it’s 

important that we protect consumers from fly-by-night 

operators or those that wish to prey on our elders and so on and 

so forth. There are those organizations and people that are out 

there. So we want to make sure we do the consumer protection 

process as fairly and open and thoroughly as we can, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think the other thing that’s important too is, as we embark on 

this journey of strengthening the consumer affairs protection 

Bill, that we ask for a number of different groups and 

organizations that could be of invaluable assistance. And one of 

the groups I think is important, Mr. Speaker, is the elderly. As 

you and I know that there’s many times that elderly people get 

involved with many different aspects of life. And they do a lot 

of shopping online. They get telephone calls. They’re subjected 

to many, many different kind of scams over their time. I know 

many elders in my community that are promised great things, 

but send us $1,000. And they end up sending $1,000 

somewhere, and they never see that money nor do they see the 

product that they paid for. 

 

So I think overall, I think people are wary of those particular, of 

that particular activity over time because there’s more and more 

information. And any time you see that kind of activity, Mr. 

Speaker, my advice to the elders or those that may have some 

cognitive challenges is to contact the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] to double check that these people are really 

good business people and that they’re well-respected and that 

they’re recognized as being truthful and honest. And that’s the 

very first step, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s important that when we talk about consumer protection 

that we do our work as legislators to make sure that there’s 

some good protection there for many people that we represent. 

And certainly one of the groups that I would caution people to 

always listen to and take care of is of course the elders, Mr. 

Speaker. 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

I would also suggest to many people that are out there that if 

they have concerns of their own under the consumer protection 

scenario that they look at this Bill. Because if you educate 

yourself as to the value of Bill 39 or Bill 40 and you know 

exactly what is being intended and how it was designed, how it 

was structured, it makes you a stronger advocate. It makes you 

a stronger person. So when you see this kind of activity 

occurring in your neighbourhood or with the apartment next 

door or your aunt or your uncle, then at least you have a great 

understanding of how The Consumer Protection Act works 

overall and how consumers are protected legally and what are 

some of the frameworks in which they’re protected. Having that 

knowledge is very, very valuable. 

 

And that’s why I went through the process of doing a bit of 

education on what this Bill’s all about because there are some 

wide-ranging implications overall. And our intent is to make 

sure, as an opposition, that we do our very best to let people 

know that this is what the Bill’s about, this is how it’s 

structured, and this is how you can become a great advocate if 

you follow the process fairly. And the best way to follow it 

fairly is to understand it really good. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think overall both those Bills, as I 

mentioned, are complementary to each other. And there’s a lot 

of interest, I’m paying particular interest to the transition of 

employees. I just pray that there isn’t any loss of jobs, as 

evidenced with this particular government over time. And 

certainly we’ve seen evidence that the federal government 

would do the same. And that’s kind of one of the reasons why 

we’re a bit wary at times when this government talks about 

transition of employees or talks about new Acts. We sometimes 

think that there’s a plan in place to get rid of the employees, just 

bring in the Act, thereby doing great injustice to the Act itself if 

you don’t have the appropriate resources and the people and the 

powers to do the job right. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s one of 

the things that I want to make sure people understand out there. 

 

I would close off on my comments on this particular Bill, Bill 

39, and of course attached to Bill 40, by saying one thing that’s 

really, really important — that consumer protection is all of our 

duty. It is every single person in this particular room duty to do 

this far and beyond the average person. But every person that’s 

out there now, if they see an elder being abused in some way, 

shape, or form, a consumer being ripped off, it happens on a 

continual basis. By and large most of the businesses in 

Saskatchewan are very good, Mr. Speaker. They’re reputable. 

They’re respectful. They do great service for their customers, 

and the list goes on as to how some of these businesses ought to 

be recognized for their success. 

 

But now and then, and many times too often I might add, where 

some group, an organization gets horrendously ripped off — if I 

can use that phrase — and they sometimes feel that they’re 

alone in this process. Well now we have a Treasury Board 

Crown that we hope can be designed fairly, a Treasury Board 

Crown with the right powers that can act accordingly and to be 

able to protect some of those interests. And I pray that that was 

the intent of this particular Act, and we’re paying very, very 

close attention to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again as I said a few minutes ago, there were thousands of 

examples. And most recently I’ve used the example of, which I 

didn’t think if there was ever a phrase for counterfeit drugs, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re hearing now that there’s some drugs out there 

that pretend to be a drug that many people need, in particular 

the older people. And then we find out later — or some cancer 

patient — and we find out later that those drugs are not . . . that 

they don’t do any kind of job for the people that are paying 

good money for that. 

 

And that’s another example of how the consumer can be 

protected under this Bill. And it also is another example of how 

people need to watch out for each other because our job is to 

make sure we go after every business that practices unfair or 

certainly unscrupulous ways in how they can rip off people. We 

need to go after those organizations that do that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we hope that this Bill is explained long enough and 

loud enough so people out there know how to utilize it. So I 

think it’s important that that message is said on a continual 

basis. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to quickly wrap up how 

I interpreted the Bill overall. I found the Bill as fairly lengthy. I 

was somewhat disappointed in the brief explanation that the 

minister gave in terms of the intent of the Bill. It’s a huge, it’s a 

huge, huge Bill that has great implications if done properly. 

And the short explanation of the Bill did not do justice to the 

purpose, what I think all our purpose is, to make sure we will 

protect as many consumers as we can in all jurisdictions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly what the message is, that we have as the 

official opposition is we don’t want to take consumer protection 

lightly. We think it’s an admirable objective, and we’ll certainly 

do our part in the opposition to understand the Bill as much as 

we can. And there may be times where we will propose an 

alternative or we might propose an amendment or we may 

propose a better idea on how we could do it with some really 

good changes, better and stronger and quicker. And that’s one 

of the things I think the value of the opposition is, is to take the 

time to understand it, Mr. Speaker, and certainly work to get a 

better product or a better Bill at the end of the day if that is 

required. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So all the folks out there that may have been paying attention to 

what this Bill may or may not do for them, I would say to them 

that every Bill that comes forward has descriptions of what’s 

impacted in the Bill. Every Bill has its intent laid out. Every 

Bill that may have impact on other Acts or other Bills out there, 

that’s to be identified within the Bill as well. And that’s what 

this particular Bill has done. And this consequential amendment 

Act to the consumer protection Bill that was presented earlier 

today, that’s just a minor amendment to another Act to make 

sure it’s consistent with how we deal with Bills in the 

Legislative Chamber. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would again reiterate that we’re very pleased 

to be able to take the time to go through the Bill today. We 

obviously will have a lot more questions. We will have a lot 

more input from a lot more people as time goes on. 

 

Our job is to look at the Bill initially to see what it does, what 

the government plans to do with the Bill. And then the second 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

part of the process is to make sure we reach out to different 

groups and organizations that may be impacted by the Bill to 

see what their input is or how they would perceive the Bill as 

being advantageous or hurtful to their organization. And that’ll 

certainly be undertaken by the official opposition. 

 

And of course the other thing is to open it up to the general 

public, to the average person, to make sure that they too know 

that they have a role to play, that they can easily approach one 

of us as MLAs or phone the main NDP number. And we will 

certainly hear your advice on what you think this Bill or any 

other Bill may affect you adversely or even positively as we 

proceed to have these Bills become law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would reiterate one key point that I think is 

really important is that, as this government brings Bills forward 

— and this is the role that we would have as opposition — as 

they bring Bills forward, that we have to make sure that there 

isn’t any watering down or there isn’t any other lesser ideals 

being achieved because of these new Bills. That’s what’s really 

important. 

 

And that’s why you’ve got to make reference to some of the 

older Bills. I think that’s one part of the legislation, I think, is a 

bit weak in this Assembly. As we continue doing our work here 

is that it’s nice to be able to have the Bill that’s impacted, as we 

do with this Bill, to see all the other consequential Acts that are 

impacted by that. But it would be nice to make reference to the 

previous Bill. Like what part of the previous Bill does this Bill 

not incorporate? 

 

And I think if we don’t have that information readily available, 

I think it does a great disservice to the Bill that’s being 

presented. And it also does a great disservice to the Assembly 

itself because it’s important to have all the data, the right 

information in front of us. Because if you don’t have all that 

data, then obviously it’s going to create some problems for you 

in assessing the impact of the Bill that you’re currently 

debating. 

 

So I think the benefits have to be twofold. I think we’ve 

achieved one objective, that is to have any other Bill impacted 

to be identified within the new Bill being proposed. I think that 

is being done through the consequential amendment process. 

But more so on the secondary argument, which I don’t see 

evidence of that happening, is that we must do a comparison, an 

analysis of the older Bill in terms of what may be lost in the 

presentation of a new Bill. I think that’s important that we do 

that because we need to see and assess for our own selves, even 

from different perspectives and different parties, as to what is 

being lost in the transition. 

 

Because a lot of times . . . A good example I would use is the 

analysis of a vehicle. You know, you could have a very nice 

vehicle that’s good on gas, and it’s, you know, it’s a great, it’s a 

sound vehicle, and the engine runs good. And then you see this 

nice, shiny Camaro, you know. And you get caught up by the 

bright lights and the new, shiny Camaro and the new Bill and 

say, well right on. That looks great. Maybe I should take that. 

And what you don’t know, Mr. Speaker, is that that new, shiny 

vehicle may have a smaller motor or may be worse on gas. 

 

And that’s the problem I think happens when you look at the 

assessment of the Bills in general is that sometimes these new 

Bills that are vaunted and spoke about at length. In terms of 

what the intent is, we sometimes forget to ask the question, is 

what did the previous Bill look like? Or what is being omitted 

from the previous Bill under this new, shiny Bill? So that’s the 

thing I think I would make the reference in my argument that 

we ought to be able to see the changes, the proposed changes, 

clearly identified under a different section of how this may take 

away ability or strength from another Bill, an older Bill, without 

the public and the opposition knowing about it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think if that option were to be looked at 

and included in the analysis of any new Bills that this 

government brings forward, I think it’d be a great tool for 

democracy but more so a great tool for the opposition to be able 

to look at what is being done by this government without 

having to dig deeper and dig longer to see what exactly is going 

on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues will have a lot more to 

say about these Bills. I’ve explained the Bill in detail as I 

mentioned as best I can. There’s a lot of different issues that 

will come forward over time. We want to make sure that we 

again make the offer to the public that’s out there. If they have 

any particular advice or information that you’d like the 

opposition to be made aware of, then I think it’s important that 

you bring them forward. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that I would 

move that we adjourn the debate on Bill number . . . I believe 

it’s Bill No. 40, An Act to make a consequential amendment 

resulting from the enactment of The Financial and Consumers 

Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act. So therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, on this Bill No. 40, I move that we adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 40, The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of 

Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I will call the 

question then. We have a motion on the floor for adjournment 

of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed? Carried. 

 

Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to speak about The Tourism Saskatchewan Act. This Act makes 

Tourism Saskatchewan a Treasury Board Crown which will 

provide greater direction over tourism functioning and overall 

tourism activities. 

 

We decided to make this change after carefully reviewing key 

recommendations from a review of the tourism system. I’ll tell 

you about some of the key recommendations and some of the 

results of the consultations, but first let me give you a little 

background. 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

A few years ago, our government hired independent consultants 

to do a tourism system review. The eight-month process 

included extensive consultations and input from a broad 

cross-section of the industry. The consultations for the review 

included key stakeholder interviews, meetings with specific 

organizations including Tourism Saskatchewan’s management 

team, focus group sessions with industry, and written input 

from interested organizations. 

 

The consultants wrote in the report that with the creation of our 

ministry, the Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport in 

2008, that it was, and I quote: 

 

. . . timely to review the role of the Ministry, Tourism 

Saskatchewan’s mandate and the relationships of the 

government and the regions with Tourism Saskatchewan, 

the five tourism regions and the City and Destination 

Marketing Organizations. Much has changed in and 

around the tourism sector in these last 10 years. The role 

and prominence of the internet in tourism marketing and 

visitor planning has grown. Saskatchewan’s economic 

profile as well as the world economy continues to 

fluctuate. How, why and where people travel has evolved 

significantly. 

 

And that’s the end of the quote. 

 

These were some of the reasons for the review. Even more has 

changed since that was written. In fact Tourism Saskatchewan 

has taken the first step in making some changes, implementing 

a quality assurance program and stopping funding for the five 

tourism regions. 

 

At this time, I’d like to read the eight guiding principles for the 

review developed by the steering committee and recorded in 

volume 1 of the review: 

 

(1) The review needs to be visionary. 

(2) The growth of the tourism industry in terms of gross 

revenue should be the focus. 

(3) The relationships in the industry should emphasize 

collaboration. 

(4) Recommendations should emphasize a simplification 

of processes. 

(5) Recommendations should be informed by best 

practices. 

(6) Recommendations should be action-oriented and as 

specific as possible indicating responsibility for the action 

and timeframe. 

(7) There are no sacred cows. 

 

And finally: 

 

(8) The review will be transparent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I review these eight guiding principles and 

think about the recommendations and our government’s 

subsequent actions, I am indeed proud to say we followed the 

spirit of these guiding principles. 

 

Now let’s get to what the consultants found. The consultations 

showed that generally there is satisfaction with the current 

model but that it could be better. And certainly we want it to be 

better, Mr. Speaker. Making these changes to focus Tourism 

Saskatchewan’s mandate and to better coordinate the provincial 

image will grow this industry and will support our 

government’s growth agenda. The review consultation 

document asked if government was in or out and said 

specifically, if it was in tourism, it needed to fund its own assets 

such as its provincial parks, among other things. We’re 

certainly doing that, Mr. Speaker, as you well know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, government is in tourism. It’s a $1.7 billion 

industry for this province, and we are funding our own assets. 

Budget 2012-2013 fulfills the government’s promise to invest 

an additional $10 million over the next four years to improve 

provincial parks. This year an extra $2.5 million will be spent 

on things like improving washroom and shower facilities, 

upgrading picnic areas and barbeques, and adding more 

electrified campsites. As you will remember, we have achieved 

almost 1,100 of those in the last four years. 

 

The review also recommended a one point of entry, a single 

point of entry for tourism. By creating this tourism Treasury 

Board Crown, we are creating one point of entry for tourism, 

and that, of course, is the provincial government itself. 

 

And the review highlighted that this province is an anomaly in 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, we’re taking best practice from across the 

country. It’s well worth noting that every other jurisdiction in 

Canada has the tourism functions in either an agency of the 

Crown or delivers it directly through a ministry. For example, 

you may have seen Newfoundland and Labrador’s recent 

television campaign which won the Tourism Industry 

Association of Canada’s Marketing Campaign of the Year 

award. Mr. Speaker, Newfoundland and Labrador currently 

does this from inside the Department of Tourism, Culture and 

Recreation in that province. You may also have seen the recent 

Alberta advertisements. They were done by a legislated agency 

of the Crown called Travel Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re acting on the recommendations in the 

tourism report, and I believe the industry will see tangible 

benefits as a result. In fact the industry has already seen 

tangible benefits consistent with the tourism review 

recommendations. The review had recommended a quality 

assurance program and a centrally coordinated, in-province 

marketing campaign. Tourism Saskatchewan has already acted 

on and implemented both of these items. 

 

Our government is now continuing to review and implement 

recommendations from the tourism review. From here industry 

will see a greater focus on tourism as part of government’s 

overall economic plan. This will ensure that the entire tourism 

industry benefits from our government’s investment, not just 

the members of the association. It will allow a greater 

coordination of the provincial image, particularly at major 

events.  

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has already hosted and will be 

hosting a number of very significant events. Right now, for 

example, Tourism Saskatchewan and the provincial government 

each have their own presence at these events, and this just 

doesn’t make sense to us. The change will allow for one 

coordinated provincial image, and this is particularly important, 

and particularly so right now. 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

I’m pleased to report that budget 2012-13 includes increased 

funding of $2.5 million for our event hosting program in the 

tourism initiatives branch. The Government of Saskatchewan 

supports events to increase tourism revenue, create 

employment, increase volunteerism, increase opportunities for 

residents and non-residents alike, and to solidify our provincial 

identity, and, I might add, Mr. Speaker, build pride in our great 

province. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Events provide residents the chance to participate in new and 

unique activities. They provide exposure to different cultural, 

recreational, and sport activities and a forum to generate interest 

for those activities among a wider audience. Major events 

provide a return on investment and grow the economy. For 

example, the 2010 IIHF [International Ice Hockey Federation] 

World Junior Hockey Championships generated an estimated 

$86.6 million in economic activity for the province, of which 

$49.6 million was in Saskatoon, $18.9 million was in Regina, 

with the remaining 18.1 million for the rest of the province. Mr. 

Speaker, the ROI [return on investment] on that event was 

approximately 30 to 1. That’s significant. In fact it’s 

extraordinary. 

 

Since 2008 more than 70 events have received support, and we 

have some exciting events coming up that our ministry is 

supporting. And these include: the 2012 Canadian Country 

Music Awards in Saskatoon supported by a grant of $375,000; 

the 2013 Juno Awards and Junos in Regina, $1.5 million in 

support — I must also add that that’s going to be in Moose Jaw 

as well; they’re very proud of their participation and so are we 

— the 2013 Memorial Cup in Saskatoon, $250,000 in a capital 

grant and $3 million in a profit guarantee; and finally the 2014 

North America Indigenous Games here in Regina, $3.5 million 

in support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, supporting events like these provide a significant 

return on our investment through stimulating the economy. 

They bring tourists, increased tax revenues, and yes, they create 

jobs. They help our government in keeping the Saskatchewan 

advantage. This is a program we are very proud of, and it makes 

sense to work with Tourism Saskatchewan on showcasing our 

very best self at these events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, one of the recommendations in the 

review was one point, a single point of entry for tourism. There 

are many people experiencing Saskatchewan these days. There 

are in fact business leaders, meetings and conventions, 

dignitaries, investors, foreign students, and on and on. This 

change will allow coordination so that government can make 

the visitor experience great and more similar for all of these 

groups. Mr. Speaker, tourism is a big industry in Saskatchewan, 

and government is taking a greater leadership role, which will 

better position the industry for growth as requested by the 

review. The new Crown corporation will help us to achieve the 

goal of better aligning all of our provincial marketing efforts to 

attract more business and investment and be more consistent 

with our message and more effective in marketing our province 

both here at home and around the world. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan has done a solid job in taking tourism to 

this point, but Tourism Saskatchewan is an anomaly in Canada. 

In the three other provinces that actually have an arm’s-length 

agency, they are all agencies of the Crown. This Act makes 

Tourism Saskatchewan a Treasury Board Crown rather than an 

arm’s-length agency and clarifies Tourism Saskatchewan’s 

mandate by focusing it on marketing, visitor services, market 

research, and product development. 

 

At the same time, as a Treasury Board Crown, Tourism 

Saskatchewan will retain much of the flexibility it currently has. 

It will retain, for example, the ability to respond to shifts in the 

marketplace and technology, the ability to access private sector 

support and partnership through partnered marketing 

promotions, the ability to market online, the long-term 

commitment to markets, the ability to enter multi-year 

agreements, the ability to carry funds over between fiscal years 

— very important — the ability to attract top quality marketing 

people, and finally the ability to foster industry engagement. 

These will all continue under a Treasury Board Crown model. 

 

I want to assure industry members that as a continuation of the 

existing corporation, all of Tourism Saskatchewan’s current 

agreements and contracts will carry forward under the new 

structure. Employees and employee contracts are also carried 

forward to the new organization. And Tourism Saskatchewan’s 

budget allocation from the Government of Saskatchewan 

remains fully intact at $12.81 million. 

 

Many tourism operators are wondering what the structural 

change at Tourism Saskatchewan means for their tourism 

business, event, or attraction. The programs and services of 

Tourism Saskatchewan will continue uninterrupted. This 

includes targeted marketing initiatives like the travel guide 

advertisements and listings, trade shows, and of course the 2012 

Saskatchewan campaign. The work Tourism Saskatchewan has 

been moving forward on quality assurance will also continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I conclude my remarks, I want to assure 

industry that there is one recommendation in the review that we 

will not be implementing, and that is a province-wide 

destination marketing fee, or DMF as it’s known in the 

industry. We believe that the current system, where the private 

sector such as the Hotels Association implements these fees, is 

working very well. We have certainly said that we will not be 

changing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again I’d like to thank Tourism 

Saskatchewan for all of their good efforts, their hard work, and 

to let them know we are looking forward to working with them 

to continue to grow this wonderful industry. Again, tourism is a 

$1.7 billion industry, and I might add it accounts for 60,000 

jobs for Saskatchewan residents. It certainly makes sense that it 

be marketed alongside the rest of the provincial economy as a 

full and equal partner. 

 

To conclude, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second 

reading of The Tourism Saskatchewan Act. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport has moved second reading of Bill No. 37, The Tourism 

Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

interest that I rise today to speak to this new Bill respecting 

Tourism Saskatchewan, Bill No. 37. 

 

Just with a bit of a background, Mr. Speaker, I have been 

peripherally involved in the tourism industry for a number of 

years now, in particular through a cultural centre that’s been 

established north of Big River, Saskatchewan at what we call 

Ness Creek. And Ness Creek is an actual creek that’s located 

about 15, 20 kilometres northeast of Big River, and we have 

been doing cultural events there for over 20 years now. 

 

I also am a part of a group that operates a campground in a 

recreational site in northern Saskatchewan called Nesslin Lake. 

And we are busy getting ready for this year’s operation. We 

have people that are working very hard to get everything ready. 

And you know, running a business up there with a remote 

location has always proved to be very challenging. 

 

So as a result of some of the work we’ve done with Tourism 

Saskatchewan, we were with the northwest tourism region for a 

number of years and have been heavily involved in the 

operations of that region until it was shut down recently. And 

my one business partner, Gord Olson, is the linchpin for our 

organization, and he has been heavily invested in the 

development of Tourism Saskatchewan since it was started in 

’98, and certainly was involved with TISASK [Tourism 

Industry Association of Saskatchewan] before then. But since 

Tourism Saskatchewan got established, he has been incredibly 

involved in that particular region, supportive of the work of the 

organization, and a key member of the Tourism Saskatchewan 

industry. 

 

Some of the work we’ve done has been with the help of 

Tourism Saskatchewan, and one of the main programs that 

we’ve really benefited from was one that helped us establish 

CNEC, which is the Canada Nature Escapes Cooperative. And 

we’ve joined forces with six or seven other tourism operators in 

the North to provide what we call a DMO, or a destination 

marketing organization, and this has proved to be very, very 

helpful for us. It was totally with the support of Tourism 

Saskatchewan, who understands how small operators work and 

how working together co-operatively can help enhance our 

marketing opportunities. 

 

So the main thrust of CNEC is to do marketing, and we’ve 

worked very closely with the marketing officials at Tourism 

Saskatchewan. They’ve been incredibly helpful and have 

certainly have provided funding for CNEC to do the work it 

does. And certainly I would recommend any of the members to 

go online and just google CNEC, Canadian Nature Escapes 

Cooperative, and you will see a lot of the results of the work 

that has been done, on and off, with the incredible support and 

assistance of Tourism Saskatchewan, particularly Mr. Jonathon 

Potts who’s been at Tourism Saskatchewan for a long time. I 

met Jonathon several years ago when we first started 

developing our operation, and the support that we’ve been 

given has been substantial. And I think without them, we 

certainly wouldn’t be where we are right now. 

 

Another piece of work that we’re working on is looking at the 

west side of the Prince Albert National Park, so there’s been a 

lot of partnerships developed there. And the national park itself, 

of course, is a federal jurisdiction, but with some of our 

business partners in the area, including Sturgeon River Ranch 

and Nesslin Lake campgrounds and Delaronde and the town of 

Big River, and certainly with the support of the government 

through some tourism funding support for the town, we’ve been 

able to create a buzz around the west side of the Prince Albert 

National Park. 

 

And again it’s a remote area. It’s beautiful and it’s pristine. And 

all those features are, in a strengths analysis, they are our 

strengths and weaknesses. So with the co-operation of other 

tourism operators in the area, we’ve been able to build a 

reputation for ourselves. And indeed this year, CNEC will be 

represented at Rendez-Vous Canada, which is the premier 

tourism marketing event in the country. And this is the first 

time that us, as small operators, have been able to afford to 

work together with other operators, through the support of 

Tourism Saskatchewan and encouragement of Tourism 

Saskatchewan, to actually be a presence and to attract 

international visitors to our beautiful but remote area of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s been other programs that we’ve been able to access 

through Tourism Saskatchewan, particularly through the STEC 

or the Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council. And we 

worked on a mentorship program, and we were mentored with 

Brad Muir who operates a sled dog — Sundog Excursions, I 

think it’s called — he operates a sled dog excursion company 

near the national park, I think near Anglin Lake. And other 

members of CNEC have mentored our organization. So you can 

see that the member-driven aspect of Tourism Saskatchewan 

has been incredibly successful for our operation, and I would 

think that for many of the small operators and the ones that I 

have spoken to, it’s something that is cherished and really 

appreciated. It’s the collegiality among the members that has 

been the actual strength of Tourism Saskatchewan in addition to 

the strong leadership that the agency has had, particularly with 

their most recent executive director, Dr. Haverstock. 

 

So she’s been a visionary in many ways for the organization, 

and I think it’s been a very good development in the tourism 

industry. It’s really helped the small operators and helped the 

people that need the help the most, which is the people in 

remote areas or mom and pop operators that have a bed and 

breakfast or maybe a little cattle ranch or the organization at 

Herschel where they have the tours of the medicine rings in the 

area. So there’s small anthropological tourism outfits. I know 

the T.rex Centre down in Eastend has benefited from the 

support of Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

So for all those reasons, Mr. Speaker, it’s somewhat curious 

that this government has felt necessary to interfere in what 

appears to be a good thing. We just heard some of the reasons 

from the minister, which to me suggests that it isn’t absolutely a 

requirement for this to be a Crown corporation; it is just 

something that this government wants. I don’t think there’s any 

real need for this to happen. The operations are going just fine. 

There’s been no complaints from the industry. 

 

And certainly according to news reports that we have had 

opportunity to read since the Bill was introduced, it’s clear that 

there was no consultation at all with the industry. And that’s 

one of the major concerns, I think, that’s being expressed. 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

Certainly the executive director of Tourism Saskatchewan was 

blindsided. So that’s a strange way to work closely with an 

industry is when you actually knock them over sideways with 

an announcement that will profoundly impact the way their 

operations are being conducted. 

 

I guess another thing I’d like to talk about a little bit before I 

actually get into the Bill is the work of STEC, the 

Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council. And I was really 

fortunate. All of us were invited last week to a banquet in 

Saskatoon of the graduates from the STEC program for the 

hospitality industry. And this is a 12-week program that is 

offered to people who are looking for a career in the service 

industry. These are young people, and they may not have any 

other opportunities for this kind of program. I went to the 

banquet. I was the only MLA there. It was a really amazing 

event; it was quite impressive. We had some very young people 

who had spent 12 weeks learning how to cook under the 

supervision of two master chefs and they also had service . . . 

The other group were taught service under again the supervision 

of experienced career industry professionals. So these young 

people would . . . They all came. It was a small group of us, and 

they would serve us. They poured the drinks, they set the table, 

they brought out all the meal, the entree, the salad, all of those 

things. And they were so proud of the work they did that it 

really came through in the service that we received. 

 

But I think the people that were the most proud were the people 

from STEC. I sat at a table with four of the employees from 

STEC, and they talked with great pride about the advances that 

they’ve made through STEC in the service industry and in the 

hospitality industry. And just even some of the standards that 

they’ve established, and they’ve been partnering with all the 

other provinces and working on nationwide standards for 

service, for food service, for health and safety. All these 

students were taking all the food safety training, WHMIS 

[workplace hazardous materials information system] training, 

and all the other sort of certificates that they would need to be a 

contributing member of that particular profession. And indeed, 

Mr. Speaker, they treat it as a profession, and it’s something 

that they’re all very, very proud of. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So that was one of the events. And I think with STEC, there’s a 

lot of questions right now. What is going to happen to the 

people at STEC? How are the programs going to be changed? 

What will the impact be now that the government has inserted 

itself into the processes that were working just fine and had no 

need of change? And certainly with no consultation, they are 

really worried about what’s going to be their future as a 

program and individually as employees of STEC. 

 

So they have a lot of contractors who provide all sorts of 

training in different areas. Those people are very concerned 

right now about the impact of this Bill. And certainly we have a 

lot of questions about that and are going to want to look into it 

very carefully before we can suggest that this Bill be moved 

forward to committee. 

 

The other experience that I had recently was attending the gala 

here in Regina a few weeks ago for the annual awards, and that 

was a really informative evening as well. And I did . . . There 

was I think the day after this Bill was introduced first reading, 

and there was some real concerns about what was happening, 

and particularly from the staff again. The one fellow that I 

talked to the most is incredibly concerned about the marketing 

work that he’s been doing. And I think there’s a good reason for 

that, and mainly because the marketing program that has been 

developed to date is one that is supported by the members. 

 

So all the consultation in terms of how marketing is delivered, 

what Sask Tourism’s role is in marketing is very, very focused 

on the individual operators. That’s who they go to first, and 

that’s who drives the marketing planning. And as I said, the 

Canadian Nature Escapes Cooperative, that’s an example of a 

marketing plan that has worked very, very well and that the 

operators have benefited from. 

 

If the focus now appears to be on major events, which is what 

the minister spoke about in his introductory remarks, it worries 

me that small operators are just going to be overlooked 

completely, that this government is not interested in anything 

unless it generates big dollars for single events. When you look 

at the dollars that these people are generating through their 

marketing efforts over the season, throughout the year, it’s a 

much smaller level. So it’s not so splashy or flashy as these 

major events are. And not to say that those events aren’t 

important. And certainly the funding that’s been provided in the 

past for those events has been greatly appreciated and used. 

And what’s the problem? They’ve been run just fine. 

 

So to insert another layer of bureaucracy into something that’s 

working quite well is really beyond my understanding, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think there’s a lot of people in Saskatchewan 

have questions about that as well. 

 

The Bill itself, the way it’s structured and it appears to be 

pointing towards, is the establishment of another Crown 

corporation. We heard earlier today about yet an additional 

Crown corporation, the Financial and Consumer Affairs 

Authority. So we have two Bills here today. We’re talking 

about where we’re going to actually have new Crowns. I don’t 

know how many Crowns we’re up to now, but it looks like 

they’re being added to quite steadily through this legislative 

session. 

 

At any rate, they are going to transform, the goal is to transform 

the authority into a Crown called Tourism Saskatchewan, which 

would be a Treasury Board Crown corporation. So it’s caught 

within The Crown Corporations Act. There’s going to be . . . 

The membership is going to be established pursuant to section 

13 which I’ll get to in a minute. And here’s the purposes of the 

corporation, and it is “to market Saskatchewan as a tourism 

destination in domestic, national and international markets.” 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is something that Tourism 

Saskatchewan’s been doing. So it’s not clear to me where the 

difference is and why that would be seen as a change or 

something necessary for the government to intersperse a whole 

new bureaucratic layer to the work that these people have been 

doing. 

 

The second purpose is “to assist Saskatchewan’s tourism 

industry operators to market their products.” As I said, that’s 

already being done, and it’s being done at the direction of the 

members which makes . . . The operators themselves are the 



April 16, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

ones that are making those decisions. They have the skills. They 

have the expertise. With the help of Tourism Saskatchewan, 

they’ve been trained, and they certainly have the awareness of 

what their marketing needs are. So again, this purpose adds 

nothing to what’s already there. And certainly the lack of 

consultation with the operators and Tourism Saskatchewan 

itself points us to a direction I think many people are 

uncomfortable with the direction that this government is taking. 

 

The third purpose is “to develop and promote the quality of 

tourism products and services in Saskatchewan.” Again there’s 

no indication from anything the minister has said or anything 

that we see in the press or anything from Tourism 

Saskatchewan that this is a problem that they aren’t already 

developing and promoting the quality of tourism products. So a 

bit of a mystery there as well, Mr. Speaker. We’re not sure why 

this is seen as necessary, for government interference. 

 

Fourth purpose, “to provide visitor information services.” Once 

again, we have Sask Tourism who’s already conducting that. 

They’re already looking after it. They’re already doing a fine 

job. It’s member driven. It’s operator driven. They know what 

they’re doing. They have the expertise and the corporate 

knowledge that they need to ensure that the visitor information 

services truly represent what the operators, the backbone of the 

industry, the operators and the outfitters and the local recreation 

associations and all the parks, they all know what they need for 

marketing. So to add a bureaucratic layer of civil servants to tell 

them what they need is of great concern to the industry, and I 

think it certainly is of concern to the public. 

 

And then of course the fifth purpose is the usual undertake any 

other activities clause that you would see in a Bill of this sort. 

So in terms of the purposes of the corporation as set out in this 

Bill, it appears to me that it’s changing really absolutely nothing 

except adding government interference into what is already 

being done successfully, competently, and capably by the 

operators of this province and by Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

There are several powers that are set out in the Bill, and those 

powers are all found in section 6(1). There’s things like they 

can sign contracts or buy land or charge fees or establish 

advisory committees, typical things I think you would see. And 

again this is something that the Saskatchewan Tourism is 

already doing. So other than . . . I’m not sure if they can 

purchase land, but you know, those are the typical things that 

the Saskatchewan Tourism has been doing. There’s no change 

here. 

 

They’re deeming that it’s an agent to the Crown in section 7. 

 

Section 8, that the head office is to be in Saskatchewan, which 

makes sense. So that’s not really an issue. 

 

I guess the biggest issue is section 9 where the corporation is 

now responsible to the minister for the fulfillment of its 

purposes. And I think that’s something that the public needs to 

be very concerned about here is that we see a government 

minister inserting his agenda, his corporate agenda for the 

success of the government rather than the agenda that should be 

front and foremost, which is the agenda of the actual tourism 

operators. Because the power of tourism is so alluring for 

advertising dollars and for capturing people’s attention, I’m 

afraid that this government is inserting itself into a business that 

has clearly established itself as one that’s capable of doing what 

it needs to do, which is promote the industry. It’s not to 

promote the government. And I think that’s the biggest 

distinction that needs to be made here, Mr. Speaker. This isn’t 

about promoting industry. This Bill is not about promoting the 

industry. It’s about promoting the goals of this government. 

And those are two very different things. 

 

The government’s agenda is quite different than the agenda of 

the tourism industry. And I know the minister spoke about some 

of the events, that somehow the events are what’s driving us. 

Well those events are happening, and certainly the government 

should support them. But there are capable people within the 

community, within the industry that can run those events. They 

don’t need the government’s help in running it or organizing it 

or directing it. They do need government support in financial 

support to make sure these events are able to be carried out. But 

as he said, the return on investment for these events is so great 

that it is a wise investment on the part of our government to 

support them financially. 

 

But supporting them financially is nowhere near what this Bill 

purports to do. It goes far greater in depth than supporting them 

financially. It is taking control of the advertising agenda for 

tourism in Saskatchewan. And I think that may be the reason 

why they chose not to consult with the operators in the industry 

because I think the message from the industry would have been 

very, very different, Mr. Speaker, than what the government is 

intending to do here at this point. 

 

The goal to have a government presence, I think I saw when the 

minister was introducing the Bill in the budget speech when we 

first heard about this. I think the Finance minister said 

something about that it’s to promote government ministries 

rather than tourism. That doesn’t make sense. I mean if the 

Crown corporation’s sole purpose was to take advice from 

operators and have some sort of consultative process with 

operators and unfold the industry as the operators and all the 

industry people saw fit, that would make a lot more sense, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But in this case, it isn’t what they’re doing. What they’re doing 

here is actually taking over the agenda. And any time a 

government takes over an agenda for advertising of the 

activities of the province, we have to be worried about what that 

is going to be seen as. And in many cases, I think people will 

see this as somewhat of a propaganda machine, that this 

government is looking to promote its own agenda, its own 

platform. And it’s overtaking what is really important to the 

tourism industry, and that’s the agenda of the operators 

themselves, the smaller operators as well as the large ones and 

those are ones that are the backbone of the industry. Yes, the 

Junos are important but they’re not here every year. The 

CCMAs [Canadian Country Music Association] are important, 

but they are not here every year. Even the Grey Cup is 

important, but it’s simply not here every year. 

 

The tourism industry in Saskatchewan is supported by those 

small organizations and some really well-established ones — 

the golf courses, the resorts, the campgrounds, the cultural 

events and festivals that give vibrancy to our summers and to 

our province so that people know who we are. 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2012 

So, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had a chance to go through the 

whole Bill, but I think my main concerns are those that I’ve 

expressed, where we see a government interfering and 

interspersing its own agenda in the tourism advertising 

objectives of the industry. So at this point I think, Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to close my comments. I know a lot of my 

colleagues are going to have comments as well, so I want to 

give them time to address this. And I think at this point I would 

just like to move to adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 37, The Tourism Saskatchewan Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees this evening, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands adjourned to 

1:30 p.m. Tuesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1021 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1032 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 2012 Paragon Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 

 Hampton Village Easter Extravaganza 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 

 New Moose Jaw Hospital 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1023 

 Ehrlo Outdoor Hockey League 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 

 TheatreFest in Yorkton 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1024 

 Recognition of Police Services in Regina 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 

 Remembering Archbishop Michael Bzdel 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Electoral Representation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1025 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1025 

 Minimum Wage Rate 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1026 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1026 

 Plans for Highways Ministry 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1026 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1027 

 Community Pastures 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1028 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1028 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 39 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1029 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1030 

 Bill No. 40 — The Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority of Saskatchewan Consequential Amendment Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Financial and Consumer Affairs 

 Authority of Saskatchewan Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1034 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1034 

 Bill No. 37 — The Tourism Saskatchewan Act 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1048 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1051 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


