




















































Hansard: November 13, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 11A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1869 

 November 13, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the Assembly, two gentlemen seated in the west gallery. 

They are the mayor of Wolseley, His Worship Mr. Dennis 

Fjestad, and the town administrator, Mr. Ed Attridge, if they 

can just give us a wave up there. There they are. These 

gentlemen have joined us today in conjunction with the Main 

Street program in Wolseley, Mr. Speaker, which we will hear a 

little bit more about later in today’s agenda. 

 

Both Mayor Fjestad and Mr. Attridge have played a big part in 

the success of the Main Street program in Wolseley. Mayor 

Fjestad has lived in Wolseley for 14 years and is currently 

serving his second term as mayor. Besides serving as the 

chairman of Main Street Wolseley, he also sits on the board of 

directors for SaskCulture. In his role as Main Street coordinator, 

Mr. Attridge works with the community, government, and 

stakeholders to deliver the Main Street program. He also 

administers the cultural resource partnership through the 

SaskCulture program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to help 

me welcome these gentlemen to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 

introduce Lesa Giesbrecht. Lesa is a 13-year-old student who 

attends Venture Heights in Martensville. She’s here today with 

her mom, Vicky. She’s missing school today but for an 

educational experience. She took a tour of the Legislative 

Building this morning, and I got to meet with her and show her 

the Premier’s office and the cabinet office, which is not usually 

on the tour. 

 

And so I would ask all of my colleagues to welcome them here 

to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Greystone has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, it’s a bit of a bittersweet 

introduction this afternoon to a remarkable son of Prince Albert 

and of the province, a graduate of the University of 

Saskatchewan with a bachelor’s degree in engineering and a 

master’s degree in physics and a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 

from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology joins us today, 

and that is in Dr. Richard Florizone. His experience went well 

beyond the academic realm. He has had senior portfolios with 

Bombardier and the Boston Consulting Group. He has served as 

well with Cambridge University where he helped with strategic 

planning for their College of Engineering, and he also helped 

out with their 800th anniversary fundraising campaign as a 

corporate liaison officer. He was recruited back to the 

University of Saskatchewan in 2005 where he has served with 

distinction as the vice-president for finance and resources. 

 

And he’s been involved with a number of initiatives that have 

contributed mightily to not just simply the University of 

Saskatchewan but to the province writ large, and that is the 

nuclear institute that now bears the name of Sylvia Fedoruk, our 

previous lieutenant-governor. He certainly has played a key role 

in the Canadian Light Source synchrotron. He’s been involved 

with the Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization and key 

areas of big science, not simply for the province but also for the 

country. And he also helped to shape key public-private 

partnerships in student housing, where today on that campus 

there are now more than 1,000 new suites for students — just to 

name of few of those activities. 

 

He’s also a policy fellow with the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate 

School of Public Policy, and I expect we’ll hear from him 

through publications shortly on that. And at present, he’s 

seconded to the World Bank’s International Finance 

Corporation in Washington, DC [District of Columbia] where 

he’s working on key policy questions regarding public-private 

partnerships. 

 

In recognition of his accomplishments, character, and acumen, 

and the fact that he’s a fine gentleman and a really great scholar 

and a true friend to so many, he’s just been named the 11th 

president of Dalhousie University. Mr. Speaker, I will ask all 

members of this Assembly to join me in wishing Dr. Richard 

Florizone and his wife Mona, an accomplished art history 

professor in her own right, and their daughters all the best as 

they settle into the Dalhousie community. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the minister and members of government in 

welcoming Mr. Florizone to the Assembly but more importantly 

in congratulating him for being named the next president of 

Dalhousie. It’s a huge accomplishment. 

 

And based on his track record here in the province, we know 

that Richard is someone who has always advocated strongly for 

the University of Saskatchewan and for the province as a whole. 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

So while it is a posting, it could be for a few years, we know 

that the Florizone family is very accomplished but also have 

deep roots in the province. So I’m hopeful that it’s not the last 

that we will see of Richard Florizone here in Saskatchewan. So 

I wish he and Mona and their children all the best as they make 

the move, and good luck. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to introduce the Legislative Assembly to 

my beautiful wife Leane sitting in your gallery. Leane keeps the 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. Leane keeps the kids 

busy at home and certainly throughout my career and starting 

back campaigning has been the rock at home. Like a lot of my 

colleagues here, it is very difficult to be away from home but, 

Mr. Speaker, I very much appreciate everything that she’s done. 

 

She is a small business owner. She was a teacher for nine years 

in Saskatchewan, cashed in her teaching pension and started a 

business. And as my friend from Cut Knife-Turtleford said, she 

is a survivor, Mr. Speaker. She is a survivor, and she is 

flourishing with the best year ever in her business. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to welcome her to her Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to present a petition today on cellphone coverage for 

northwestern Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation, along with the 

adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation and the community of Turnor Lake, 

including the neighbouring communities in each of those 

areas. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 

from Green Lake. They’re from Patuanak. They’re from Turnor 

Lake. They’re from Dillon. And this particular petition I’m 

presenting today are people that have signed from Jans Bay, 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 

relates to education in our province. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to make education a top priority by 

establishing a long-term vision and plan, with resources, 

that is responsive to the opportunities and challenges in 

providing the best quality education and that reflects 

Saskatchewan’s demographic and population changes, 

that is based on proven educational best practices, that is 

developed through consultation with the education sector, 

and that recognizes the importance of educational 

excellence to the social and economic well-being of our 

province and students for today and for our future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Remembering Jim Sinclair 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

remember the life of a very important individual in 

Saskatchewan’s history, Jim Sinclair, who died on Friday at the 

age of 79 years. 

 

Sinclair was born in 1933 in Punnichy, Saskatchewan. In 1964 

he began work as a field worker for the Métis Society of 

Saskatchewan and was elected to the board in 1967. He later 

became president in 1971 and continued in that role for 18 

years. He went on to become a founding member of the Métis 

National Council and was president of the Native Council of 

Canada, now known as the Congress of Aboriginal Peoples, 

from 1994 to 1996. In 1982 Jim led the effort to ensuring Métis 

people were recognized along with the First Nations and Inuit 

people in the constitution. He also fought for Métis treaty rights 

and overall human rights internationally. 

 

Jim played a key role in creating many organizations that are 

well-known in Saskatchewan today such as the Gabriel Dumont 

Institute, the Saskatchewan Native Economic Development 

Corporation, Saskatchewan Native Addictions Centre, the 

Urban Native Housing Corporations, the Provincial Métis 

Housing Corporation, and the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations. He received a National Aboriginal 

Achievement Award, and the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] recently honoured him for 50 

years of service to the community. 

 

Mr. Sinclair was an important person in our history, and we 

would like all members to remember him today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Main Street Wolseley 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I was 

pleased to attend the town hall meeting and have a guided tour 

of the Main Street Wolseley target area. Last year our 

government initiated the Main Street Saskatchewan program 

with the three-year, $1.65 million investment to revitalize 

historic downtown commercial districts. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to say the program has been a resounding success. 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

In its first year, the Main Street program has generated $1.66 

million in local commitments for capital infrastructure projects, 

a 10 to 1 return on the government’s investment. In addition 

local citizens have contributed more than 5,450 volunteer hours, 

the equivalent of 681 eight-hour work days. 

 

As you recall, Mr. Speaker, earlier in today’s proceedings, 

Wolseley Mayor Dennis Fjestad and Main Street Wolseley 

coordinator Ed Attridge were introduced in the legislature. Due 

to their outstanding contributions and the tireless work of 

numerous other volunteers, I am pleased to say that Wolseley 

has generated a total investment of over $1.1 million in capital 

projects. The Main Street program has been instrumental in the 

economic revitalization of Wolseley. It has also helped develop 

a renewed sense of community pride. 

 

I know the community is extremely proud, as they should be, 

for what they have accomplished in the first year. And like the 

rest of the province, Wolseley is very excited about its future. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

HayEast 2012 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to commend 

the tremendous organization and work that has gone into the 

HayEast 2012 program here in Western Canada. This program 

originated in response to the Hay West program that was 

introduced in 2002. Ten years ago, growers in Eastern Canada 

shipped more than 110,000 tons of hay to farmers in 

Saskatchewan and Alberta when our regions were devastated by 

drought. 

 

This year Eastern Canada faced the same difficulties and now 

the Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan, or 

APAS, is helping to repay their kindness by organizing Hay 

East 2012. The Ontario Federation of Agriculture estimates that 

livestock producers will require 70,000 large hay bales, and it is 

hoped that the Hay East program will provide approximately 

50,000 of the needed hay bales. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the program is having a tough time meeting 

the goal. These days excess hay doesn’t stay in the province as 

there’s a bigger market south of the border. Also energy costs 

have risen substantially over the past decade and therefore 

truckers are not able to donate their services in bringing the hay 

out east. Even bringing the hay by train means paying double 

the cost of what it did in 2002. There are more ways to support 

HayEast than just hay bales. They’re also looking for cash 

donations and volunteers. I would like to commend Agrium for 

their substantial donation of $20,000 and all other contributors 

for their donations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in thanking Nial Kuyek and Norm 

Hall from the Agricultural Producers Association of 

Saskatchewan for their leadership in promoting Saskatchewan’s 

generous spirit to help farmers in need. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Premier’s Award for Excellence 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today we honour a number of dedicated public service 

employees who have shown great commitment to the people of 

this province. Thirty-seven public service employees will be 

recognized with the Premier’s Award for Excellence in the 

Public Service. The Premier’s Award for Excellence in the 

Public Service recognizes and celebrates the achievement of 

outstanding employees in Saskatchewan. These employees 

provide exceptional service to the people of the province, 

develop innovative ideas, and demonstrate extraordinary 

leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s Premier’s Award for Excellence in the 

Public Service recipients are Dr. Moira McKinnon, for 

providing leadership during the H1N1 pandemic planning; the 

Ministry of Health’s blood product inventory lean team for their 

outstanding efforts to streamline and improve the provisions of 

blood products to our health care facilities; the Ministry of 

Economy’s Ireland labour recruitment mission team; the 

Ministry of Environment’s results-based regulation code 

secretariat team for enhancing the protection of our province’s 

environmental resources; the Ministry of Social Services and 

the Ministry of Government Relations Wollaston Lake housing 

project team for their efforts to provide 14 families in 

Wollaston Lake with quality places to call home; and lastly, the 

Minister of Central Services youth advisory team for their 

leadership in developing a mentoring program to help 

employees learn how to best do their jobs. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Harvest for Kids Sets World Record  

 

Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I rise in the House 

today to recognize a world record set by Harvest for Kids in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On October 6th, farmers from throughout Saskatchewan 

reclaimed the world record for the most combines harvesting a 

single field at the same time. Mr. Speaker, 249 combines rolled 

down a 200-acre oat field 25 kilometres north of Saskatoon in 

front of thousands of spectators. The 249 combines bested the 

previous world record of 208 set in Ireland last year, last July. 

 

This marks the fourth time that the record has been passed 

between Irish and Canadian farmers. In Winkler, Manitoba in 

2010, 200 combines took to one field and in Ireland in 2009, 

175 combines were recorded in one field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Harvest for Kids raises money for Children’s 

Camps International by taking the proceeds of a crop which is 

produced with donations of land, machinery, inputs, and by 

work of the sponsors. Children’s Camps International is a 

non-profit organization that supports children’s camping 

programs in the developing world. 

 

Wendell Andres, the regional director of Children’s Camps 

International in Saskatchewan, said since the program started in 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

2003, it has helped more than 900,000 children go to camp. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask that all members join me in saluting all those 

who made this world record a possibility. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Saskatchewan Author Wins Writer’s Trust Prize 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

pleasure today to recognize an outstanding achievement by a 

proud Saskatchewan citizen. Candace Savage, now of Eastend, 

Saskatchewan, has won the $60,000 Hilary Weston Writer’s 

Trust Prize for Nonfiction, for her book investigating the 

natural and anthropological history of the Cypress Hills entitled 

A Geography of Blood: Unearthing Memory from a Prairie 

Landscape. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Candace’s book was chosen by a jury including 

former Ontario Lieutenant Governor James Bartlemen, and 

writers Charlotte Gill and Marni Jackson. Mr. Speaker, Candace 

Savage moved to Eastend in 2000 and spent a decade 

researching the history of the area and what happened to its 

indigenous peoples. The Weston Prize jury said of the book, 

and I quote: 

 

A two-week vacation evolves into a decade-long 

fascination with the region and the writing of A 

Geography Of Blood, a part memoir, part history, part 

geological survey, part lament, part condemnation of the 

accepted myth of the settlement of the Western Plains, 

and above all, a haunting meditation on time and place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ms. Savage’s 29th book prevailed over four other 

titles for the prize and purse that is larger than any of the other 

fiction prizes available in Canada. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members to join me in congratulating Candace Savage on this 

outstanding achievement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Improvements to Affordable Housing 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in the House to recognize the joint investment between the 

Government of Canada and the province that is helping to 

improve the quality of life for low- and moderate-income 

Saskatchewan families, seniors, and persons with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government, in partnership with the 

Government of Canada through Canada’s economic action plan, 

has invested an additional $102.16 million to make much 

needed improvements to existing government funding housing 

in Saskatchewan. This direct investment in our province has 

resulted in improvements to 572 projects in 206 communities. 

Mr. Speaker, this is an initiative that underlines our resolve to 

meet current and future affordable housing needs of 

Saskatchewan citizens. It has also helped to create employment 

opportunities and strengthen the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes that some of 

Saskatchewan’s existing affordable housing units are getting 

older and require repairs and upgrades. This work can extend 

the life of a building that is essential to a community and help 

keep homes safe and affordable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this time of rapid growth, it’s more important 

than ever to work together to develop housing solutions that 

will benefit Saskatchewan citizens and revitalize communities. 

Our goal is to improve the quality of existing housing in 

Saskatchewan and, most importantly, benefit the people who 

live there now and in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Registry of Asbestos in Public Buildings 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

sadness that I inform the House that Howard Willems passed 

away last Thursday. Shortly after I gave the second reading 

speech on Bill 604, the asbestos right-to-know Act, Howard lost 

his battle to cancer. I’d like to extend my heartfelt condolences 

to Howard’s family and to his loved ones. 

 

Up until the very end, Howard was pushing for the creation of 

an online registry of public buildings containing asbestos. It 

was his last wish that this Assembly pass this important piece of 

legislation, a mandatory and comprehensive listing of public 

buildings containing asbestos. 

 

Before question period, Mr. Speaker, the government 

announced a step in the right direction with a voluntary registry. 

While this is progress, it doesn’t fulfill the spirit of the 

right-to-know legislation. My question to the Health minister: I 

thank him for the positive steps that he’s taken on this issue so 

far, but will he do the right thing and pass legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, that will make this registry comprehensive as well as 

mandatory? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think on 

behalf of all members of the legislature and all citizens of the 

province, we would like to offer our deepest sympathy and 

condolences to the family of Howard Willems. He’s been a 

tireless advocate for this cause for some time. I met with him 

and the member from Silver Springs has met with him and I’ve 

heard him speak at a number of events. 

 

We earlier today posted a website with the information of all 

Government of Saskatchewan buildings. We are contacting 

school boards, health regions, and other public entities to see 

what information they have available and that could be 

included. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is only one step of a variety of 

things that can and should be done to increase public awareness 

of asbestos, and we intend to take further steps through the 

winter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, the steps 

that the government have taken are positive. Increased 

education and the existence of this online registry is good, but it 

needs to be mandatory, Mr. Speaker, and it needs to be 

enshrined in legislation. We have the opportunity here, Mr. 

Speaker, to take some real action and do something other than 

simply extend our condolences to Howard’s family and loved 

ones, the people that are so affected by this loss. 

 

The legislation, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve been considering 

before the House would make a mandatory list of public 

buildings accessible to all of the public. It needs to be 

mandatory, not voluntarily. It needs to include buildings 

belonging to ministries, Crowns, regional health authorities, and 

school divisions. If it is not mandatory, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t 

meet the goal and the objective of Howard’s work that the most 

information possible be relayed to Saskatchewan people so that 

they can make informed decisions. We can think of the 

incident, Mr. Speaker, at St. Mary’s Villa in Humboldt. It was a 

voluntary registry. There is no guarantee that the residents there 

in that facility would have known that asbestos was present 

during the renovations. 

 

My question to the minister: the government has softened its 

position on this and I do compliment them on the steps that they 

have taken, but there is more to do, Mr. Speaker. Will they 

support legislation that brings in a mandatory and 

comprehensive registry for public buildings with asbestos? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I indicated in 

the House last week is the best assumption that all buildings 

constructed prior to 1980 or that had renovations prior to 1980, 

the presumptive approach should be that those buildings contain 

asbestos. To the extent that records are available or records are 

complete, that information is certainly provided and is certainly 

on the website. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concern that we raised last week was that if 

information was incomplete or inaccurate, you would have a 

situation where somebody may have a false sense of security. 

By mandating such a position — and we certainly don’t want to 

rule out any particular obstacle by mandating something — you 

may have a situation where an entity would include all 

buildings because they’re not certain or, worse yet, not include 

buildings that may have asbestos. We’d like to have the most 

complete, the most accurate information. 

 

We will over the next few weeks have consultation and 

discussion with school boards, health regions, and other public 

entities, and we’re prepared to allow the website to be used for 

private entities that may wish to have their information 

included. And we will do everything we can, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that the public has this information, as well as other 

public information of other risks of asbestos. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the existence of the online 

registry now undercuts the argument that the minister just made 

about why they can’t put this in legislation and have a 

mandatory registry. If the concern, Mr. Speaker, is that 

individuals in the province do not have complete information, 

then what better approach than to have a mandatory registry 

where individuals know that public buildings with asbestos will 

be listed on there, Mr. Speaker? In the second reading speech 

that I delivered, Mr. Speaker, I think there are ways that we can 

get around the very rare occasion that there could be an error, 

Mr. Speaker. The good of providing the information outweighs 

the bad, the bad possibility that there could be an error there. 

And after all, we do operate on the assumption that asbestos is 

present. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been contacted by Howard’s family with one 

last request. Howard’s family, Mr. Speaker, would like to see 

this Assembly pass this legislation, and they would like it to be 

renamed Howard’s law. My question to the minister: will they 

enshrine this legislation, through this Assembly, and can it be 

renamed Howard’s law? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have offered our 

sympathies to the Willems family. We have a great deal of 

sympathy for them. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to do things 

that are positive and productive and actually increase the safety 

of Saskatchewan citizens. That includes public education. Later 

in the spring there will be an asbestos awareness day. There’s 

groups that are organizing that type of thing. We may well want 

to move to have that renamed after Mr. Willems. There’s a 

variety of other options that may be available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think that Mr. Willems was a tireless advocate 

for this cause. He believed in public safety, and, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a legacy that he left behind and a legacy that all members of 

the House should want to continue. We want to do it by way of 

having best practices. We will continue to have the discussions 

with the various other entities. Mr. Speaker, we do not want to 

have a situation where the registry is wrong or relied on in 

error. And we’ve brought this forward, and we will deal with it 

as appropriately as is proper, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Friday the Sask Party appointed a new CEO [chief executive 

officer] for Tourism Saskatchewan. In the spring, the Sask Party 

changed Tourism Saskatchewan from an arm’s-length agency 

into a PR [public relations] spin shop for the Premier. The 

industry was always worried about this approach. The 

consensus in 2009 was clear: “One of the key areas of 

agreement among all parties to this review is Tourism 

Saskatchewan should remain an arm’s-length organization from 

government.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new CEO said he wants to make Tourism 

Saskatchewan’s brand consistent with the Premier’s message. 

Why does the Sask Party believe it’s acceptable to use public 

dollars to brand the tourism industry in the image of the 

Premier? 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We view 

Tourism Saskatchewan as a great Crown corporation. We think 

that tourism is a big part of our growth strategy, that 

Saskatchewan has a substantial amount of opportunities to offer 

the world, to offer people here in Saskatchewan and from across 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member opposite referenced the legislation that was passed 

here in the House in the spring. It was proclaimed July 1st, Mr. 

Speaker, and now the new CEO has been installed as of Friday. 

We look forward to Tourism Saskatchewan moving forward to 

ensure that Saskatchewan has a consistent brand, Mr. Speaker, 

to ensure that the people who want to access Saskatchewan for 

tourism know one . . . where they can go; the information can 

be consistent. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to see this agency 

move forward in a very positive and proactive way. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party 

government changed Tourism Saskatchewan from an agency to 

a Crown corporation in the spring, no one was consulted, 

including the former board and the former CEO. It came as a 

shock to the whole industry. Now the public is finding out the 

Sask Party plan is to brand Tourism Saskatchewan in the same 

image as the Premier. 

 

The new Tourism Saskatchewan CEO says his first job is 

“creating a vision to match where the province wants to go.” 

Tourism Saskatchewan should not be taking the direction from 

the Premier’s office on how to market the province’s best 

features. Mr. Speaker, why won’t the Premier let Saskatchewan 

Tourism stand on its own two feet? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the Act that was 

introduced in the spring, Mr. Speaker, built upon a tourism 

review that started in 2009. That tourism review spoke to 

having a consistent message coming from the Government of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that there was one focal 

point for people that wanted to access services in regards to 

Tourism Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

have put forward the Act. It was proclaimed in July. 

 

A new board of directors, Mr. Speaker, was brought in at the 

same time of the proclamation, July 1st. That board is a very 

strong group, Mr. Speaker, of business leaders, of continuity 

from former members that were on the previous board of 

Tourism Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that group, Mr. 

Speaker, was first tasked with finding a CEO to move the 

process forward. They have done that. I’m very excited about 

the future of Tourism Saskatchewan and this industry inside our 

province. Today it’s $1.7 billion worth of an industry, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s growing. It’s positive. And we’re looking forward 

to the future. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, this is why an arm’s-length 

agency was the right one for the province and also the model 

the industry wanted. The arm’s-length model would’ve 

prevented politics from interfering in marketing the province. 

That’s why the previous Chair, who was dismissed along with 

other board members by the Sask Party, said, “This blatant 

disregard for any input by thousands of business owners and 

operations that make up our industry is alarming.” 

 

The last thing the public needed was another expensive PR 

machine promoting the Premier. Why does the Premier need 

Tourism Saskatchewan to market himself instead of our 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the new board that was 

appointed July 1st, it included two members that were on the 

previous board of Tourism Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It has a 

Chair which is a business leader from Saskatoon. It has a great 

deal of experience in event hosting, in putting forward a 

product, Mr. Speaker, and a tourism venue. Mr. Speaker, it 

brings people from northern Saskatchewan and Elk Ridge, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the new board, the new CEO are tasked with 

an aggressive approach. We recently put forward a growth plan, 

2020 and beyond, vision Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And in 

there, there are some aggressive targets for growth. Tourism is 

one piece of that, Mr. Speaker, a big piece of it, and we’re 

looking forward to the Tourism Saskatchewan moving forward 

with a plan that has been laid out for them. The board is 

working very hard to ensure that tourism maintains its status, 

Mr. Speaker, as a substantial revenue generator for our 

province, as a place that people view our province as a very 

forward-looking, beautiful place that has tourism at the lead. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Last week the Minister of Education 

admitted to the media that his government’s policies and 

responses to growth pressures were inadequate and not meeting 

the needs. One of the major issues is funding that lags 

population growth, leaving hundreds of students without 

funding, shortchanging boards, and impacting all students with 

cuts and pressures. 

 

I’ve raised this issue for the better part of a year and, despite 

recognizing a problem, government has failed to act. School 

boards are meeting here today and they’re looking for some 

answers. To the minister: when will he act and provide funding 

for enrolment growth? Time is slipping away. Action and funds 

are required. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

opposite for the question. The boards are actually meeting in 

Saskatoon today. However, Saskatchewan is a growing 

province. It’s an exciting, dynamic place to be. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve having record birth rates, population growth in our 

province, and we’re not going to go back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can recall the pressures of timetabling, the 

pressures of budgeting, the pressures of single options on a 

timetable — not even being able to field a football team 

because of declining enrolments, Mr. Speaker. Our province is 

growing. We’ve got those enrolment pressures. We’ve been 

working with our sector partners to mitigate those and, as we 

speak, we’re going to continue to move in that direction. We 

celebrate the growth . . . [inaudible] . . . and we will deal with it. 

That’s our promise. We’ve made that, and we’ll continue in that 

direction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the government is clearly 

failing to meet the demands of education in our province. The 

capital’s but another example. The bricks and mortar of the 

schools and classrooms themselves are not keeping pace with 

population growth. 

 

The minister admitted last week that his government was failing 

to keep pace, yet he didn’t have a plan. He also revealed that 

P3s [public-private partnership], costly private infrastructure, 

were on the table. P3s have proven themselves short-sighted, 

risky, and costly approach to infrastructure, particularly in 

education. The public is on the hook for higher costs through 

paying profits to the private sector along with substantially 

higher borrowing costs. Honestly, how does the minister 

believe that a more costly private approach is the way to go 

instead of a common sense solution to build the schools this 

province needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

last spring we set out a plan. We’ve stuck to that plan. We’ve 

made promises to our sector partners to work with them to 

mitigate the pressures of growth, and we will continue to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. More work needs to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have increased operating funding to school 

divisions by over 21 per cent since we’ve taken office. Mr. 

Speaker, as the minister, I’ve committed to seeking a mid-year 

funding for school divisions who experience large enrolment 

growth, and we’re working in that direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re committed to working with school divisions on 

addressing how we recognize increases going forward, both for 

the short term, Mr. Speaker, because we have some immediate 

pressures, and for the long term. And we will continue to do so. 

Our government has been consulting with education partners all 

along. We will continue to do so to mitigate the growth 

pressures. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Sorry, I’m not sure the minister heard 

the question. It was about P3s, Mr. Speaker. P3s simply are 

attractive to governments who want projects now but aren’t 

willing to pay for them. They in effect punt higher costs and 

risks down the line and they tie the hands of future 

governments, inevitably bringing about higher costs. 

 

This new costly, private, no-money-down approach reflects a 

government with strained finances looking for any trick to try 

and manufacture a rosier-than-reality financial picture. Instead 

of financial tricks, we need support and a plan for education. 

Question to the minister: why is he willing to take us down a 

path that’s fraught with unneeded risks and costs for the public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Half a billion 

dollars in infrastructure spending since we’ve taken office. 

Shared use facilities, Mr. Speaker, throughout our province 

since we’ve taken office. Mr. Speaker, we’re not afraid to set 

targets — bold targets — both for enrolment and for capital 

infrastructure. We have some short-term issues that we need to 

deal with. P3s is a possibility. We’re not afraid to look at any 

kind of options to mitigate the pressures that we have facing 

growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to step outside the box to solve 

problems in the short term, but we’re also working with our 

sector partners to gain a long-term strategy that will ensure 

sustainability for education in this province for a long time to 

come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re witnessing a 

government that is failing to have a real plan for education that 

responds to the growth in this province, and they’re trying to 

maintain a financial story that’s become anything but reality. As 

a result they’re making reckless, short-sighted decisions that 

don’t serve the best interests now and well into the future. 

 

In this latest example of putting the public and students on the 

hook for costly, risky, private school buildings, they are in 

effect tying the hands of future populations in this province. 

When will this government start to serve the best interests of 

students and the public and provide a real plan with some 

common sense solutions to build schools and support education 

in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, I too take 

education very seriously, very seriously, Mr. Speaker, and I 

have done so for about 40-some years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our priority for education was very clearly 

articulated in the Throne Speech, very clearly articulated in the 

growth plan. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, our operating grants 

to school boards have increased by 21 per cent since we’ve 

taken office. Our capital is up $500 million since we’ve taken 

office. Pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] investment is 

up 85 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Early childhood education is up 16 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue. There’s no 

question in my mind that our government’s priority is in 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

education. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Immigration Issue 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has now been over 

two weeks since I asked the Immigration minister questions 

about the plight of Victoria Ordu and Ihouma Amadi. These 

two international students, Mr. Speaker, are facing deportation 

from Canada because they made an honest mistake. They were 

allowed to work on campus, Mr. Speaker, but mistakenly took a 

job at Walmart for two weeks. As a result, Mr. Speaker, the 

federal government is looking for these students and has 

ordered their deportation. They’ve been in hiding, receiving 

sanctuary in a local church, Mr. Speaker, for over 147 days. 

 

Earlier on, Mr. Speaker, when I asked the minister questions, 

later in QP [question period] and in the scrum he later said that, 

based on his understanding, that the treatment that these women 

were receiving was not in fact fair. I agree, Mr. Speaker. I 

believe that it was an honest mistake. My question to the 

minister: does he still believe that the treatment of these two 

women is not fair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, given the information that we 

have at this point, we have no reason to believe that our position 

needs to be changed. We are of the view, on the face of the 

situation, that there is nothing inappropriate here — a minor 

infraction in our view. And it’s unfortunate, it’s unfortunate that 

the federal government doesn’t see it that way, however. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today on campus at 

the U of R [University of Regina], a rally was held over the 

lunch hour. And at the rally, students, administration, student 

leaders, and friends and those who simply see this as an 

injustice came together to draw attention to this and keep 

pressure on all levels of government to make a positive change 

here. 

 

Earlier on when I asked questions, Mr. Speaker, the Minister for 

Immigration said that the Minister of Justice was going to be 

meeting with the federal minister to discuss this matter. I’m 

asking for the provincial Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, to 

provide a report to the Assembly. How did that meeting go? 

What was discussed? What was the duration? And what is the 

outcome? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The week 

before last, we had the opportunity to entertain the federal 

Minister of Justice here in Saskatchewan, in Regina at the 

federal-provincial-territorial ministers meetings. We did raise 

the issue, both with the Minister of Justice and the minister in 

charge of Public Safety. We raised the issue with him. We told 

him what our concerns were. He then turned . . . He had a press 

conference and let his position be known to the press at that 

particular time. But we certainly did make the position of the 

government known. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately when it 

comes to issues of immigration, the track record of the Sask 

Party government is putting the interests of its cousins in 

Ottawa ahead of the interests of Saskatchewan people. We can 

think of the changes that they made, Mr. Speaker, to the gutting 

of the family class of the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 

program. That is a clear fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister doesn’t have to take my word for it that this is an 

injustice that is occurring. Students, faculty, the U of R 

administration have all spoken out about the harsh treatment, 

Mr. Speaker, that is being pursued by the federal government 

on this issue. We know that the Sask Party government has sent 

a letter. We understand that there were discussions that occurred 

between the ministers of Justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the government now: are they content to simply 

sit on the sidelines, watch these two women to be handcuffed, 

put on a plane, and sent home? Is that now their position? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the track record in terms of 

immigration in our province is very clear. There’s been some 

40,000 immigrants that have moved to Saskatchewan since our 

administration formed government, 7,000 during a similar 

period of time under the NDP [New Democratic Party] — 

almost six times difference between our record and the former 

NDP government’s record. 

 

In addition to that, if this member was so concerned about this 

situation as he claims, the federal minister responsible was 

sitting in the gallery just a few short days ago. You should have 

taken the opportunity then, if you’re so concerned, to make 

representation yourself, just as we did. Unfortunately it didn’t 

work out. But if you’re so concerned, you may have made . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the minister to direct his 

comments through the Chair. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what a pathetic response. Here we 

have a minister, here we have a minister, Mr. Speaker, who 

wants to outsource his role of advocating for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

The students, Mr. Speaker, these two women who are at the 

University of Saskatchewan, are attending a provincial 

institution. These women are here carrying, Mr. Speaker, their 

experience of Saskatchewan. Surely we owe it to them, Mr. 

Speaker, that these women be treated fairly. Why the minister 

would not actually stand up and promote Saskatchewan’s 

interest to the federal ministers is beyond me. Mr. Speaker, we 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

have seen even the university administration, Mr. Speaker, 

saying, “We don’t condone the breaking of the law, but we are 

concerned with what we feel is disproportionate punishment,” 

coming from Barb Pollock. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this matter should matter to the provincial 

government. This is about our provincial reputation and this is 

about the fair treatment of two women who came to this 

province for a better future. Will the minister actually stand up 

and take our interests to the federal minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we take our role very 

seriously with respect to this situation. We have written to the 

federal minister. We’ve also made representation in person to 

the federal minister, both the Justice minister and myself, with 

respect to this situation. But when the opportunity arose for the 

critic on Immigration to make a similar representation to the 

minister, where were you? Where was he, Mr. Speaker? The 

minister was sitting right in that gallery a short few steps away 

from the member opposite. And did he take the opportunity to 

ask a question or did he take the opportunity to get on his feet 

and walk up into the gallery? No, he didn’t, Mr. Speaker. The 

fact of the matter is we take the situation very seriously and we 

wish you would as well. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Ticketing System for Occupational Health 

and Safety Offences 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to rise in the Assembly to introduce another tool in a 

series of measures introduced by this government to improve 

health and safety outcomes for the working women and men of 

Saskatchewan. Our government is committed to promoting 

growth while protecting workers. Saskatchewan’s injury rate is 

one of concern to the government. 

 

We are taking up the challenge to create healthier and safer 

working conditions for Saskatchewan workers. We all need to 

work together to improve workplace health and safety 

outcomes. Our ministry’s occupational health and safety 

division is working hard to promote and enforce safety, 

conducting 4,500 on-site inspections each year, and now 

occupational health officers will be empowered to issue on-site 

tickets through the implementing of a ticketing system for 71 

occupational health and safety offences. These offences can 

apply to individual workers, employers, and supervisors. 

Occupational health and safety is a system of shared 

responsibilities. Mr. Speaker, summary offence ticketing will 

serve as a deterrent to non-compliance and improve health and 

safety outcomes for workplaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

The summary offence ticketing regulation will become 

operational on January 1st, 2013, but we will introduce a 

six-month transition period during which occupational health 

officers will engage workplaces on the new ticketing regime, 

promoting awareness and compliance. While they will continue 

to prosecute flagrant violations of the OHS [occupational health 

and safety] Act, they will not begin summary offence ticketing 

until July 1, 2013. The ministry will work with stakeholders and 

educate workplaces and, in due course, conduct an evaluation of 

this new system to ensure that it is in fact having the desired 

effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government values and respects the 

contribution of Saskatchewan’s working population. We want 

to keep them healthy and safe. Summary offence ticketing is 

just one more way we are attempting to do that. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the comments made today, and I want to thank the 

minister for his advance copy. 

 

And of course occupational health and safety in Saskatchewan 

is very, very important. Unfortunately our province has a record 

of having the worst or the second worst record of workplace 

injuries and deaths, and this is something that we need to do all 

that we possibly can to make sure we turn that around. And we 

know for now it’s been five years for Mission: Zero, and yet we 

still are more or less in the same place, and we need to do as 

much as we can. 

 

The idea of summary offence ticketing is not a new one. In fact 

we have asked the minister about this several times. And it has 

caused an awful lot of anxiety, particularly in the workplace, as 

it may be directed unfairly at the workers. Now we’re going to 

be watching this very carefully to make sure that doesn’t 

happen. The minister is quite correct when he says it’s a shared 

responsibility. That is true. 

 

But clearly we need to make sure that the resources to work in a 

safe workplace exists and that training happens — that’s 

important — and that plans happen, that every workplace has a 

safety plan, a work hazard plan and, importantly, a training 

process to make sure that happens. All of those are important 

components of a safe workplace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, I toured the province a bit in 

September talking about workplace issues, issues that people 

were most concerned about, and clearly occupational health and 

safety was one that people raised over and over and over again. 

I have to tell you that one of the tools that they would like to see 

is actually more inspectors. The minister talked about 4,500 

inspections. I think we need to have more inspectors out there 

doing the work. In fact people compared it to conservation 

officers. I’m not sure if they’re accurate, but that fact we have 

more people looking after the animals versus looking after the 

workplace. So I’d like to see more inspectors. Having said that, 

Mr. Speaker, we look forward to see how this is implemented. 

We’re going to be watching this very carefully so that everyone 

is held responsibly to make sure our work places are safer than 

ever. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

Access to Asbestos Information 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m saddened to rise today to mark the passing of Mr. Howard 

Willems. Mr. Willems died on Thursday, November 8th after a 

long battle with mesothelioma, a rare form of cancer caused by 

inhaling asbestos fibres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan the launch of a webpage on the 

Ministry of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety’s 

Occupational Health and Safety’s website that improves public 

access to asbestos information. 

 

Asbestos, as we know, can cause chronic irreversible and 

life-threatening lung diseases. These diseases, which can occur 

several decades after exposure, include asbestosis, a lung 

scarring disease; lung cancer; and another rare form of cancer, 

mesothelioma. It is therefore vitally important that individuals 

have a clear understanding of the dangers as well as the proper 

procedures to prevent exposure. 

 

This website offers Saskatchewan workers and their families a 

starting point from which to further their understanding of 

asbestos hazards and controls. We’re also providing a list of 

government buildings that have been assessed for their asbestos 

content. This list will improve the public’s awareness of 

asbestos. We encourage schools, health regions, universities, 

municipalities to post their own list on our website so that we 

can continue to build on the available information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is one more way in which our government is 

taking steps to improve the health, safety, and well-being of our 

workers and their families. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Minister 

for sending across his remarks in advance. Mr. Speaker, this 

issue and this change that the government has made comes out 

of the discussion we’ve been having in the Assembly about how 

we can increase the public safety when it comes to the presence 

of asbestos in public buildings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said in question period, I congratulate and 

compliment the government on softening its position and taking 

this half-step. I do think it’s important to have the online 

registry, however I feel that this step falls short. It falls short of 

being effective and moreover, Mr. Speaker, it falls short of 

meeting the goal and the desire of Howard Willems and the 

many advocates who want to reduce asbestos-related diseases in 

our society. Central to how it falls short, Mr. Speaker, two 

factors: one, is voluntary. There’s no requirement for public 

agencies to put this information online. So it’s up to each school 

division, up to each regional health authority, perhaps up to 

each Crown whether or not this information is provided. 

 

The whole point of the registry, Mr. Speaker, is that it is 

mandatory. Government agencies know this information, have 

this information. It ought to be put online. So it needs to be 

mandatory and also needs to be comprehensive, Mr. Speaker. 

Without it being mandatory, there may be many holes in the 

listing which could cause confusion and problems. 

 

A common argument that has been used by members opposite 

up until, even including today, Mr. Speaker, is that the presence 

of a registry, there could be errors. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s even 

worse to have an incomplete registry where agencies aren’t 

even putting forward the information if they don’t want to. I 

think that’s a major problem. Let’s make this mandatory. Let’s 

make this compulsory. Let’s put it in legislation. Let’s support 

this Bill No. 604, Mr. Speaker, and let’s call it Howard’s law. 

Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 

the end of my remarks, I will move second reading of Bill No. 

59, The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

Current legislation to provide oversight for brand inspection 

needs to be updated. In its current form, it is not flexible enough 

to allow industry to control the delivery of services that they 

need. The proposed bill will add provisions so it will allow for 

the delivery of brand inspection services by parties outside of 

government. Brand inspection services in Saskatchewan are 

currently delivered through the Ministry of Agriculture 

livestock inspectors. 

 

Brand inspection ensures that animals offered for sale are 

rightfully owned and verified through a brand registry. The 

messages come in loud and clear from livestock producers that 

they want and need a brand inspection service. The changes that 

we are proposing will allow for brand inspection to continue in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The role of government in verifying ownership of livestock is 

unique in Saskatchewan. No other agricultural commodity is 

purchased or sold in the province with a government service to 

verify ownership. In addition, both Alberta and British 

Columbia currently have industry-led and -delivered brand 

inspection systems. Manitoba has no brand inspection services 

at all. 

 

On July 30th, I announced the formation of an industry advisory 

committee to review the delivery of brand inspection in 

Saskatchewan. I have personally met with the committee and 

they have met several times since then. They are consulting 

with livestock producers, industry, and other provinces to 

explore alternative delivery model options to achieve more 

efficient brand inspection services in Saskatchewan. 

 

They are currently studying current brand inspection models in 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia, and have even 

looked at a model in North Dakota. They will review options 

for industry-led brand inspection and recommend a preferred 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

option to the Ministry of Agriculture. The group will look at all 

options, including an integrated western Canadian approach. 

After undertaking this analysis and stakeholder consultations, 

they will finalize a recommendation by early 2013. 

 

Members of the committee include two representatives from the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, two representatives 

from the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, one 

representative from the Saskatchewan Horse Federation, one 

representative from the Livestock Marketers of Saskatchewan, 

and two member-at-large representatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these industry representatives are working hard on 

this initiative and looking forward to a new model. 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association Chair and committee 

Co-Chair Mark Elford said, “I look forward to reviewing brand 

inspection services in Saskatchewan. An integrated western 

Canadian brand inspection system will help ensure the rightful 

ownership of everyone’s cattle and be a win-win for everyone 

involved,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

In addition, Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association President 

and committee Co-Chair Harold Martens said, “We welcome 

this review of brand inspection and I look forward to examining 

the options on how industry can improve these services for 

Saskatchewan producers.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize brand inspection is important to 

producers in our province. As the industry evolves, so too must 

our service. An industry-led brand inspection model can 

provide more efficient, improved services to better meet the 

needs of producers. In order for brand inspection service to 

continue in Saskatchewan under the direction of livestock 

producers, current legislation needs to be amended. It is our 

intention to ensure there are no obstacles to industry when a 

new system is ready for implementation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this proposed legislation is enabling in nature. It is 

necessary to allow for the new delivery model when it is 

finalized in 2013. The exact details of the new model remain to 

be determined as the committee works towards its final 

recommendations. We want to ensure that we are not limited by 

the current inability of this Act to allow for third party delivery 

in 2013. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And that is why we are introducing this legislation, to allow a 

broader range of possible structures in the delivery of inspection 

services while ensuring that the Ministry of Agriculture 

maintains legislative responsibility. 

 

Amendments to the Act will provide the necessary flexibility in 

how inspection services can be offered in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, the work done under the authority of The Animal 

Identification Act is important. The government is simply 

bringing this authority forward in an up-to-date and 

forward-looking Act. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 

59, The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 be read a 

second time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 59, The Animal Identification 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise today and offer our initial analysis of Bill 59 on 

behalf of the official opposition. I think it’s really important 

that, as I indicated on many other bills brought forward by the 

Sask Party government, that we are certainly going to go 

through the bills with a fine-tooth comb to see if there’s any 

particular issues that are trying to be hidden in terms of the 

agenda that the Sask Party has from our perspective, Mr. 

Speaker; to make sure that what the bill, as the minister alluded 

to, is hoping to publicly achieve that’s exactly what the end 

result is; and that there is no other agenda that the people of 

Saskatchewan might not be aware of or that the people of 

Saskatchewan might not be supportive. So it’s important that 

we go through these bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as small as the bills may be in some cases, it’s important 

that we take the time. And we invite comment and we certainly 

invite people to come forward to share from their perspective 

any of their take on some of the bills that the Sask Party is 

proposing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, from what I understand of Bill 59, what they 

wanted . . . the primary focus of Bill 59 is the brand inspection 

services. The minister alluded to the fact that the Ministry of 

Agriculture is not going to be the primary player in this 

particular service and that while they retain the legislative 

authority to provide or to monitor those services, that they 

won’t be playing a key role, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one of the things that I want to obviously point out is that 

prior to this, I’m assuming that the government did have the 

authority and certainly did have the manpower and the mandate 

to look at the brand inspection services that the producers 

wanted. And the minister was good enough to mention all the 

different groups that were involved. Now obviously the 

question that we would have, at the outset, is that this is 

obviously a shift that the minister, I believe, was proposing in 

this bill: to go from the Department of Agriculture playing a 

larger role, including staffing, to do the brand inspection 

services. 

 

Now obviously we’re not going to see the brand inspection 

services stop. Obviously this needs to continue to build. So the 

question we’re going to ask is, how many current employees of 

the government do the brand inspection? Whether it’s the actual 

physical inspection or whether it’s administration or whether 

it’s support staff out in the field, we need to know those 

numbers because obviously, Mr. Speaker, that has an effect on 

the people of Saskatchewan overall. 

 

Now the minister, I believe, alluded to the fact that he is 

looking at outsourcing those services. Now obviously as there’s 

firms out there that provide that service, is the cost in the long 

run to the Saskatchewan taxpayer lower or is it just a matter of 

time before we see the fact that these costs could actually 

increase? The minister very, very quickly brushed over some of 

the facts that he wanted to present in terms of the dollar costs 

and the manpower costs, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of the 

things that’s really, really important when we look at this 

government and their lean programs that they have initiated 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

throughout the province. Is this something that we have to pay 

close attention to? And the obvious answer, Mr. Speaker, is yes, 

absolutely. 

 

So I think one of the things that we want to do is make sure that 

we get those numbers from the minister as to who’s working in 

the brand inspection branch now through his department. What 

are their roles? What are their costs? And as he has this 

transition from the department doing the work to the private 

sector doing the work, what are the costs overall? And perhaps, 

Mr. Speaker, something as important as brand inspection, it’s 

important that we do this right. So as you’re looking at the 

process, are we going to be compromising some of the quality 

services that are there now if we decide to go to a model where 

we have the private sector doing them? 

 

The minister spoke about an integrated Western Canadian 

branding model, which I think is important that people of 

Saskatchewan know that if this is going to be a model that 

works, then obviously all three jurisdictions that the minister 

referenced to, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia . . . 

Are some of the activities and some of the processes that were 

undertaken, are they complementary and similar to those 

jurisdictions? We don’t know that information yet, Mr. Speaker. 

And we obviously will research that particular . . . those files 

and compare it to the Saskatchewan model. 

 

What’s important in the agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker, is that 

people take the time to understand agriculture as best they can. 

As a member of the opposition, being born and raised in 

northern Saskatchewan, one of the greatest advantages that I 

have as an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] is you 

get subjected to a lot of information of rural Saskatchewan and 

certainly how important the agricultural sector is to our 

province. 

 

So it gives me a lot of pleasure as an opposition member to get 

up and talk about things of importance such as branding, such 

as marketing our cattle, the international markets, the rail line 

challenges. All this information, the costs, the input costs, all 

the information that I’m privy to in this Assembly certainly 

helps make me, I think, a stronger MLA overall in terms of 

trying to understand rural Saskatchewan as best I could. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that people out in Saskatchewan 

know that this information is really, really important. At the 

outset you see that the minister is trying to adopt a process 

where he’s advising people that the branding model that we’re 

working on is something that is embraced by Alberta, embraced 

by BC [British Columbia], embraced by the producers. And, 

Mr. Speaker, at the outset we sometimes don’t want to take that 

minister’s word on how they’re going to support rural 

Saskatchewan, nor the cattle producers, Mr. Speaker, because 

we see some of the difficulties that the cattle industry has over 

the years as well as the hog industry. And the list goes on as to 

some of the challenges some of those industries face, and yet 

they see cutbacks by the federal government and quite frankly a 

lack of support by the Sask Party. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, any time they bring forward bills of this sort, I 

think it’s important that the opposition take the time, research 

the bill, watch carefully what the minister is saying as to what 

his intent is behind the bill, and then if the bill proceeds and the 

minister obviously doesn’t follow the intent, that’s important 

that it is our role as an opposition caucus to get up and point out 

those problems that the minister has created. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I take great interest in the fact that there was 

reference to the American kind of model and you see BC, 

Alberta, and Saskatchewan and you generally see the fact that 

some of these groups and organizations have a traditional 

marketing and export co-operative plan, so to speak, that 

involves their American cousins. And I don’t think anybody in 

Saskatchewan would complain against that. I think what they 

want to do is they obviously want to see a free flow of goods 

and services back and forth. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that 

we support those kind of notions, we support the plan that 

would make that a lot easier on a lot of the producers in 

Saskatchewan, and I think the taxpayers themselves would 

appreciate that. But as I said at the outset, we have to ensure 

that’s the net goal and that it’s not some confusing process that 

the Sask Party undertakes that creates more problems down the 

line. That’s the important role that the opposition has. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look carefully at some of the points he’s 

raised. Nothing to support the cattle industry, nothing to support 

the hog industry, nothing to support the rail line challenges. The 

reduction of services from the feds that we are all aware of, the 

fact that the cost of fuel, the costs of inputs, the lack of support 

in international marketing, the challenges around BSE [bovine 

spongiform encephalopathy] — Mr. Speaker, there’s so many 

challenges in the agricultural sector that the minister takes some 

time under this bill to talk about branding and in branding 

inspection services. And I would say that the bill itself may be a 

small part of the system overall, but there’s big challenges 

within the ag sector that I think they also have to address. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, we have many more people that 

are going to respond to this bill. We have the opportunity to 

allow the process to unfold over the next several months and I 

urge the people of Saskatchewan not to take a back seat when it 

comes to agricultural practices or programs or bills of this sort, 

to the Saskatchewan Party. Because what you’re doing is you’re 

quite frankly leaving folks that may be not doing it right, and so 

it’s important that you challenge them. It’s important that you 

bring forward better systems and better, better ways of doing 

business. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s an open invitation that the opposition 

would like to extend to the people of Saskatchewan because 

what we’re not going to do is take a back seat to anything that 

the Sask Party does to pretend to support the ag sector in the 

province. Because we know that they have . . . There’s 

challenges in that industry and so far the Sask Party has sat on 

their hands and done absolutely nothing to address the 

long-term challenges that the ag sector faces in our province. 

They do a lot of little band-aids here and there, Mr. Speaker, but 

nothing to cure the ills that ail our rural and our urban people 

and the effect that it has on the producer overall when it comes 

to building this economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn Bill No. 59 at this 

time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 59, The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products 

Amendment Act, 2012 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 

the end of my remarks I will move second reading of Bill No. 

60, The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Animal Products Act needs to be updated. In its current 

form it does not provide the authority for third party delivery of 

inspection services. We wish to enable third party delivery of 

certain inspection services in the future, specifically meat and 

brand inspection. Right now the Act allows for only 

government-employed inspectors to deliver these services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have already spoken to the issue of brand 

inspection in my remarks regarding Bill 59, The Animal 

Identification Amendment Act. However The Animal Products 

Act also needs to be amended to allow for a new brand 

inspection delivery model in Saskatchewan. The work currently 

being done by our industry advisory committee and their 

forthcoming recommendations will help determine what that 

new system will look like. This legislation will allow us to 

implement that new system. 

 

The same impediment exists with respect to meat inspection for 

provincially registered meat, slaughter, and processing facilities 

in Saskatchewan. Currently the Canadian Food Inspection 

Agency, CFIA, provides inspection services to these facilities. 

However we were made aware in June 2011 that CFIA intends 

to withdraw these services as of December 31st, 2013. 

 

This was a federal decision and we had no input into it. 

However, we have been working to address this issue and 

develop a new provincial meat inspection system going 

forward. Since we were first notified of the decision to 

withdraw CFIA inspectors, we have been consulting 

extensively with all affected meat processors in the province. 

While we are still determining how meat inspection will be 

delivered once the CFIA stops providing this service at the end 

of 2013, we do not want to be limited by an outdated legislative 

framework. 

 

I want to be clear: food safety remains the top priority. We 

know that our farmers and ranchers produce safe, reliable 

products on their farms, and it is essential to our entire industry 

that we ensure food safety throughout the value chain. 

 

There are currently 12 provincially registered facilities in the 

province. They have all been engaged in the process to date. 

Many other provinces in Canada already have their own 

provincial meat inspection services. Mr. Speaker, we have 

asked the federal government to reconsider their decision to 

withdraw CFIA services. However we still need to prepare for a 

new system after 2013, and this legislation is part of that 

process. 

Another major initiative under this bill is to provide the 

livestock industry the flexibility it needs to move forward with 

a producer marketing assurance mechanism. To enable this, we 

are adding provisions to this bill to enable industry-led producer 

marketing assurance funds. These funds would allow industry 

to collect fees to establish the fund. The fees would go into a 

fund that would then be used to compensate producers when 

livestock buyers default on payment. This has happened in the 

past as recently as 2011 with G & M Livestock in Manitoba. 

The industry has expressed interest in establishing a fund. 

However, no consensus on final details has been determined. 

The legislation will simply establish the legislative capacity to 

implement a livestock assurance fund if and when this 

consensus is reached. 

 

[14:45] 

 

 Mr. Speaker, The Animal Products Act is simply not flexible 

enough in its current form for industry to administer such a 

fund. This amendment would allow industry to step forward to 

administer an assurance fund on behalf of livestock producers. 

With the proposed amendments to the Act, we will be able to 

provide industry the option of running their own program if 

they so choose. The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 will 

prepare government for this request from industry. It will allow 

for an appointed third party to have the authority to run an 

assurance fund. It will also allow assurance funds to be financed 

by levies for the purpose of compensating producers who do not 

receive payment from a livestock dealer. We are simply making 

room in the legislation for producers to protect their most 

important investment — their animals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, producers and industry know their business better 

than any government ever will, and this legislation will 

recognize that. Mr. Speaker, the livestock industry will play a 

major role in our growth plan going forward. The legislation 

will help us to modernize our processes and services, all in 

consultation with producers and industry. Industry-led 

inspection services and an assurance fund will help to support 

the continued growth of the livestock industry. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I move that The Animal Products Amendment Act, 

2012 be read a second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 60, The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

again pleased to stand today to offer initial comments at the Bill 

No. 60. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we obviously see this bill as being a very 

important bill to the future inspection services and certainly the 

quality assurance that the people of Saskatchewan and Canada 

and the international market want. So it’s something that we 

pay very close attention to because obviously, as one would 

know following the news of some of the challenges that could 

occur, the dramatic negative challenges that could occur if we 

don’t take the proper steps to ensure food inspection is done 

properly, and the fact that the quality is there and the safety is 

there and that there is no problem for the public health overall, 

Mr. Speaker. 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

So I think this bill is really, really important because I think 

what this bill does, it does have a dramatic shift in some of the 

other players that were obviously involved with meat inspection 

services, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the Canadian Food Inspection 

Agency, CFIA, as many people out there know, many of the 

producers would know. 

 

Recently the federal government have slashed hundreds of jobs 

within CFIA. And it’s very, very disappointing, Mr. Speaker, to 

hear today that the minister is speaking about the lack of clarity 

when it comes to CFIA’s future in Saskatchewan because 

obviously I think a lot of people in the country trust CFIA. 

There has certainly been a lot of people are aware of what 

happened with XL Foods, that there was some significant 

challenges there. And as a result of that, the federal government 

is going to be continually under attack from many, many groups 

and many, many people that are very, very unhappy in how that 

particular issue and matter was dealt with. So I think there’s 

going to be a lot of people angry for a long, long time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important for people out there to know what the 

government is planning today, the Sask Party government, is 

they’re not planning on going to Ottawa to give the federal 

government extreme grief on how they handled the XL Foods 

crisis, Mr. Speaker. What they’re going to do instead is simply 

say, look, these guys are getting out of the CFIA business. 

We’re going to try and see what we can do to provide those 

services with the producers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think they should be standing up for the 

people of Saskatchewan, standing up for the producers because 

I think overall, if you want to make sure that we have the 

quality and want to assure people of that, then we ought to have 

the best model possible for inspection and to make sure that 

these plants are operating top notch, Mr. Speaker. And unless 

and until we have a proven track record of some of those 

entities that are able to do that, Mr. Speaker, all we have right 

now is CFIA. CFIA has been doing this work for a number of 

years, Mr. Speaker. And in general when there’s a crisis in the 

livestock industry, when there’s a crisis at some of the 

slaughtering plants, the first groups of people that are . . . 

[inaudible] . . . to explain to the public, Mr. Speaker, has been 

CFIA. 

 

Now what happened with the Canadian Food Inspection 

Agency is that the federal government slashed services, slashed 

programs, and of course fired hundreds of inspectors whose 

primary role and whose job was to make sure that these plants 

were operating as they should and that the safety of food, the 

consumption of that food, was something that the people of 

Canada could count on when CFIA was involved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister alluded to the fact that they’re trying to look at a 

third party to do those services once the federal government 

pulls out of those services in 2013. Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

got to find out what exactly the minister meant when he talked 

about a third party. There’s consultations that are going on. But 

the difficult part, Mr. Speaker, for the public in general . . . 

Because you have to make sure, when it comes to the producers 

themselves, that the public is assured, that the public is 

confident in these models. And, Mr. Speaker, when you bring in 

a new model without first arguing with the federal government 

that they should have kept CFIA’s model in place until they 

developed a bigger or a better or a stronger one, instead, Mr. 

Speaker, they simply rolled over and say, okay these guys are 

out of the inspection business by 2013, which is only a few 

months away, then we better find a different system, Mr. 

Speaker. We better find a better system. 

 

And the problem we have within Saskatchewan, and I think the 

producers will certainly express that as well, is that how do you 

develop a model, a model that has some track record. If it’s 

new, Mr. Speaker, it won’t have a track record. If it hasn’t got 

the resources, Mr. Speaker, it won’t be effective. And this is the 

problem we have with the Saskatchewan Party is that they’re 

reactionary and yet they’re very protective of their federal 

cousins, even though they do things of this sort that hurt the 

industry dramatically, Mr. Speaker, by cutting back CFIA 

inspectors and also by cutting back supports for the producers 

and the ag sector in Saskatchewan. 

 

So that’s one of the things I think is really important at the 

outset, that when a minister talks about a third party inspection 

process and to actually get the government employees out of the 

way and have this become more of a industry friendly process, 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that we have to balance, not only 

the industry interests, Mr. Speaker, but the consumers’ interests 

as well. Because you can’t have either/or; it’s got to be a 

collaborative and very integrated system. 

 

And that’s what we find severely lacking in this particular bill, 

Mr. Speaker, is that there has been no action by this government 

to condemn the federal government for cutting back CFIA 

supports. There’s been no action by this government to 

condemn the federal government for a lack of service that 

they’re providing to the industry, Mr. Speaker. And once again, 

they’re simply reacting in a manner that is confusing to the 

producers that are out there. It’s confusing to the opposition, 

and I think it’s confusing the public as well. 

 

So the federal government is exiting the inspection process by 

firing all the CFIA personnel, and the Sask Party comes along 

and saying, well we’re going to do a third party process. Well 

questions will begin to be asked; like, what kind of process? 

What track record does this new entity have? What kind of 

resources is the new entity going to be afforded? All of these 

questions I think, Mr. Speaker, are good questions that the 

public have a right to ask and, more so, have a right to know. 

 

Now I think industry themselves, Mr. Speaker, the industry 

itself has been really, really moving leaps and bounds in terms 

of ensuring quality. I don’t think that’s the problem at all, Mr. 

Speaker. I think people in general think that the producers in 

Saskatchewan — whether it’s hog or whether, in this case, 

cattle — I think they know that the people of Saskatchewan that 

get involved with this business do a tremendous job. 

 

But the most important thing is that they know, the producer 

knows that they have to have what they would consider a 

neutral qualifier of the fact that they’re saying, our meat is safe, 

Mr. Speaker. They’ve got to have somebody in there, a third 

party. And usually it has been that they’re CFIA folks that can 

assure the public that the process that is involved with raising 

cattle and selling cattle and marketing the products is safe. And 

that’s one of the things, I think, that as a government it’s 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

paramount that they provide that model, Mr. Speaker. And yes, 

it’s important to consult with the industry. I’m not saying you 

don’t consult with them, but you’ve got to have that 

independence. You’ve got to have that qualification, and you’ve 

got to have that expertise. 

 

Now what I think should have happened is the federal 

government should have at least afforded the Saskatchewan 

Party with the means and the mechanisms to provide something 

that is a lot better than CFIA, Mr. Speaker, instead of just 

simply firing all those employees and eliminating all the 

programs that support the proper inspection and handling of 

meat. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that when the minister 

has spoken the second part of his bill, the producer assurance 

fund, I think we don’t see anything significantly wrong with 

that in the sense that if a producer does run into problems with 

not being properly paid for his animals and his product, then 

obviously it’s something that we need to take into account. But 

obviously this is going to raise the price of food because any 

time you have these levies put on to these animals and the 

products, that obviously has to be paid by the consumer. 

 

Now we don’t know what kind of levy that this would be. We 

don’t know what kind of a problem it is throughout industry as 

to how many people are not getting paid for their animals. So 

it’s difficult for us to figure out, and I’m sure it is difficult for 

the Sask Party to figure out what kind of levies would take care 

of that problem. So you’ve got to be careful because levies 

sometimes to people means extra taxes. And extra taxes to the 

public means of course more money out of their pocket when 

they go buy these products at the store. So these are really 

important issues, Mr. Speaker, really important issues that need 

to be addressed and need to be of course understood by the 

public. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think on this Bill No. 60, I think the minister 

has a lot of work ahead of him. I think he’s got a tremendous 

amount of work ahead of him. And let me say at the outset that 

if the Minister of Agriculture doesn’t get this right, if he doesn’t 

get this right the entire industry is going to be affected 

negatively by his actions. And, Mr. Speaker, if he doesn’t get it 

right, there’ll be hundreds of families at risk if his model 

doesn’t work to ensure that the inspections of meats and meat 

products produced in Saskatchewan is done with the utmost 

care and the utmost concern and the utmost attention. 

 

And that’s why the Minister of Agriculture should have stood 

up, should have stood up to the federal government and said to 

them, if you want to reduce or eliminate the Canadian Food 

Inspection Agency’s programs in our province, including 

inspectors, then you give us the money. We’ll put together a 

more superior model to make sure the people of Saskatchewan 

and the places that we market our cattle is assured by top-notch 

professionals. Then, Mr. Speaker, we could certainly respect 

what the minister is trying to do in this bill. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, the minister is simply making excuses for 

his federal counterpart, doesn’t speak up for the producers. And 

when they fire CFIA workers with nothing to replace them in 

terms of services, it begs the question, it begs the question, why 

aren’t they supporting the producers? Why aren’t they putting 

the necessary means of making sure that the consumers — 

which is our families and our children and our grandparents — 

the consumers are protected properly, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Instead the minister sat on his hands, along with the Premier, 

and allowed the federal Conservatives to do what they want 

with CFIA. And not a peep from them, Mr. Speaker. So this bill 

has some serious ramifications to the future of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, not only in the sense of making sure that the 

inspection services are top-notch, Mr. Speaker, but now to 

make sure that the producers are protected in the event that they 

don’t get payment from a meat processing operation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of problems here. There are a 

lot of significant challenges. And you know, Mr. Speaker, as we 

had the opportunity in opposition to hear speeches from the 

Throne time and time again — this is the, I think it’s the sixth 

opportunity that the Sask Party has done a speech from the 

Throne — and not once, not once did we ever hear them say 

that the federal government should be condemned for pulling 

out CFIA services. Not once was this mentioned on any, on any 

of their particular Throne Speeches to warn the people of 

Saskatchewan of the impending changes to CFIA, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the model that the minister wants to replace CFIA with, 

we’ve got a whole whack of questions as to what kind of 

resources are you affording them. What kind of credentials are 

going to be on some of the boards or commissions that we 

assume would be monitoring the process, Mr. Speaker? We 

want to know exactly, if they’re able to develop the model, are 

they doing this development in concert with our federal cousins, 

or are they doing it in concert with Alberta, with BC? There are 

all kinds of questions. 

 

Now if something happens — if something were to occur, Mr. 

Speaker, where the minister came along and said, here is our 

model — it doesn’t work, and somebody is hurt, it’s either the 

industry themselves get hurt, or we have some major public 

health crisis. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And the last thing we want to hear from this minister is, well we 

have more work that needs to be done. That’s a common phrase 

we hear from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. We’re warning them 

today that the model that you’re hoping to develop in terms of 

your particular Bill No. 60, it better be far superior to what 

CFIA offered. It better be comprehensive. It better be 

well-financed, and it better be well-understood by all the 

players, Mr. Speaker. And above all else, it cannot pose in any 

way, shape, or form risk to the public for the sake of politics, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s one of the most pressing things that people tell us as 

we engage in this particular process, is you look at what 

happened with XL Foods. We don’t want to see that fiasco 

happen again, Mr. Speaker. There’s been too many people hurt 

by this. And the last thing you want to do is hurt your industry 

by allowing lax controls, Mr. Speaker, and allowing inspection 

programs that really don’t have the right credentials nor the 

right qualified people in charge, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 

these bills are so very important, that we watch very closely and 

carefully what the minister is proposing, and that we don’t 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

minimize in any way, shape, or form the importance of food 

inspection. 

 

We’ve seen evidence of that in the last few months, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s something that the people of Saskatchewan 

and Canada and, I think, the world is really, really struggling 

with right now is to make sure that the quality of food put in 

front of you and put in at the stores is something that they 

sometimes take for granted. But they ought to know now that 

they’re assured of that quality and that it’s safe, and that’s 

something that’s really, really important, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s why some days I look at the government across the way, 

and that confidence certainly doesn’t jump up when we talk 

about taking on the federal government and bringing and 

developing better systems of public safety, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important that we mention three things in our 

closing comments. Number one is when the federal government 

slashed the programs to ensure quality inspection services for 

the meats that are being fed to our families, this government 

didn’t say a word — not one little word of protest. When they 

slashed CFIA programs that inspected plants, that provided 

services that looked after public health, Mr. Speaker, not one 

little peep from the Sask Party. And that’s a shame because 

their primary goal shouldn’t be politics. Their primary goal 

should be protection of people and the protection of this 

industry. 

 

The second point I would make, Mr. Speaker, is that if the 

minister is alluding to a third party animal products inspection 

process, that he better make sure it’s top-notch. He better make 

sure that there is quality people, that they’re highly, highly 

professional people involved, that they have the proper 

resources, and that it’s not just something that they’re doing 

through the back door in response to the federal government’s 

slashing of these important jobs, and that he ought to hold the 

federal government to account for the action that they 

undertook and to ask them to transfer the resources of that 

particular role that they’re now playing to the province, to the 

province, to fill that void. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think this particular minister or this 

Premier or this Sask Party government will dare to take on their 

federal cousins, Mr. Speaker. They’ll simply sit on their hands 

and hope somebody hears their plea for help. And, Mr. Speaker, 

unless and until they get the federal government’s resources to 

build that system which has to be much more superior than 

CFIA, then I say to you today that they should have kept CFIA 

intact until a better model would come. 

 

Now the third thing, Mr. Speaker, I would point out is that 

industry could be dramatically, negatively affected if this 

process doesn’t work, and never mind consumer confidence, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s two big issues at risk here: consumer 

confidence in the cattle industry and the producer’s industry, 

and the second thing of course, Mr. Speaker, is the many men 

and women and families that make a living off agricultural 

products and in this case the cattle industry. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they would be at huge risk if the Sask Party didn’t do this right. 

 

So we’re telling from our perspective as an opposition, and 

certainly from many of my other colleagues, that this bill is 

going to deserve extra attention. The process that’s going to be 

unfolding is going to deserve extra attention. We need to find 

the data necessary as to what the federal government cut, what 

programs they cut. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to see what 

program support that they may give to the federal government, 

which I can assume right now is going to be zero, Mr. Speaker. 

But more so we’re going to see what the Saskatchewan Party 

affords this process, and not to play politics with food safety, 

Mr. Speaker. That is paramount to the whole integrity of this 

particular place. 

 

So my point is that today I’m going to tell the Minister of 

Agriculture, if you undertake this job, you better do it right. 

You better do it right because there’s a lot at risk. There’s a lot 

at risk, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I hear the member from Weyburn chirping from her chair, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that one of the biggest things is that 

she should know, she should know more than me about the 

cattle industry, Mr. Speaker. And we’re just making sure, we’re 

making sure that they get the message that food inspection and 

the delivery of safe products on the people’s plates is 

paramount to this particular exercise, Mr. Speaker. Because if 

they make one mistake in either category, then we’re holding 

the Sask Party to task because the message has been delivered 

by the opposition NDP that you’d better not mess this up, that 

you’d better not mess this up. And we’re going to watch very 

carefully, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Right now, for the record, they’re hooting and hollering over 

there, and they’re making all these little phrases over there, Mr. 

Speaker. But what happens if there’s a breakdown? What 

happens if some family gets sickened by a poor process that 

they’ve put in place? Then we’ll see who’ll be hooting and 

hollering after that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the premise of my presentation today on Bill 60, instead of 

giving your federal cousins a good talking to and a good public 

thrashing, they sat on their hands. And now they’ve got to find 

the means and the resources to put another inspection process in 

place to assure the people of Saskatchewan that our producers 

are producing quality meat. And I’m telling them today, they 

better do it right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And all you hear from them is cat calls and laughter, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s no laughing matter. It’s a serious business because 

families . . . The safety of food comes first. And of course the 

producers, which is a huge industry in our province, their issues 

are important too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re going to watch very carefully the process that this bill 

undertakes. We’re going to watch exactly what resources this 

minister affords this process. And we’re going to see how much 

they speak up for Saskatchewan producers and Saskatchewan 

families when it comes to making sure that the federal 

government is held to account for their slashing of CFIA 

support systems and not putting anything in back, not putting 

anything in place to counter that, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

sat on their hands. And we’ll see what happens in the future, 

Mr. Speaker, as the government, federal government continues 

turning their back on Saskatchewan’s producers and the people 

of Saskatchewan in general. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this bill has a lot of questions. There’s many, 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

many angles that we’re going to undertake to make sure that the 

analysis of this bill is completely what we understand it to be. 

And if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, then rest 

assured that this bill and this process had better be done 

absolutely right, Mr. Speaker. It better be done absolutely 

correct. It better be done with a lot of professionalism, with a 

lot of integrity and a lot of key professional people that are in 

the know that’ll hold the system to account between the 

producer and of course the consumer. And right in the middle 

of all that is a process to inspect our meat and to make sure this 

is done. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, there’s going to be other 

folks that are going to have points to be raised at this. I 

encourage many people out there that may be involved with all 

kinds of farming operations, in particular with hog and cattle, 

that if you have any concerns on these particular files, that rest 

assured that these concerns are important to us as an opposition 

and that this issue is too important to be partisan. So if you do 

have some concerns as to how the process is unfolding, that you 

see weaknesses within the bill or within the processes that the 

minister may develop, then it’s your duty and your obligation to 

come forward and point out those weaknesses because in the 

long run you might be saving your industry a lot of headache, 

and you might be improving the system. So don’t sit back and 

hope that this particular minister and this Sask Party have things 

figured out because I can assure you they don’t, Mr. Speaker, 

they simply don’t. So you have to get involved. You have to 

make sure your associations that are going to be at these 

consultations, make sure that they represent the best way to 

safely market your meat, to safely produce your meat, and to 

safely sell your meat, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s really, really 

important that we share that message with the producers out 

there. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, a lot more to be said. And I’m 

going to re-enter the debate because more information is 

coming forward. We know CFIA services are going to be 

slashed, and we know that when that happens that there is a 

breakdown in inspection services somewhere. And if people 

don’t realize this is happening and the federal government’s 

getting a free ride of doing some of these things that threaten 

the safety of our food supply and nobody’s giving the federal 

government grief, especially the Sask Party . . . And I think 

that’s a crying shame in this day and age, Mr. Speaker, because 

that would never stand, never stand when our parents and 

grandparents ran our provinces and ran our federal government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a big issue. It’s an important issue. We’re 

going to take the time in the next few months to look at the bill, 

and we’re going to compare models of other countries and other 

jurisdictions. We’re going to compare what the CFIA done. All 

this work needs to be done. 

 

And the final point I would make on this bill before I adjourn 

the debate on this bill is that the minister had better do this 

right. And this is coming from a northern Aboriginal MLA, Mr. 

Speaker, that has limited experience and knowledge about the 

cattle industry and the hog industry and the agricultural sector 

in general. But this I know: that when the food supply is 

threatened or tainted, the public is not very forgiving. And we 

can’t risk the comforts and the safety of our industry to in any 

way, shape, or form threaten that safe supply of food to our 

families. And that’s the message I think, Mr. Speaker, that I’m 

fairly confident in, and I think it’s time that the Sask Party wake 

up to that challenge. So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I move we 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 60. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 60, The Animal Products 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today 

I rise to speak about Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 

2012 (No. 2) which will introduce four amendments to The 

Parks Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has committed to 

improving and expanding the provincial park system of 

Saskatchewan. My ministry has been working for more than 

two years towards meeting that commitment by holding public 

consultations in two areas of the province. The first amendment 

I am introducing today establishes a new provincial park in the 

area of Anglin and Emma Lakes that will result in an additional 

12 821 hectares of Crown lands being protected in a park that 

will also absorb the existing Anglin Lake and Emma Lake 

recreation sites resulting in a total park area of 16 010 hectares. 

 

Over the last two years my ministry has held two open houses, 

three trade show events, consulted with 25 various interest 

groups, consulted with five local First Nations and Métis groups 

as well as the respective provincial agencies, and consulted with 

local jurisdictions. An online survey was conducted to reach a 

broader cross-section of the population. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

5,500 surveys were distributed with 721 completed surveys 

specific to Anglin and Emma lakes returned. Overall support 

for the proposed park at Anglin and Emma lakes among the 

general public was high at 87 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Designating this new park will result in improved protection to 

an area of the mid-boreal upland eco region of Saskatchewan, 

local watersheds, and natural resources, several of which are 

endangered or are considered species of concern. The name of 

the new park as identified in this bill is Anglin-Emma Lakes 

Provincial Park. This name was chosen from the names of the 

two main lakes in the area of the new park. It is my ministry’s 

intention that this is an interim name and that this name will be 

amended prior to third reading after local jurisdictions and 

Aboriginal communities are given a chance to comment and 

recommend alternative names. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am introducing an amendment 

that will remove 31 hectares of land from the Coteau Bay area 

in Danielson Provincial Park for the purposes of making this 

land available for cottage lot development. The land being 

removed has a low ecological integrity due to impact from the 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

construction of Gardiner Dam. To offset this reduction to 

Danielson Provincial Park, this amendment also adds 65 

hectares of other lands which contain native prairie grassland to 

the park. This amendment is in line with broader 

inner-governmental discussions respecting recreation potential 

of Lake Diefenbaker and results in a net gain of 34 hectares of 

land for Danielson Provincial Park. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the third amendment improves visitor 

safety while they are in the parks and reduces risk to our park 

wildlife by reducing the potential for dangerous wildlife 

encounters through visitor education on the proper management 

of dangerous wildlife attractants. Over the past five years, our 

parks have experienced record growth in visitation numbers. 

This increase is good news for our park system but has led to 

increases in the number of visitor encounters with dangerous 

wildlife within the parks. Dangerous wildlife attractants can 

include such items as improperly stored food, greasy pots left 

for later cleaning, or waste improperly disposed of. In 2011, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, close to 1,000 calls were received 

regarding nuisance bears with 850 of these occurring in parks. 

 

Education of park users is foremost in minimizing wildlife 

encounters, but sometimes patrons refuse to become compliant 

with park regulations, so enforcement officers need the ability 

to exercise stronger authority for those few instances. The 

amendment will allow park officers to remove dangerous 

wildlife attractants and the container they are found in from 

campsites to a secure storage area when the owner cannot be 

located, leaving notification on where and how to reclaim their 

items. This will allow the park officers to provide information 

on the proper management of wildlife attractants when the 

items are reclaimed by the owner. 

 

And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fourth amendment deals 

with Steele Narrows Provincial Park whereby the description of 

the park is being adjusted to improve mapping of the park, 

confirm that shore lands currently shown between the waters of 

Makwa Lake and the current boundary of the park are part of 

the provincial park, and to remove a sliver of land separated 

from the main park area by Highway 699 so it may be 

transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture. My ministry has 

worked with the Ministry of Agriculture and Information 

Services Corporation to ensure agreement with the legal 

description and that mapping of Steele Narrows Provincial Park 

meets with their approval, and they have assisted with this 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to conclude, I am pleased to move second 

reading of Bill. No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 

(No. 2). Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport has moved that Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 

2012 (No. 2) be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I just want to again stand on behalf of the opposition 

to give the public a chance to join the debate on this particular 

bill. And I’ll do my very best to explain what the minister 

alluded to in terms of the contents of the bill, but obviously 

there’s a number of different areas that I want to challenge the 

bill’s integrity on, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s important that 

again at the outset, we invite public input, and we also ask the 

people that may be involved with this particular bill to come 

forward and share with us any information that they think is 

important to be shared with the public because that’s our role as 

opposition is to make sure that we hold the government to 

account. 

 

Now I understood the minister speaking of Bill 62 and being 

four components: creating a new provincial park, Mr. Speaker; 

some changes to the Danielson Park; some measures to avoid 

animals as a result of the many people that use our parks, Mr. 

Speaker; and of course to talk about a sliver of land that he 

made reference to at the Steele Narrows Park. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I took a bit of interest in the creation of a 

new park. I think in general, people throughout the province 

think that, you know, when you look at protecting land and 

keeping land in its natural beauty and its original habitat, all 

those qualities are really important, Mr. Speaker, that the people 

of Saskatchewan I think overall would like to see much more of 

our land protected. And I think that at the outset, that in that 

particular frame of mind, I don’t think you can find any people 

in the province that would be against creating more parks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That being said, it’s important to know that all the different 

groups of people that I met with over the years as an MLA, is 

that we want to make sure that when we do certain things as a 

government or as a people that we try to get as many people’s 

blessing on some of these projects or some of these initiatives 

because it’s important that we have buy-in from all the groups. 

Now what’s really important on the new provincial park that the 

minister made reference to, the Emma Lake and Anglin Lake 

park, is that the important phrase that I like to hear when people 

propose parks of this nature is that, we have an agreement from 

the many people that were consulted. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister didn’t talk about agreement. He spoke about, we 

consulted with five First Nations. We consulted with the local 

community. We consulted with some of the other industry 

players or the regional players. And, Mr. Speaker, people ought 

to know in Saskatchewan that there’s a significant difference 

when they use the word we consulted as opposed to we have an 

agreement. 

 

And that’s what’s really important here, Mr. Speaker, because 

we think in Saskatchewanland that the people know it’s 

important to protect land. It’s important to have quality parks. 

But it’s important that we all buy in to the park and that you 

shouldn’t create a park to create trouble and you shouldn’t 

create a park to create division within different groups of 

people, Mr. Speaker. So it’s important that he made reference to 

87 or 84 per cent of the people in the area, local community, 

want to see the park created. And that goes back to my earlier 

point, Mr. Speaker, that the public in general like the creation of 

a new park. However it’s important that you get as many groups 

of people buying in to the process as possible and not to ignore 

certain groups and not to ignore certain aspirations for that 

particular land that you want to create a park on. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, when I hear the minister talk about, 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

we consulted, what that means to me is that they simply 

dictated this was going to happen and they didn’t get any 

approval from any of the players that would have a significant 

concern as it relates to the creation of a new park. 

 

So I’m going to ask the minister during our process, did he 

consult with the First Nations in those areas and did he get 

agreement with them? And I can almost guarantee that the First 

Nations in that particular area, Mr. Speaker, may have had, you 

know, may have had some aspirations for that use of land. They 

may have had some concern as to the continued access to that 

land. They may have had some concerns that they’ve had 

traditional hunting, fishing, and trapping rights attached to that 

land. Now did the minister get the First Nations support? I can 

almost guarantee that he didn’t get that support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead, what the minister would like to say in the Assembly is 

that we consulted with the five First Nations in that area. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, consultation does not equate support for that park, 

Mr. Speaker. And if the minister wishes to challenge me on the 

particular front, I’m going to ask him today to produce letters 

from those five First Nations that show that they support the 

creation of this park. 

 

And wouldn’t it be wonderful, Mr. Speaker, if they were 

brought in as partners to create this park so that we can see that 

the First Nations and the Métis people and the non-Aboriginal 

people in general of that area all have an ownership stake on 

that park and that they all support that park and there isn’t any 

kind of costly legal battles, that there isn’t any political strife 

created between the groups, Mr. Speaker. And to me I think 

that’s what the important message is, is that we have some kind 

of partnership and that we have inclusion of all the groups of 

people that are impacted by the creation of this new park as 

kind of the basis of the minister’s decision to proceed with this 

particular bill. 

 

And I can tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, knowing some of the 

mistakes made early on by that particular minister, that he 

doesn’t have the support, he doesn’t have the blessing of the 

First Nations groups in that particular area, Mr. Speaker. So 

he’d much rather use the phrase we consulted with them to give 

the premise that he’s got their support. But I can tell the people 

of Saskatchewan, more than likely they don’t have the five First 

Nations’ support on the creation of this park, Mr. Speaker. And 

I would challenge him to produce evidence contrary to my 

position, and I doubt very much if he could rise to that 

occasion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing I think is really important is the local people 

have always had traditional access to that particular land. Some 

may have had cabins. Other people may have had trapping, 

traplines, and there’s a lot of non-First Nations and First 

Nations that participate and enjoy the land. Some may want to 

keep the land as it is. There may be opportunity from the 

economic perspective to develop certain parts of that particular 

land that many people in the local community might be able to 

take advantage of. And again, Mr. Speaker, when you do 

referencing of consultation and 83 per cent like the idea, there’s 

still a lot of work that needs to be done to make sure that they 

have buy-in by the region. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of things that we need to watch 

here. And again, as I pointed out at the outset, you look at what 

the federal government has done to these guys again. It seems 

the federal government really has these Sask Party’s numbers 

because every time the Sask Party tries to do something, your 

federal cousins come along and they kind of just slap them back 

in line and that’s it. 

 

You know, look at . . . I make reference to CFIA. And most 

recently on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill 62, we now 

know that under the federal government I believe now that 

they’re not protecting the Clearwater River Park anymore as a 

heritage site. The Churchill River system is now not being 

protected by the federal government, Mr. Speaker. And you see 

those two waterways, those two important waterways, not just 

to the history of the country but to the future promise of our 

country as being pristine and clean and unhindered, Mr. 

Speaker. The federal government is now delisting the 

Clearwater River national park from protection. The Churchill 

River system is now being delisted. And now the minister is 

coming along saying, well we’re going to create a new park and 

that will solve the problem. 

 

Now once again we’re seeing the excuse factory on behalf of 

the federal Conservatives — called the Sask Party — putting 

forward bills of this sort that really don’t counter what the 

incredible damage that the federal Conservatives are doing. So 

their cousins, Mr. Speaker . . . Our opposition caucus has now 

determined that our best bet for the future in Saskatchewan is to 

make sure we tie the Saskatchewan Party’s inaction to the 

federal government’s poor planning when it comes to 

Saskatchewan’s interest. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan know that the Sask Party and the federal 

Conservatives are tied at the hip, as many of them across the 

way have joint memberships not only in the provincial Sask 

Party association but there are federal Conservative members of 

that party as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we hear notions of a new provincial 

park and they got the blessing of five First Nations, I don’t 

believe that in any way, shape, or form. When they talk about 

the integrity of the parks system, Mr. Speaker, they’re watching 

their federal cousin delist critical ecosystems in our province 

such as the Churchill River system and the Clearwater River 

system and, Mr. Speaker, they sit on their hands and don’t say a 

word. Well I don’t believe that their interest in the long run is to 

protect our parks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think one of the things that’s important too is that one of 

the premises of the provincial parks system, if they’re not 

selling them or delisting them or simply exchanging a nice 

piece of quality parkland for less quality parkland and selling it 

off to their private friends, Mr. Speaker, I think those are some 

of the actions that the people of Saskatchewan will not forget. 

They will not forget. So it’s important that we take the time to 

understand what exactly is the Sask Party doing to our parks 

system. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that the premise behind the 

parks system is that you don’t delist any particular areas of the 

park unless you have land that it’s available to make sure that 

you don’t lose acres overall from the provincial parks system on 

a year-by-year basis. Now what the minister’s alluding to is that 

we are in essence increasing, as a result of no. 2, 34 acres of 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

park under Danielson Park. Well, Mr. Speaker, the question I 

have is: what land are you exchanging for what land? We need 

to know what’s the value of that land to the Danielson Park, 

integrity of Danielson Park. What are you giving up, and what 

are you getting in exchange? Because obviously he’s saying 

we’re swapping particular land areas here. And, Mr. Speaker, 

given their track record, it’s very interesting as to what they’re 

trying to do in the Danielson Park. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, avoiding animal encounters, you know, 

obviously public safety’s important. That’s another part of the 

bill that the minister alluded to and obviously we’re all for 

safety. There are ways and means in which you could 

discourage animals from roaming around in your park. And it’s 

something that’s really, really important that we in opposition 

say, of course, we think avoiding animal encounters by taking 

the proper steps and minimizing the risk to your campsite, as 

the minister spoke about garbage and food being left out in the 

open and cooking pots and pans being left out in the open that 

obviously attracts animals because of the scent . . . So we think 

that anything to avoid dangerous animal encounters is 

something that we ought to do. And the only thing I wish they 

would do is avoid dangerous political campaigning by some of 

the Sask Party MLAs during camping season, Mr. Speaker. So I 

think we are all for safety. Nothing wrong with that. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And finally under Steele Narrows Park, he’s talking about a 

sliver of land. And basically we’d like to know the details of 

that as well. Because what is a sliver of land? How many acres 

does this involve? And the question we have is, Agriculture 

wants it. What does Agriculture want it for? Do they want to 

sell it? Was it part of the initial decision to create Steele 

Narrows Park? 

 

These are some of the things that we obviously have to check 

on, Mr. Speaker. But overall when it comes to protecting the 

environment, we give them a big fat F, Mr. Speaker. When it 

comes to protecting the park system, yes, tell us another one 

because we don’t believe that in any way, shape, or form. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that in the long run we know on this 

side of the Assembly the people of Saskatchewan are smart 

enough to know when a rope-a-dope is being done on them 

when it comes to the park system. Because quite frankly, 

they’re simply not going to follow in any way, shape, or form 

any measure to enhance, nor protect, nor build the integrity of 

our park system because they simply want to sell it, Mr. 

Speaker. And they want to sell them as quick as they can create 

them. And on this side of the Assembly, we’re going to be 

bringing forth casework of that sort just so people of 

Saskatchewan can see evidence of that. 

 

So I think one of the points I would make on my closing the bid 

on Bill 62, why don’t you stand up and speak to keep the 

Churchill River system protected that your federal 

government’s delisted? Why don’t you stand up and speak out 

about the delisting of the Clearwater River Park, Mr. Speaker? 

Two very important ecosystems in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you want to create new provincial parks, 

maybe you should get the blessing, partnership, and integration 

of the First Nations people in that area. Then you make the 

parks stronger from many ways, from many cultural 

perspectives, from many historical perspectives, and from many 

stewardship points as well, Mr. Speaker. Because First Nations 

obviously over the years have gathered a lot of information and 

knowledge on how to protect the land. They would be a 

valuable partner as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So overall I think there is a lot of problems with this particular 

Bill. We’re going to take our time to analyze it. We’re asking 

the people of Saskatchewan to join in the debate, bring forward 

your concerns. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be a lot more 

said on this particular file. But at this moment I’d like to move 

that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 62. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 62, The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today 

I rise to speak about a consequential amendment to The 

Regional Parks Act, 2012. The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012 updates references to The Regional 

Parks Act, 1979 which are contained within The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this amendment Act is a result of the 

proposed enactment of The Regional Parks Act, 2012 and is 

proposed to come into force on the day in which section 1 of 

The Regional Parks Act, 2012 comes into force. I am pleased to 

move second reading of Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2012. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport has moved that Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now read a second 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to stand today and once again offer our initial comments on Bill 

64. And I think one of the things that’s really important here, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the bill, while very brief — and certainly I 

think the minister spoke very quickly here — we assume that 

the bill is going to have some . . . While there’s minor details of 

the bill as to how they’re going to proceed with the regional 

parks plan, that there’s a lot of different connections to what 

they want to do on the regional parks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We spoke about the bill earlier last week and how the minister 

may have the authority now above the RMs [rural municipality] 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

and above the community and above the regional parks board or 

the regional park executive that in the event that they want to 

sell a particular regional park, Mr. Speaker, that the minister 

may have that authority to overrule that particular board. That 

rule wasn’t there before, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that Bill 64 

is a consequential amendment to that particular process, Mr. 

Speaker, and that opens up a lot of different avenues of 

discussion. 

 

And I know there’s been examples of one particular regional 

park which they had the opportunity to try and sell this 

particular park, Mr. Speaker. I believe that regional park had a 

golf course. It had a swimming pool. It had some campsites. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was a discussion with the community 

after the fact when the Sask Party sold that regional park. And 

they went in there, and they showed the people the value of 

selling that particular park, the Sask Party did. And the people 

overall decided that it was in the best interests of the region that 

they do this. 

 

But you know, one of the points they raised is that geez it 

would’ve been nice to have consultation before you’d done this. 

And one of the amendments to the minister’s bill, which I am 

assuming would be part of the consequential amendment Act 

that he’s proposing just now, Mr. Speaker, is to infer greater 

power on him. And I go back to my earlier statement about 

some of the challenges that the minister has in showing the 

commitment to the park system. We don’t see no evidence of 

any sort that he is supportive of that particular process. And the 

integrity of these parks, the integrity of our ecosystem 

protection measures is really called into question when the Sask 

Party tries to come forward and start waving that flag 

pretending to be champions of the environment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know over the years that people that have 

developed our park system have counted on the blessing and 

support of the many landowners, not just the First Nations or 

Métis communities but people that have owned farm land. And 

there is years and years of examples of how people have 

donated their farm land. If there’s a special piece of land within 

their family farm, the parents or the grandparents took it upon 

themselves as an initiative to basically say, look, to their family, 

we think this land is so special that we ought to protect it. So as 

a family they donated that piece of land, and now you see the 

examples of how they want to keep the integrity of the 

ecosystems alive and well. And we see thousands of examples 

every year, Mr. Speaker, of how families have given up farm 

land, how First Nations have worked together to manage some 

of the lands, of how the Métis people have spoken about the 

need to involve them as partners, and then the environmental 

group is of course supportive of all those measures, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think overall that there’s been thousands of families that 

have contributed greatly to the protection of ecosystems, 

protection of the lands, protection of the parks systems. And 

that’s something that I think sometimes the Sask Party doesn’t 

take into consideration, and they ought to see some of the many 

thank yous and some of the awards that were handed out over 

the years to families that have done this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important that people don’t take any bill the Sask 

Party presents, even though it’s very small in terms of the 

quantity of pages or the presentation that the minister took — 

less than 20 seconds — to do that. We don’t in any way, shape, 

or form think that it’s not something that we should pay 

attention to, and we do plan on paying a lot of attention to Bill 

64. 

 

So again there are ramifications. There are challenges. There 

are issues. There are some things that the bill has not spoken 

about, Mr. Speaker. And all we know is that as a result of the 

changes that this minister has done to other parks Acts, it 

authorizes him more powers to delist parks. It gives him the 

sole authority to determine whether a regional park should be 

sold or not. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on the one occasion that they did do this, 

they went in after the fact to explain to the local people why 

they’d done this. And the local people were gracious enough to 

give them support, with the qualifying statement that in the 

future, you try some of these things, maybe you should tell us 

first. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s the message that I think a 

lot of people that do have regional parks or provincial parks or 

national parks, that they’re giving the message to their 

politicians that consultation is really, really important. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I encourage people to follow 

these bills through even though they’re consequential bills to 

other bills, that there is indeed a connection here, and that you 

have to watch what other bills are doing because their plan is to 

try and confuse as many people as they can so they can get on 

with their privatization agenda of not just our Crowns but our 

provincial parks as well. And we’ll be bringing forward 

examples, Mr. Speaker, of how they’re doing this. 

 

And I think the people of Saskatchewan feel betrayed. And 

what’s really important is a lot of families that have donated 

land over the years, they’re going to feel equally angry and 

betrayed if they start seeing some of the activity happening to 

the land that they have bequeathed on behalf of their families to 

be protected in its natural habitat as a contribution to the great 

ecosystems of our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say. 

There’s eight other folks that are going to be speaking. There’s 

interest groups that are out there. We ask for their engagement, 

their advice, and we’ll certainly be talking a bit more on this 

particular bill. So on that note, I move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 64. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 64, The Regional Parks Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill 65, The Securities Amendment Act, 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

2012. Mr. Speaker, the main purpose of this bill is to introduce 

a regulatory framework for financial products known as 

over-the-counter derivatives. An over-the-counter or OTC 

derivative is an agreement where the price, value, delivery, or 

payment obligation is derived from an underlying interest. OTC 

derivatives are used to transfer the financial risk that an 

underlying interest poses to a company, an institution, or an 

individual to another entity that is willing to accept that risk. 

 

These derivatives are not to be confused with derivatives that 

are traded on an exchange. When traded on an exchange, 

derivative contracts are standardized and traded anonymously 

through secure electronic means. Such products are well 

regulated and an essential element of a strong global economy. 

 

Over-the-counter derivative trades, however, are not 

standardized or cleared in this manner. They are executed only 

through bilateral negotiation. Mr. Speaker, the opaque nature of 

the OTC derivatives market has limited the ability of provincial 

market regulators to effectively monitor them and deter 

improper market activity and conduct. 

 

The lack of information available on parties participating in 

OTC derivatives trading, including their debt position and 

exposure, has also limited the ability of regulators to identify 

the potential buildup of systemic risk. It has also limited their 

ability to take steps to manage that risk. In particular the threat 

of systemic risk is enhanced in these markets because provincial 

market regulators cannot identify who is participating and what 

risks they may present. Furthermore the absence of harmonized, 

robust market conduct rules has impeded the ability of 

provincial market regulators to take enforcement action. The 

framework introduced through these amendments is a 

significant step toward the reduction of these risks. 

 

OTC derivatives did play a role in the financial crisis of 2008. 

While they are not considered the primary cause of the crisis, 

they made it more difficult for regulators to understand the 

scope of the crisis and the interactions between market 

participants. In 2008 the OTC market and the complexity of 

OTC derivative contracts was compounded by a lack of 

transparency. This made it challenging for regulators to identify 

the risk before the crisis. This is in contrast to the trading of 

derivatives on regulated exchanges which did not experience 

any significant failures during the financial crisis of 2008. 

 

Jurisdictions where many of our Canadian firm counterparties 

are based, such as the European Union and the United States, 

are posed to impose new regulations on OTC derivative 

markets. This means Canadian entities may have to adhere to 

new requirements in those jurisdictions as well. For this reason 

regulatory inaction is not an option given the commitments 

Canada has made as part of the G20 [Group of Twenty]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2008 the Canadian Securities Administrators 

derivative committee has been closely following international 

regulatory proposals and legislative developments respecting 

OTC derivatives. That committee has also consulted 

extensively with Canada’s OTC derivative market participants 

and worked closely with other Canadian prudential regulators to 

determine the most appropriate approach to enhance in the 

regulatory framework. These proposed amendments are based 

on the committee’s work and recommendations. An in-person 

consultation session focused on Saskatchewan-based business 

sectors that are affected by the regulation of derivatives trading 

was held in Regina in September of this year. 

 

In addition to the framework affecting OTC derivatives, Mr. 

Speaker, this bill also provides that certain confidential records 

and information gathered by officials with the Financial and 

Consumer Affairs Authority may not be publicly disclosed. 

These include records relating to examination of market 

participants and self-regulatory organizations, review of 

reporting issuers, continuous disclosure records, investigations 

into alleged contravention of securities law, and enforcement 

proceedings. Protecting the confidentiality of these records is 

critical to ensure the effective enforcement of securities 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will provide the fine 

collection branch of the Ministry of Justice with the authority to 

enforce and collect financial compensation orders. These orders 

are made by Financial and Consumer Affairs Authority against 

individuals or companies that have contravened securities 

legislation through activities such as fraud. Order is made 

following a formal proceeding that hears and reviews evidence 

and quantifies the amount of the financial loss. The amount of 

the order is to be paid to an individual who has suffered 

financial loss on the account of the illegal activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment will provide a further 

enforcement tool to officials involved in protecting 

Saskatchewan investors. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move 

second reading of Bill 65, The Securities Amendment Act, 2012. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

that Bill No. 65, The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly at the outset of Bill 65, we’re going to obviously have 

to spend quite a bit of time on this particular bill to see exactly 

what the government is planning on doing with this bill, but 

obviously from the perspective of the opposition, 

non-regulation of OTC derivatives is not acceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. I think the OTC derivatives that the minister is 

speaking about, that we simply, simply think that it is not going 

to be a problem, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first thing that people 

ought to know is that this deserves a lot of attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke in language I’m sure that the 

average layperson and certainly from my perspective, one 

would beg the question is, what the heck is an OTC derivative? 

Now OTC obviously means over-the-counter, Mr. Speaker. But 

any time that, as an opposition, that we want to make sure that 

there is oversight on any financial products, Mr. Speaker, that 

it’s important that the people of Saskatchewan be afforded that 

particular oversight through measures of this sort. But exactly 

as the minister spoke about when some of the challenges were 

created in 2008, they weren’t certain if this particular activity 

helped hasten some of the challenges of 2008 when the market 

stumbled and people lost a lot of investment dollars and there 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

was a financial crisis throughout the country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is so many different products out there 

from the financial perspective that people have to understand 

market activity. They have to understand the products and the 

benefits that some of these particular companies may garner as 

a result, some of their products. And they look at things like 

systemic risk, of how that might affect the financial standings of 

not just families but governments as well overall, because many 

times we are connected. And they also need to determine 

whether these OTC derivatives, what kind of market activity are 

they involved with. What’s the activity in the market as a result 

of some of their involvement? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the biggest issue, of course, is a lack of 

transparency. I think one of the things that people ought to 

know is exactly what we’re dealing with here. And I think any 

time that the consumer protection is enhanced and that there is 

better oversight of some of the products and some of the 

products that may be coming from other countries, I think it’s 

important that people, people in general, know that there is 

action on that particular file to understand exactly what the 

effect of an OTC derivative is, on not just family finances, but 

certainly governments in general. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are so many . . . There is a lot of 

confusion as to how the global economy works. As many 

people know that there is money, there is trillions of dollars 

being stocked away in offshore accounts. And there is a lot of 

people wondering how that system works, Mr. Speaker. There 

are programs out there to make you understand exactly how 

some of these programs work. And obviously the minister is 

talking about one of the tools that may complicate the issue 

being an OTC derivative. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think if we are able to understand what the 

derivative is and what the impact it has on families and 

communities and the government, and then we understand how 

it affects the markets, how that some countries have different 

rules governing the derivatives, then it’s important that we 

analyze all that and expose any particular challenges that the 

derivative may impose upon a family structure or our financial 

institutions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of implications to how our 

financial system works. The minister spoke about consumer 

affairs and financial affairs, and these issues are something that 

we obviously have to pay close attention to. And as I said at the 

outset, that if we don’t have any regulation of over-the-counter 

derivatives, then we ought to have that as regulation. In this 

stage of the game, I’m assuming that it may be anything from 

credit cards to a number of other products. And so I think it’s 

important, Mr. Speaker, that we take the time to understand the 

bill and understand it very well. 

 

So I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are provincial and 

federal governments involved in this process. There’s 

companies and there’s countries involved in this process. So 

understanding this as best we can, to protect the consumers’ 

confidence in some of these products, we certainly want to see 

that continue and have this analyzed properly. 

 

So the minister used some fairly, very strong financial wording 

that we want to obviously understand better, but anything from 

systemic risk to robust market activity to lack of transparency in 

market activity to products and benefits of OTC derivatives, 

Mr. Speaker, is something that we have to certainly take the 

time to understand. And we shall. And so on that note, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a bit more work to do on this particular file. 

Our folks will be analyzing this and studying this. We 

encourage people to participate, and we’ll get certainly our 

perspective on how we can strengthen families, institutions, and 

countries. If there’s a way that could be done going through this 

exercise, then obviously we certainly will support that. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we’ve a bit more work to be done 

on this file, and I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 65. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 65, The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to rise today in the House to speak to the Bill No. 

50, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012. And I’ll 

start off with just making a couple of comments about the 

minister’s comments on this. 

 

He gave a short speech the other day about the intention of this 

particular bill, and as I understand his comments, it’s coming 

from actually the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 

Saskatchewan. A request came through them to make some 

amendments to the way the bill is structured to enable these 

self-regulating health professionals to respond to some of the 

federal changes that are coming forward and recommendations 

from the federal level and the national level. 

 

So I guess my first step at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to 

talk a little bit about the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 

Saskatchewan. It’s a statutory, self-regulating body, so of 

course the bill that gives it its authority is The Medical 

Profession Act, 1981. And in that bill there’s a number of things 

which indicates how the medical profession will be regulated. 

And the College of Physicians and Surgeons is charged with the 

responsibility, three particular responsibilities. 

 

One is licensing properly qualified medical practitioners. So in 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

order for any doctor to be licensed to practice here in 

Saskatchewan, he has to have, he or she has to have the 

approval of the college. The second area that they’re 

responsible for is developing and ensuring standards of practice 

in all fields of medicine, which is of course something very 

important to public safety. And then finally, also of great 

importance to public safety and to the profession itself, is the 

responsibility to investigate and discipline doctors whose 

standards of medical care, ethical, or provincial conduct are 

questioned. So obviously when there are concerns about 

conduct, the body, the College of Physicians and Surgeons, is 

responsible for the investigation and discipline that may be 

required. So that’s from the web page for the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons. 

 

And I also understand that one of the regulatory agreements that 

exist, and this is from October 2009, is an agreement on 

national standards for medical registration in Canada, and that 

comes from an organization called the Federation of Medical 

Regulatory Authorities of Canada. So there’s an agreement 

amongst all medical authorities across Canada to have some 

form of standardization of the registries that exist when it 

comes to registering doctors. And I think what’s really 

interesting in their agreement from October 2009 is the 

principles that this group — and there’s 13 members in the 

group; I assume Saskatchewan’s college is one of them — 

there’s five principles there. One is that protection of the public 

is the primary responsibility of the medical regulatory 

authorities. 

 

The second principle is to the minimum standard set out in this 

agreement for full and provisional medical licensure in Canada. 

That’s an agreement. They also agree on consistent and 

sufficiently rigorous registration and licensure processes for 

physicians across all Canadian jurisdictions. So again you see 

the principle of consistency. Fourthly — and this is something 

that’s also important to any profession — is mobility, and 

principle four is to support the mobility of physicians across 

Canadian jurisdictions. So that’s something we support, is to 

ensure that physicians, along with other professions, have the 

ability to move around in Canada and still practise their chosen 

profession. 

 

And finally they list criteria, five Es, to issue a licence to 

practise medicine. And that includes education, evaluation of 

their undergraduate medical education, their experience, and 

their evaluation of post-graduate medical education, and finally 

evidence of currency of practice. So this allows doctors across 

Canada and colleges of physicians and surgeons across Canada 

to ensure that there’s consistency. And I know in my 

profession, the legal profession, similar standards have been 

adopted and consistency across Canada has been desirable. 

 

In the appendix to this agreement, they indicate that for those 

educated anywhere in Canada, they are looking at three main 

educational or training stages to get a licence. So this is 

something, I think, that applies across Canada. First one 

obviously is completion of medical school. You want to make 

sure that the physician has completed medical school, including 

part 1 of their exam. The second one is the successful 

completion of a post-graduate medical education program. So 

this is post-grad work and also part 2 of the qualifying exam. 

And then finally the requirement to certify as a specialist, which 

would include the specialty of family medicine. So as long as a 

doctor has completed all three of those stages and is in good 

standing, he or she will enjoy full mobility amongst the 

provinces and the territories. 

 

So that’s the background I think to the requirement from our 

provincial College of Physicians and Surgeons to the Ministry 

of Health to basically tune up the registry requirements in The 

Medical Profession Act, 1981. 

 

So if I want to move now into the actual changes that are being 

proposed, there’s a number of . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, do. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Well in fact I plan to do that. I’m going to 

indicate, first of all, there are several registers that are 

established under the existing bill that it appears that the 

Minister of Health is now deleting as redundant. And there’s 

going to be simply a referral to a registry because there are three 

registers that are deemed to be no longer required, and that’s 

found in sections 28, 29, and 30 of the existing bill. And one is 

called the education register under section 28. And then there’s 

also the, it’s called the podiatric register, and that’s going to be 

repealed as well, and there’s some other ones. 

 

So we’re looking at generic language now to reference the 

registers rather than the specifics. So the education register was 

described in section 34. The podiatric surgical register was 

referred to in section 42.2, and it’s not clear to me why there is 

a specific register for podiatry. 

 

[16:00] 

 

There’s a temporary register referred to in section 31(3), and 

that also is being repealed. The indication in the explanatory 

notes to the bill, it says there are two other specific registers 

including the corporate register, and they’re not referred to in 

part 3 of the Act. Specific reference to all five registers is being 

replaced with generic language to prevent any confusion . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’m having some difficulty hearing 

the member from Saskatoon Nutana. I know there’s a number 

of conversations taking place. If that could be done at the back, 

it would be much appreciated. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s encouraging to know that you’re hanging on every word 

that I’m saying, so I appreciate that. 

 

So the first provision that’s being amended is obviously the 

interpretation provision where there’s a number of definitions. 

And what’s happening is that the reference to the education 

register is being repealed, and then the reference to the podiatric 

surgical registry is being repealed as well as section (m), which 

is the register itself, and then under section 27, and the 

definition of temporary register under subsection 31(3). So 

that’s the first change we see. 

 

They also have to redefine who the members are. So in section 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

4, where the definition of the members of the college is referred 

to, again the amendment required there is to remove the 

reference to sections 28, 29, or 30 because those are being 

repealed later on in the amendments. So that seems to make 

eminent sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The next clause that’s being amended is section 6. And this is 

one that does raise some concern because what we see in 

section 6 is further powers of the council of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan to make changes 

within their bylaw structure rather than in legislation. And I’ve 

spoke to this before as a concern that whenever you delegate 

authority downward, there’s less public scrutiny of those types 

of delegations in law. However I think when I was reading 

about the College of Physicians and Surgeons, they actually are 

required to let the public into their meetings. So any changes to 

their bylaws would certainly be open to the public to scrutinize 

through the open meeting process that they’ve established. 

 

So section 6 then, the proposed amendments are just giving the 

council additional bylaw-making authority. And some of the 

specific changes are allowing for again the generic referencing 

of registrars. So as I indicated earlier, the specific references to 

the registrars are being removed and we now have simply all 

registers or a register in the language that’s being added. 

 

There’s two new subsections in section 6 and the goal there I 

think is to ensure that physicians’ current address is in the 

registers. And they said there’s been a number of instances 

where the Privacy Commissioner has urged them to seek a 

legislative amendment to do this. So that makes sense, that it’s 

important for the public to know where these doctors live and 

whether they’re still practising in Saskatchewan. So these 

changes will require members to provide the college with their 

home addresses and other information in the bylaws that might 

be required, including information about themselves, the places 

where they practise, and the services they provide at the places 

where they practise. And so I think that’s a good change and 

certainly it’s one that it appears that the Privacy Commissioner 

has required. 

 

One of the references there is that it will also assist with disaster 

planning. And so having up-to-date information on physicians 

and the services they require would be of assistance for disaster 

planning as well. So that seems to make eminent sense, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The next section that’s being changed is section 12, and that’s 

simply using the generic reference to the registrars, and the 

same with clause 24(2)(a). So that’s clause 7 of this bill is 

making those changes there. So those are pretty straightforward. 

 

Part III, the heading has changed and there’s now just . . . The 

existing name of part III is registration of physicians. That’s just 

been changed now to read membership, registration, licences, 

etc. And that’s where these changes to the specifics are being 

repealed. Sections 27 and 28 are being repealed. And in the 

substituted clauses, we now see a reference of the bylaws where 

the council can keep one or more registers. So it’s entirely 

within the purview of the council of the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons to make determinations about which registers will 

be in place and how they’re maintained — certainly giving 

them more flexibility as has been requested by the medical 

profession to the minister. 

 

There’s a new section. In clause 11, they’re introducing a new 

section 32. Actually the existing section’s being repealed and 

we are looking at . . . Just let me find this in the explanatory 

note. This is one that’s a bit curious to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

The original provision speaks to the vesting of certain powers in 

the event of an emergency and in this case the Lieutenant . . . 

Currently the Lieutenant Governor in Council can declare an 

emergency to exist and may order that the council’s powers 

become vested in the minister. The change of language in this 

clause is much broader, and it no longer requires the declaration 

of an emergency for the minister or the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to take over the powers that are vested in the minister 

and the council. And I’m not sure. It’s kind of broad, and that 

seems to be something that may be of concern where the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council can actually overrule the 

council itself. 

 

And in that case, the types of situations where the Lieutenant 

Governor could declare an emergency previously was where 

members have withdrawn services, and we certainly recall well 

in Saskatchewan where medical doctors have withdrawn 

services and the kind of disruption that creates. It certainly 

could be seen to be an emergency. Also the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council could declare an emergency if they are of 

the opinion that the safety of the residents of the province is 

being threatened and, finally, that the council itself is not 

adequately discharging its responsibilities under the Act. 

 

Now it appears that those three conditions are being maintained 

in the substituted section; however, it seems that no longer is it 

being declared an emergency. So that’s something I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that we’re going to want to take a look at and 

understand fully the implications of this extraordinary use of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council’s authority to supersede and 

take over the rights and the powers that are vested in the 

council. It seems a bit arbitrary now, and the reason for 

removing the requirement to declare an emergency is not 

immediately apparent and is certainly not something that the 

minister provided in his comments. So we’ll have to look into 

that a little bit more and try and determine why this is seen as 

necessary. 

 

I just wanted to go back a little bit too. Although sections 29, 

30, and 31 are being repealed as well as 30.1, there was a 

decision to retain 31.1 itself and that is the delegation to the 

registrar. The explanation that’s being provided is that it’s being 

retained to ensure that the right of an individual to request 

review decisions remains in the legislation. And I think that’s 

an important right for individuals, especially if decisions have 

been made that adversely affect their practice. It’s important for 

these types of provisions to be at the level of legislation and not 

within the bylaw’s authorities or the internal authorities of the 

council or the college itself. 

 

So that’s something I think that makes sense, that that allows 

the individuals who are aggrieved by decisions of the registrar 

to continue to apply to the council, and it remains in the 

legislation and it doesn’t get delegated down to the college 

itself through its bylaw-making powers. 

 

So moving on, section 33 of the Act is repealed. And again it’s 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

because that section refers again to sections 28, 29, 30, and 

42.1. Those sections are being repealed, so it makes sense that 

this one is repealed. And of course the explanation itself says, 

this won’t impact on the ability for people to apply, appeal a 

decision to the court. So again that’s been protected in sections 

62 to 66 in the Act. So I think the view is that this is consistent 

with other health profession legislation and so this section is 

really no longer required. 

 

We see sections 34 and 35 also being repealed, as is the 

heading. And in that case it’s the same reasoning that, it’s 

again, these are specific references to the registers in categories 

of licensure and this is no longer required. It allows the council 

itself of the college to respond more quickly to changes of 

licensure including anticipated changes recommended by the 

work that’s being undertaken by the Federation of Medical 

Regulatory Authorities of Canada. And that’s the agreement I 

spoke to earlier where the Canadian medical regulators are 

looking to standardize this kind of registry work across the 

country and just make it easier for physicians to practise in 

Canada. 

 

We also see section 36 is being repealed as well and it’s 

substituted . . . And in here 36 has again the references to all the 

other registers: the education register, the temporary register, 

the corporate register, or the podiatric surgical register, and now 

it’s just any register. So that makes sense; it cleans up the 

language. There’s no concerns there. 

 

And then we look at section 17. We see that section 37.3 is 

being repealed and section 37.5 is being amended. Now the 

explanatory notes, again, are just that these are . . . again there’s 

specific references to the registers of the college and they’re 

being again replaced with the more generic language. So there 

are no issues with respect to that. 

 

Section 37.7 is repealed, again, because it refers to the specific 

registers. Section 41 is also being repealed. And the view given 

in the explanation is that this section 41 deals with inactive 

members, but because those sections in part III are being 

repealed, that is no longer necessary. So that section’s being 

repealed as well. 

 

Section 42.2 is also being repealed: again specific references to 

the registers being replaced with more generic language. So that 

seems to be in order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see the similar kinds of changes being made to clause 

45(12)(a), and specific references are being replaced with the 

more generic ones. And the same goes for section 46 which is 

being amended in section 22 of this Act or this bill that’s being 

proposed. And finally section 54 is being changed as well to 

remove the specific references and substitute them with the 

word “appropriate,” which is consistent with the other changes 

that are being proposed. 

 

The same changes are being made in section 62. This is the 

right of appeal section in The Medical Profession Act. And the 

specific references to registers are again being changed to say 

the appropriate register, and that’s again consistent with the 

other changes that are being proposed. And section 69(1) has 

some minor changes that are being proposed which are really 

housekeeping, and it’s just cleaning up the language a little bit. 

And I guess the one that is most interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, 

is the new section being added after section 82. And this is an 

interesting section. I’m just going to read it out. Section 82.1(1) 

reads: 

 

Subject to subsection (2), nothing in this Act prevents or 

limits a duly qualified medical practitioner from 

delegating, in accordance with the bylaws, acts in the 

practice of medicine that are specified in the bylaws to 

health professionals specified in the bylaws. 

 

And (2) reads, “A delegation mentioned in subsection (1) may 

be made only if the health professional has the requisite 

knowledge, education, training and skill to perform the 

specified act”. 

 

And this change brings in other health practitioners and allows 

current members of the college to delegate specified acts to 

registered nurses. The explanatory note indicates that there’s a 

supportive collaborative document in place that monitors this 

practice by RNs [registered nurses]. It’s called the specialized 

nursing procedures by transfer of medical function. So it sounds 

like this is a practice that’s happening at this point of time. 

What this legislative change will do, along with bylaws passed 

by the college, will better regulate the delegation of acts in the 

practice of medicine and place authority for those delegated acts 

with the appropriate regulators. 

 

So what we see here is the ability within the bylaws for 

physicians to delegate certain services to medical professionals, 

and it seems to specify registered nurses. However I think the 

way that the clause is reading, it’s health professionals, which 

would be a much broader range of professionals than registered 

nurses. So there’s . . . again delegating something like this to 

the college level without legislative oversight can be of some 

concern, and I would think that some professions may want to 

watch this carefully. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And I guess the other concern I have is in the subsection (2) 

there is a requirement for the delegation to be made only if they 

have the requisite knowledge, education, training, and skill to 

perform the specified act. That gives some concern as well 

because it appears to be a very discretionary power that is being 

given and it requires pretty particular knowledge about the 

ability of that particular health professional to deliver that act in 

the practice of medicine. 

 

So it may be happening informally now, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 

not sure that this is something that we would wholly endorse. I 

mean certainly we want to look at it more closely and make 

sure we understand that this is necessary and appropriate. So 

we’re going to have to look into that one a little bit more closely 

to make sure if it’s something that the public’s comfortable 

with. 

 

Certainly the minister indicated in his comments that the goal of 

this is to ensure patient safety, which of course is always 

number one when it comes to physician care. But the minister 

has indicated that the effort here is to provide the safest possible 

health care environments for patients and health providers. So 

whether or not that kind of delegation to health professionals is 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

appropriate from medical doctors is something that we’ll need 

to keep an eye on. The minister indicated that there were a 

number of organizations that were consulted with about the 

changes and certainly we understand that these have been 

brought forward by the profession itself, and that seems to be a 

good way to go. 

 

My final comments, Mr. Speaker, are in relation are to how this 

approach has not been yet taken with another profession, and 

I’ve received calls and concerns from professional music 

teachers in Saskatchewan. They currently have legislation that 

sets them up as a professional body. These are people with the 

highest level of education and training in and teaching music. 

And to be an RMT or registered music teacher is something that 

means something, and it has the force of legislation behind it. 

 

Sadly and unbeknownst to the Association of Registered Music 

Teachers this government has decided that it’s no longer 

important for it to be registered as a profession, and they 

received notice earlier this summer and this spring that the 

legislation is going to be wiped out. We haven’t seen the 

introduction of that bill yet and I’m personally hoping it doesn’t 

show up on the order paper at any point. 

 

Because this is a profession that takes itself very seriously and 

they have been monitoring the requirements. And what happens 

if it’s gone and it has to form its own sort of non-profit 

organization is they lose the force of law to do disciplinary 

action. 

 

So for parents or for anyone who’s looking for a qualified 

music teacher, the notion that you can have letters behind your 

name that say registered music teacher means something to a lot 

of people. And if that’s wiped out and taken away, all of a 

sudden anyone can hang up their shingle and teach music. And 

indeed that is happening in some circumstances without the 

RMT designation but at least then the association has the force 

of law to say these people can’t be registered music teachers; 

they are doing it on their own without the requisite approval. 

 

And just like the College of Physicians and Surgeons decide 

who are members, that’s the same for the Registered Music 

Teachers’ Association of Saskatchewan. So it’s disappointing to 

see the government taking proactive steps in this particular bill 

and ensuring that the College of Physicians and Surgeons 

continues to monitor its membership and make sure that it’s 

appropriate across Canada. But we don’t see the same kind of 

treatment being afforded the teachers for the Registered Music 

Teachers of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I hope we won’t see that bill in this session, although 

they’ve been forewarned that it’s coming. And certainly we’ll 

have something to say about that if and when that bill is 

introduced. But I would strongly encourage the government to 

think about that and really question why it’s necessary to 

basically demote the good registered music teachers of 

Saskatchewan to the non-profit status when they have the force 

of law which allows them . . . That bill’s been in place since the 

1930s so it’s a long-standing bill. It’s served the population 

very well and there’s no need to fix it, because it isn’t broken. 

 

So I would hope the government would take more of this kind 

of approach that we see in the amendments to The Medical 

Profession Act and encourage the professional responsibility for 

music teachers in the same way that we are for our physicians 

and surgeons. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, at this point that would be the extent of 

my comments on this bill, Bill No. 50 which is An Act to amend 

The Medical Profession Act, 1981. We certainly see some good 

changes and changes that will bring this bill in line with the 

other colleges across Canada and to ensure mobility for our 

physicians and that our physicians, as registered, are properly 

recorded and that the government can ensure that public safety 

remains number one. So I think at this point I would like to 

move to adjourn. What’s the language I use here? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Debate. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Yes, I would like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

50. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 50, the medical professions Act, 2012. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 51 — The Public 

Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As is 

often stated, a pleasure to rise in debate today to join in the 

discussion around Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, Loi de 

2012 sur les enquêtes publiques. It was introduced, of course, 

by the Minister of Justice. In the minister’s second reading 

speech it made reference to the work being done by the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada and the examination into 

the creation and use of public inquiries in Canada and the 

recommendations they had made for public inquiries legislation 

implementation across Canada. 

 

Now according again to the minister’s second reading speech, 

we’re led to believe that the provinces of British Columbia and 

Newfoundland and Labrador have passed legislation based 

largely on the uniform Act. As we go about our work of due 

diligence, Mr. Speaker, that is certainly something that we’ll be 

looking into, and we’ll be looking into how this expands or 

contracts the abilities of public inquiries to do their business. 

 

Again from the minister’s second reading speech, there’s a new 

bilingual complement to this Act, something that I’m sure Mr. 

Speaker is very pleased to see, being a solid francophile. 

Certainly on behalf of the official opposition, we’re glad again 

to see legislation being modernized with an eye to the official 

language responsibilities of the province of Saskatchewan, and 

particularly for something as vital to the public’s interest as the 

legislation governing the public inquiries. 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, you think about the different inquiries that 

have taken place in the province over the past, both immediate, 

immediately in the past and historically. Again there are 

different sort of statements of inquiry that once upon a time 

would have been included in what was referred to as a Royal 

Commission and the way that that did work in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Some time ago we had the Royal Commission 

usage slide into public inquiries. But the great sort of service 

that was done to the work of gathering knowledge and 

information upon which, of course, solid knowledge and 

information being the appropriate basis for a formation of sound 

public policy — and ranging from things such as the daylight 

savings time question to rural life to, you know, larger school 

units — you know, there’s been a great many topics of inquiry 

that have sent the Royal Commissions forth to the public to 

come back with their findings and then of course to inform 

action by the government and hopefully not to sit on a shelf. 

 

It makes good sense that we’re normalizing or making a more 

uniform approach to the question of public inquiries because of 

course the more sort of clarity you have on the basic terms of 

engagement in something as possibly contentious as a public 

inquiry, I think the greater chance there is that the process 

questions are dealt with and you can deal more squarely with 

the policy questions and not spend too much time process 

wrangling. 

 

In terms of the current public inquiries Act, again referencing 

the bill itself and the minister’s second reading speech, there are 

five sections that have been enforced for close to a century, the 

current Act providing a bare framework of powers for the 

implementation of a public inquiry. And this is critical, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that “A detailed order in council is required to 

set out the terms and conditions and operational mandate for 

any public inquiry struck under provincial powers.” Continuing 

the quote, “The new Act contains specific provisions that 

outline a commission’s authority in a number of areas. These 

include standing and participation, procedure, evidence, 

compellability of witnesses, investigations, search and seizure, 

and reporting.” 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of normalizing or making 

uniform these basic sort of functions of an inquiry, we think 

that that serves the public good in that it again provides clarity, 

provides the edge of these things for the public to know, and 

that it’s not left largely at the whim of a particular Executive 

Council in terms of what constitutes a public inquiry in all good 

authority, in all good propriety. 

 

The new Act provides for the creation of two types of inquiry 

commissions: study commissions to research, examine, and 

provide advice on public policy; and hearing commissions to 

investigate and make findings in fact in matters where there’s a 

possibility of the findings of misconduct. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the work that’s been done in 

Saskatchewan, in other jurisdictions, federally around 

commissions of study, have I think made a pretty good 

contribution to public policy. And again while one of the 

challenges I think in terms of that formulation and 

implementation of public policy is that balance between inquiry 

but to have it brought to a point, to a conclusion, and then 

moving forward into action. Again, if you do a good job of the 

one, it tends to make for a better job of the other. And again, if 

you can use these tools to get out there, talk to people, bring 

stakeholders together, you get a solid read on what the solid 

ground is, what the common ground is. Again we think that 

that’s a worthwhile pursuit and one that we’ll be interested to 

see how it proceeds under the terms of this updated legislation. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the hearing commissions, where there is 

investigation and findings in fact in matters of possible 

misconduct, again there’s a fairly broad scope of mandate for 

that kind of activity under the aegis of public inquiries, and 

especially where there are points of conflict or misconduct or 

wrongdoing and there is that desire to establish fact, to find fact. 

Again, if you can deal with the process questions off the top and 

get to the policy matters so that the very vehicle itself is ready 

to go, Mr. Speaker, I think the public is better served by that. 

And it’s that kind of certainty around the framework, around the 

mandate is particularly important when it comes to matters 

where there can be death, there can be injury involved. And you 

know, it’s always important to get public policy right, Mr. 

Speaker, but where that onus is that much more important in 

terms of trying to address wrongdoing or misconduct. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now again in the second reading speech of the minister, there 

was reference to the fact that public inquiry can invoke a full 

judicial inquiry. I’m continuing the quote: 

 

While large-scale inquiries may be warranted in certain 

circumstances, there are also situations in which a study 

inquiry conducted on a smaller scale and with different 

terms of reference would be a more appropriate way to 

look into certain matters. [Continuing the quote.] The new 

Act will give express recognition to the two different 

types of public inquiries and provide a process for how 

they may operate and report. Instead of leaving it to the 

order in council to create all the terms and conditions that 

govern a particular inquiry, the new Act will provide a 

basic framework for the establishment, proceedings, and 

reporting of all inquiries. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, normalizing, making uniform the approach 

of the inquiries, very clearly designating the two sort of 

inquiries that might be had, be it a commission of study or a 

commission of finding fact and identifying misconduct. 

 

Again some of the other things though that will be left up to the 

order in council in terms of the inquiries and in terms of what 

happens with Executive Council mandating and invoking this 

legislation, of course, goes to the question of how are these 

things funded, what kind of representation is provided for under 

the legislation, and who has standing at the inquiry itself. 

 

Again it has been stated that reporting requirements have been 

established and provide: 

 

. . . that reports generated by inquiries shall be made 

public after ensuring that privacy and confidentiality 

concerns are addressed. The Act also requires that a 

report of a commission must be released to the public by 

the minister within two weeks of its receipt. 

 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

We think that’s a good thing to have in the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, having that definite responsibility on the part of the 

Crown to, having conducted an inquiry, to send it back forth to 

the public in whose name it has been authored. So good to see 

that, and good to see the timeliness of the two weeks involved 

in the legislation. 

 

In his second reading speech, the minister also referenced that: 

 

. . . certain features of inquiries established pursuant to 

existing legislation that continue to be appropriate and in 

the public interest. [Cites the example of where] . . . the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council will continue to maintain 

the flexibility to appoint commissioners who are qualified 

and impartial and also to set any terms and conditions 

specific to the inquiry. Commissions will continue to be 

able to determine their own procedures subject to the 

terms set out by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. This 

includes determining who is [able to participate], who is 

entitled to participate . . . 

 

And the funding question again, Mr. Speaker, to have those sort 

of features of the vital work of the commissioner, of the 

Commission of Inquiry up to the order in council, perhaps there 

could be greater certainty provided there. And we’ll be looking 

to see, again this very piece of legislation being brought 

forward in the name of making things more uniform, bringing 

the legislation in Saskatchewan up to best standards with the 

Uniform Law Conference recommendations, we’ll be interested 

to see if there are any sort of patterns that emerge there in terms 

of funding, in terms of standing, in terms of mandate of the 

inquiries to be authorized under this new legislation. 

 

One thing that was quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, and of course 

given the standing of committees of the inquiry and the 

long-standing practice, on the other hand, of people being able 

to address allegations or charges being brought against them, 

it’s a section in the minister’s speech where he references: 

 

. . . the new Act prohibits a commission from making 

findings alleging misconduct against a person before the 

person has been given reasonable notice of the allegations 

and an opportunity to respond to those allegations. If a 

commission decides to hold a hearing, the Act requires 

that the hearing be public except where considerations of 

privacy, the consequence of disclosure of personal 

information, public interests, or the right to a fair trial 

weigh in favour of closing a hearing. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, a fair amount of latitude left in the hands 

of the commissioner of whatever sort of inquiries that might be 

authorized under this legislation, and a fair amount of power 

invested in that person. So how this is construed, how this 

works out in practice, Mr. Speaker, we will be watching with 

great interest to see how this plays out, whether it’s narrowly 

constrained or more broadly construed, Mr. Speaker, 

particularly as regards to the considerations of privacy, how that 

is dealt with. And again the first part of the previous quote I 

referenced, Mr. Speaker, again we think it’s important to be 

able to have people answering, responding to allegations and 

being able to amount a defence. But again how that is carried 

out in practice, how that’s operationalized we’ll be very 

interested to see. 

And again this is somewhat in keeping with past practice, but 

the minister references the fact that: 

 

The new Act also provides authority for publishing, 

broadcast, or electronic transmission of any proceedings 

before the commission. 

 

Continuing the quote: 

 

Commissions will continue to retain the ability to compel 

the attendance of witnesses and require the production of 

evidence. Commissions will also have search and seizure 

powers and the ability to apply to the court for contempt 

orders. Also under the new Act, decisions, acts, or 

omissions of the commission will be conclusive and will 

not be subject to judicial review by the courts. 

 

That last point, Mr. Speaker, I think is of great interest. And 

again, there being no sort of appeal mechanism in place, we’ll 

see how that plays out in practice, Mr. Speaker. But of course 

the right to appeal is something that’s fairly well-respected, and 

for good reason in the court system. How it plays out under the 

new Act, we shall see. 

 

The clarification of the powers and functions of an inquiry, the 

ensuring of inquiry commissions being based on modern 

standards of the administrative law, that these commissions are 

adequately empowered to govern their own processes 

effectively — I think these are all things that have informed this 

legislation. And certainly that is claimed by the minister, and 

we have no reason to doubt that. But of course we reserve the 

right for further inquiry ourselves, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

examining how this lines up alongside the other jurisdictions 

that have been cited, responding to the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada and their work on public inquiries. The 

minister’s proclaimed intention that flexibility should be 

maintained for the creation of different types of inquiries, again 

how that plays out in practice, Mr. Speaker, we shall see. 

 

But I guess on the whole this would seem to be in response to 

the uniform law commission work. And again, if this improves 

the ability of public inquiries to do their business and to be seen 

as acting as fairly and impartially in the name of the public 

good as possible, we hold out some hope for that, Mr. Speaker. 

But we’ll be watching the implementation of this new piece of 

legislation in general. 

 

Of course we’ll be consulting more broadly throughout the 

community with folks on this legislation as well to make sure 

that all is as it appears to be and to see if there aren’t any 

consequences of this legislation that aren’t automatically 

apparent, in terms of the work that we’ve been able to do on it 

to date. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of the 

debate on Bill No. 51, The Public Inquiries Act, 2012. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

Bill No. 52 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 52 — The Public 

Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Sometimes we get to debate matters of great consequence in 

this Chamber. Sometimes we get to debate consequential 

amendments. It’s in service of that that I’m here today, Mr. 

Speaker, again pleased to rise in debate and consideration of 

Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2012. 

 

Again this being a consequential amendment Act following 

after the Bill No. 51 discussion, Mr. Speaker, again in the 

stirring yet succinct speech that was given about this piece of 

legislation by the Minister of Justice, this Act consequentially 

amends 45 English Acts and one English regulation adopting 

the powers conferred on a commissioner pursuant to The Public 

Inquiries Act. 

 

In the minister’s second reading speech he identifies the fact 

that: 

 

In each case the amendment makes a change to refer to the 

provisions of the new Act that correspond with the powers 

under the current Act. The changes are made to ensure 

consistency with The Public Inquiries Act, 2012. In each 

case the amendments will refer to specific provisions in 

the new Act in order to maintain the status quo.  

 

The minister recited the example of the majority of the Acts 

being amended to provide powers conferred on the commission 

by section 11, the power to compel evidence; section 15, 

contempt of commission; and section 25, the authority to hire 

staff. 

 

Presently, in terms of the way this plays out then, Mr. Speaker, 

again according to the minister’s second reading speech: 

 

Presently The Automobile Accident Insurance Act and The 

Labour Standards Act provide for the powers of a 

commission pursuant to sections 3 and 4 only. 

 

Continuing on the quote from the second reading speech: 

 

As such, amendments to those Acts will only extend the 

powers conferred on the commission in section 11 and 

section 15. Similarly each of The Cities Act, The 

Municipalities Act, and The Northern Municipalities Act 

currently grant inspectors all the powers, privileges, and 

immunities of commissioners. Accordingly, in addition to 

referencing sections 11, 15, and 25 in those three Acts, it 

will also extend the immunities conferred on the 

commission pursuant to section 29. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a consequential amendment Act and, 

you know, a fairly straightforward matter. And as a 

consequence of that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 52, The Public Inquiries Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 53 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Having 

come off the consequential amendment Act debate, this one’s 

sort of a denouement, kind of miscellaneous in nature, and I’m 

sure we’ll be moving to repeal before long. 

 

Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 

(No. 2). Oftentimes, Mr. Speaker, legislation is characterized as 

housekeeping in nature, and certainly legal counsel and various 

of the ministries certainly in the Department of Justice, the 

Ministry of Justice do fine work in terms of making sure that 

our legislation is up to date and examining the statutes of the 

province for the more arcane and out-of-date pieces of 

legislation. And it’s always sort of interesting to see what gets 

kicked up under the municipal statutes repeal Acts of different 

governments, Mr. Speaker, and this one is no exception. 

 

It moves to repeal 11 statutes no longer necessary or having 

become obsolete. And in those statutes, Mr. Speaker, I also find 

that in the move to repeal different pieces of legislation, you 

can oftentimes . . . It’s an interesting sort of reading of the 

history of the province, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that 

legislation that may have come forward with great appeal and 

force at certain points in the province’s history have been 

passed by by events and are no longer necessary. 

 

[16:45] 

 

But you know, moving from sort of back to front, the 11th, I 

would imagine, Act being repealed under this is The 

Subdivisions Act, which of course was passed in 1914, and 

which has provided the Saskatchewan Municipal Board with 

the authority to revise the property assessment of a subdivided 

area in a rural municipality and to permit the owner of a 

subdivided area to occupy adjoining vacant land for the purpose 

of common cultivation. 

 

Again referring to the second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, of 

the minister, wherein that subdivision Act permitted: 

 

. . . the registrar of land titles to exercise a variety of 

powers in a subdivided area without obtaining planning 

approval from the director of planning. The Saskatchewan 



November 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

Municipal Board has no record of using this Act in the last 

25 years, nor do land title officials recall having received 

an application pursuant to the Act. All sections of the Act 

have either been superseded by other provisions or have 

become redundant or inconsistent with current legislation, 

and [subsequently] the Act can be repealed. 

 

So there you have it, Mr. Speaker, the sort of reigning 

champion in this piece of legislation is the 1914’s The 

Subdivisions Act. And again that’s not to say we won’t be doing 

our due diligence, Mr. Speaker, in terms of following up with 

the municipalities and the folks up in the North to make sure 

that that particular provision is in fact worthy of repeal. But, 

you know, 25 years without use would certainly seem to make 

it a good candidate as such. 

 

Another Act being repealed under The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Repeal Act is The Municipal Industrial Development 

Corporations Act. It was passed in 1960 to assist towns and 

cities with the attraction and promotion of industrial 

development by providing accommodation or financial 

assistance to industries. In the second reading speech, the 

minister states that: 

 

The Act provides the authority for incorporations, powers, 

distributions of profits or assets, directors and other 

matters for industrial development corporations being 

established under the Act. 

 

The minister went on to state that: 

 

There are no active corporations that meet the criteria in 

the Act, and the last active corporation was formally 

dissolved in September of 2011. This Act can be repealed 

as municipal governments are able to establish 

corporations pursuant to The Municipalities Act, The 

Cities Act, or The Northern Municipalities Act, 2010. 

 

It would be very interesting to know just what that corporation 

that was dissolved in September of 2011, Mr. Speaker, and 

perhaps we’ll find a juncture at which the ministry can make 

that known to the House. 

 

Moving on to Bill No. 9 being repealed by the Act. It was 

passed to implement federal legislation which has also become 

obsolete and can be repealed. The Municipality Improvements 

Assistance (Saskatchewan) Act was passed in 1939 to 

implement the federal Municipal Improvements Assistance Act 

of Canada. The federal Act enabled loans to municipalities or 

power corporations across Canada for the construction and 

operation of public works. It required the provincial 

government to approve the projects and guarantee the loans. 

The federal Act was repealed in 1983, making the provincial 

legislation obsolete. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation being passed 

initially in 1939 to respond to federal offerings under the 

federal municipal improvements assistant Act was very much 

part of the changes that arose out of the Depression and that sort 

of ongoing discussion that we have in Canada that we like to 

call federalism and the appropriate division of powers between 

the different levels of government. And I think one thing from 

that time, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the fact that it used to be 

municipalities that were responsible for the delivery of social 

services and the inadequacy of municipal resources in the face 

of the kind of destitution and poverty that arose out of the Great 

Depression in the 1930s which particularly affected places like 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the way that we had to get into 

a new deal as regards the way that the federal government 

marshalled their powers, the provincial government marshalled 

their powers, and certainly the municipalities. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit of a historic artefact today, 

but I think it’s an artefact as such because it’s almost 

unthinkable now. And the sort of spirit that is entailed in this 

piece of legislation is now many fold and subject to continuing 

debate on many fronts, Mr. Speaker, certainly, but that 

federal-provincial-municipal co-operation that is needed and is 

vital to the addressing of public goods and addressing of needs, 

you know, which people find important. I think it’s inherent in 

that Act, and that spirit has spread forward throughout other sort 

of actions and statues guiding the work of government today. 

 

Again on the theme of federal-provincial relations is the repeal 

of The Municipal Development and Loan Act, having initially 

been passed in 1964 to implement a federal Act, the federal 

Municipal Development and Loan Act, having been passed in 

1963 and provided for provincial governments to borrow 

monies from the federal government and to loan those monies 

to municipalities for capital works to improve the 

unemployment situation throughout Canada. The Act was 

repealed in 1983 federally and as such rendered the provincial 

legislation obsolete. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, so you look at federal stimulus packages 

these days or cost-shared programs that address the very 

fundamental needs of citizens in the province of Saskatchewan, 

be it for infrastructure, and we think of things like roads and 

waterworks, parks, you know, pick your sort of infrastructure 

that people value, Mr. Speaker. A lot of these things are 

legacies of programs exactly like this. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, and you don’t have to drive very far in 

this town of ours to know that, you know, there needs to be a 

better job done of the federal government, the provincial 

government, and the municipal government coming together 

again to address needs. And a perfect example is as regards 

housing. And I’m not talking about the generation of press 

releases. I’m talking about the actual provision of 

honest-to-goodness units of affordable housing and work that 

should be sort of automatic and co-operative between the 

different levels of government. You know, it shouldn’t be this 

matter of ongoing programs warranting a press release all the 

time, you know, as the situation gets worse. But where’s that 

genuine co-operation, Mr. Speaker? And how can the different 

levels of government get together to do a better job of serving 

the people? 

 

Moving through the statutes being repealed, Mr. Speaker, The 

Municipal Debentures Repayment Act. Nearly 100 years ago, 

the municipal Acts required municipalities to issue debentures 

with prescribed terms of 10 or 15 to 40 years and to levy annual 

rates for repayment. The Municipal Debentures Repayment Act 

was passed in 1915 to provide municipalities with the ability to 

extend terms of debentures with the approval of the 

Saskatchewan government’s authority, now vested in the 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2012 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board. Presently the municipal Acts 

provide the ability for municipalities to finance and restructure 

financing instruments, including debentures, subject to the 

SMB’s [Saskatchewan Municipal Board] approval where 

municipalities and the board need to extend the payment terms 

on debentures. They now do so based on the authority of the 

current Act. 

 

The terms under The Municipal Debentures Repayment Act 

have not been used in the last 15 years and can as such be 

repealed. Again, Mr. Speaker, something that has been 

transcended in other pieces of legislation, superseded and no 

longer necessary. 

 

I’m sure from this corner of the House to that corner of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure there’s a great interest in The Cut 

Knife Reference Act which was passed in 1978 wherein the Act 

replaces Cut Knife, previously one word as two words, and 

there be no current legislation referring to Cut Knife as one 

word. And as such the purpose of the Act has been fulfilled and 

can be now repealed. 

 

It’d be interesting to know, you know, who picked that one out, 

Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford 

caught that with the eagle eye. Perhaps it was the Minister of 

Government Relations. You know, the mind races to try and 

figure out who might have put down that be repealed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The NewGrade Energy Inc. Act is also being repealed, the Act 

having been enacted to facilitate the financing, construction, 

and development of the heavy oil upgrader in Regina. In 2007, 

CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] selling 

its remaining interest in NewGrade Energy Inc., and as such the 

Act no longer being required. 

 

And it’s pieces of legislation like this, Mr. Speaker, I think of 

my friends that grew up on the north side in this city of ours, 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, and not far away from the refinery and the 

work that is being undertaken there, and a great many folks that 

I’ve talked to over the years, different iterations that work at the 

refinery, and the valuable role that the government, that the 

public can serve in terms of coming together with, in this case, 

the co-operative sector to build a heavy oil upgrader. 

 

And I think about the work that was done by the minister in the 

early ’90s of Crown Investments Corporation, John Penner, and 

the way that that individual I think strove to drive a hard 

bargain for the people of Saskatchewan to make sure that they 

were getting their interests represented appropriately and the 

way that that individual, as sometimes is the case, sacrificed his 

health to doing as good a job possible for the people of 

Saskatchewan, particularly as regarded those files at the time, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Throughout the rest of the legislation, you’ve got The 

Saskatchewan Development Fund Act being repealed. Again 

we’d like to see some more information on the windup of the 

affairs of that Act, and perhaps that will come before a 

committee of this House, perhaps the Crown and Central 

Agencies Committee. We see the repeal of The Sales on 

Consignment Act again being superseded by other pieces of 

legislation. And we see the repeal of the 1947 vegetable, fruit, 

and honey sales Act and again, Mr. Speaker, that balance of 

federal-provincial powers and the way that that has since been 

rendered obsolete by federal changes in legislation. And finally, 

Mr. Speaker, the repeal of The Crown Foundations Act, 

changes to donation policy and tax deductible status for 

different charitable organizations, the fact that the two 

universities no longer require such a piece of legislation to 

operate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again it’s always a very interesting thing to read any of The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, in this case, Bill No. 53, 

2012. With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2012 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It now being close to the hour of 5 

o’clock, this House stands recessed to 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1869 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1869 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1869 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1869 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1870 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1870 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1870 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Jim Sinclair 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1870 

 Main Street Wolseley 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1870 

 HayEast 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1871 

 Premier’s Award for Excellence 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1871 

 Harvest for Kids Sets World Record  

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1871 

 Saskatchewan Author Wins Writer’s Trust Prize 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1872 

 Improvements to Affordable Housing 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1872 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Registry of Asbestos in Public Buildings 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1872 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1872 

 Tourism Saskatchewan 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1873 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1874 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1874 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1874 

 Immigration Issue 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1876 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1876 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1876 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Ticketing System for Occupational Health and Safety Offences 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1877 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1877 

 Access to Asbestos Information 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1878 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1878 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 59 — The Animal Identification Amendment Act, 2012 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1878 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1879 

 Bill No. 60 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2012 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1881 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1881 

 Bill No. 62 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1885 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1886 

 Bill No. 64 — The Regional Parks Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

 Loi de 2012 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Regional Parks Act, 2012 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1888 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1888 

 



 

 Bill No. 65 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1889 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1890 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 50 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1891 

 Bill No. 51 — The Public Inquiries Act, 2012/Loi de 2012 sur les enquêtes publiques 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1895 

 Bill No. 52 — The Public Inquiries Consequential Amendments Act, 2012 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1898 

 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1898 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


