




















































Hansard: May 08, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 42A  TUESDAY, MAY 8, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1437 

 May 8, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to . . . I should first ask from members for leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks to my 

colleagues for the chance to provide a bit of an extended 

introduction. I think it’s appropriate that we’d use this great 

institution to introduce some Saskatchewan heroes from time to 

time, and it’s my pleasure to be able to do that. To you and 

through you today, Mr. Speaker, from White City we have 

some guests seated in your gallery. And I’m going to ask them 

maybe just to stand as I introduce them, and then I have a few 

things that I’d like to share with members of the House. 

 

First and foremost, I want to welcome to the Assembly and 

introduce 11-year-old Connor Kindred. If we can get Connor to 

stand. He’s here with his mom and his dad, Patti and Tom 

Kindred. I also want to thank Tom for his service at SaskPower 

where he serves very ably and well and has for some time. He’s 

also joined by his grandparents. Connor has his grandma Fran 

and grandpa Herb Kindred are also here as well. Mr. Speaker, 

unfortunately Connor’s three-year-old adopted brother Daniel 

couldn’t be here, but this is a story about him as much as it is 

about Connor. 

 

At nine years old, Connor was excited to hear that he would be 

introduced soon to a brand new brother arriving from Ethiopia. 

So he decided he wanted to buy him, I’m told, an Xbox as a 

present. Connor was surprised to learn that where Daniel comes 

from though, they don’t have electricity everywhere. They 

don’t have clean water everywhere. So he decided to do 

something about it, Mr. Speaker. He’s worked hard to raise 

awareness about clean water projects at schools throughout 

Africa in conjunction with the WaterCan Challenge 2012. 

Connor’s goal was to raise $40,000. So far he’s raised over 

$31,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He wants to bring clean drinking water and sanitation for 

people in Ethiopia by doing everything from asking for 

donations instead of Christmas presents and instead of birthday 

presents, Mr. Speaker. He’s also spoken in front of 175 people 

at the Kramer IMAX theatre asking for donations. Earlier this 

year, Connor had an opportunity to visit a primary school in 

Ethiopia where his fundraising effort is going to be put to use to 

bring a sustainable source of clean drinking water and basic 

sanitation facilities to about 1,000 students and 41 teachers. 

 

Connor is the youngest recipient of the Global Citizen Award 

from the Saskatchewan Council for International Cooperation. 

This is from Connor’s donation page on the WaterCan 

webpage: 

 

Besides the air we breathe, nothing is more fundamental to 

life than access to clean drinking water and basic 

sanitation! 

 

Many people have no water or they have dirty water that 

makes them sick. If they have enough clean water they 

can go to school and [they can] stay healthy. I want to 

raise money to provide clean water for people in Ethiopia. 

 

. . . I would like to help as much as possible — so thanks 

for donating. 

 

[Signed] Connor Kindred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Martin Luther King famously said, everybody can 

be great because everybody can serve. You don’t have to make 

your verb and your subject agree to serve. You don’t need a 

college degree to serve. You need a heart full of grace and a 

soul generated by love. Today we thank Connor for his heart 

and his soul and his selfless sacrifice for the people of Ethiopia, 

and we welcome him today to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join in 

with the Premier and welcome Connor and his family, parents, 

and grandparents, and say thank you for work well done. I 

personally have visited water projects in Ethiopia and actually 

donate through the Lutheran Church for Ethiopian water 

projects over the number of years. And there is a great need, 

and so I say thank you very much, Connor, for your good work. 

Also, working through the Saskatchewan Council for 

International Cooperation is a very important thing to do. And I 

know all of us in the legislature are very pleased with the work 

that you do there and thank you on behalf of all the people in 

the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members in the 

Legislative Assembly, I want to introduce a number of people. I 

won’t introduce them by name because there’s about 30 or a 

few, 35 I think, individuals from around the province, Mr. 

Speaker, that have been instrumental in working with the 

ministry on primary health care redesign. 

 

We had an announcement earlier today in the building. But as I 

said in my announcement from the podium, when I looked out 

and saw so many familiar faces, it really is the face of health 

care in Saskatchewan. And if we can’t get it done with that 

group of individuals, it won’t get done, Mr. Speaker. Some of 

the absolute leaders of the health care system, as I say, too 

many to mention, but from all parts of the province from La 

Ronge down to Weyburn, to Swift Current, all across the 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2012 

province, Mr. Speaker — CEOs [chief executive officer], board 

chairs, as well as citizens from across the province that have 

worked very diligently over the last year and a half to get us to 

where we are now, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Lots more work as we move forward, but I just, on behalf of the 

government and as the minister, want to thank them for all their 

work that they’ve done over the past year and a half. Absolutely 

could not be done without them. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the many individuals that are here 

today involved in the delivery of health care here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Here in the Assembly and in committee we often debate health 

care. We’re often talking about the issues that matter to 

Saskatchewan people, but we do know that it’s out in the 

communities of Saskatchewan in the health regions where 

service is provided and where leadership is provided by so 

many people within the province. So I do want to thank all the 

people that are here today that play a role in the delivery of 

health care, thank them for being here and thank them for the 

work that they do throughout the year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a chance for me 

today to practice for my member’s statement for next Thursday. 

I’m pleased to welcome my parents and my father’s cousin: my 

father, Pastor Tom Nilson, and my mother, Randi Nilson. And 

my parents have with them today my dad’s cousin from 

Norway, Reidar Nymark, and his wife, Reidun Nymark. They 

live at Visnes on the island of Karmoy near Haugesund on the 

west coast of Norway. Visnes is a famous place because that’s 

where they got all of the copper to build the Statue of Liberty in 

New York City. Reidar is a retired employee of Norsk Hydro 

Aluminium, which we recognize in Saskatchewan as the parent 

company of Yara, which is our fertilizer plant just west of town 

here. And Reidun is a jeweller with her own shop in Norway. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce seven grade 10 students in the west gallery, from the 

Collège Mathieu in the great village of Gravelbourg, 

Saskatchewan. Can you give us a wave, please? There they are. 

Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied by their teacher, Raymond 

Michaud. And they’ve done a tour of the building and I’ll have 

a chance to meet with them right after question period and have 

a little chance to talk to them. So I’d ask all members to please 

welcome these students and their teacher to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce in 

the west gallery a group of over 40 grade 4, 5, and 6 students 

from the great community of Eston. Mr. Speaker, along with 

them are a number of chaperones and teachers: Troy McIvor, 

Lisa Watson, Jason Beckstrand and Glenda Olson, Neil Clarke, 

Beth Williams, Verna Robinson and Nancy Stevenson, and 

teachers Kristin Dolman, Tawna Hansen, and Jodi Bjornerud. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if that last name sounds familiar to you, it 

would be because Jodi’s the daughter of our Agriculture 

minister. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to talking to the students 

later on this afternoon, and I’d ask everyone to please give them 

a warm welcome to their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce, through you and to the members 

of the legislature today, George and Esther Haas, who are from 

Langenburg, are very good supporters of mine, have worked on 

far too many campaigns to mention today, and owe them a very 

lot. 

 

With them today though is their grandson, and his name is John 

McDonnell. And he’s very interested in politics, has been since 

he learned to talk. And I might mention to the Premier, he has 

aspirations of sitting in this legislature, and the seat that he’s 

got his eye on is the Premier’s. And I’m pleased to hear that 

because then he won’t be bumping me out of mine any time 

soon. So anyway, you know, there’s something about the name 

John McDonnell that just has a little bit of a political ring to it. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to welcome George 

and Esther to their legislature and especially John McDonnell. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would also like to 

acknowledge my daughter and reconfirm — Jodi Bjornerud — 

and reconfirm in her mind that very shortly, within the next few 

weeks, I’ll have much more time to spoil her kids and my 

grandkids. We welcome her here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To my colleagues 

and members of this Assembly, I’d like to acknowledge one 

individual. Ron Woytowich is here from La Ronge. Ron has 

worked for many years with Kikinahk Friendship Centre 

helping many community members, First Nations, Métis in the 

community. And he runs a lot of different programs. I just want 

to acknowledge — I sat on the board for years — I just want to 

acknowledge Ron. He also has sat on the health board and has 

done an excellent job. 

 

Ron does what he can. He also sat on council, and he gives his 

input and advice. Do we always agree? No. But I just want to 

make sure that Ron knows that myself, as the MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] for Cumberland, welcome him here 

to his Legislative Assembly and thank him for all the good 

work he has done for the community of La Ronge and area. 



May 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

And, Ron, I just want to say, and I ask my colleagues to join 

me, welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to join with the member for Rosetown-Elrose in welcoming 

the group from Eston. Probably a little bit of an explanation is 

owed here. Many of the people know of course that I am from 

Eston, and normally you would think that I’d be the one that 

introduces them first. However in 2003, through redistribution 

Eston was moved into the Rosetown-Elrose constituency, much 

to their chagrin. But nevertheless I would want to add my voice 

of welcome to the school group from Eston and all of their 

chaperones and teachers. So welcome to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce a good friend of mine, formerly from Saskatoon 

Nutana who’s currently living in Regina, Ms. Carlie Letts who 

is one of those exemplary volunteers that we are proud of as 

Saskatchewanians. She volunteers very closely with the Ness 

Creek Music Festival. She also volunteers with the Jack 

Millikin Centre, which is a charity that’s devoted to developing 

a cultural centre in northern Saskatchewan. And she’s also a 

volunteer with the Children’s Wish Foundation. She’s smart as 

a whip, she’s a pleasure to hang out with, and I would like to 

welcome her through you to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to the rest of this Assembly, seated in your 

gallery it is with great pleasure that I introduce my mother, 

Margaret Docherty, and Dan Neeson to this Assembly. Give us 

a wave. 

 

My mother supported me through all of my endeavours, so I 

think that this Assembly can feel some of her pain. And I also 

double-checked whether my tie was straight, so I’m pretty sure 

it is. And, Mr. Speaker, also I’d be remiss if I didn’t wish my 

mother an early happy Mother’s Day, and for somebody that 

might forget, happy Mother’s Day to the rest of you. So I’d like 

all the members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming my 

mother and Dan to this legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce a large group of guests in your 

gallery today. They’re high school students and chaperones 

from Twin Lakes Community School in Buffalo Narrows, from 

Nisto Awasisak Memorial School in Cumberland House, and 

Birch Narrows Dene Community School in Turnor Lake. 

 

They’re here today, Mr. Speaker, to take part in the 

government’s youth mentorship program. These students have 

travelled from the North to spend time in our capital city and 

learn about Saskatchewan’s provincial government. Mr. 

Speaker, the Provincial Capital Commission has once again 

partnered with Cameco Corporation, the Ministry of Education, 

and the Government House Foundation to provide an 

opportunity for students to come to Regina from May 6th to 9. 

 

While here, Mr. Speaker, these students have had the chance to 

tour the University of Regina, the First Nations University of 

Canada, Government House, RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] Depot Division, and the Legislative Building here 

today, as you can see. This afternoon they meet with several 

members of this Assembly for a first-hand look at our system of 

government and the legislative process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure to introduce these guests to 

members of the Legislative Assembly today. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister to welcome the group. The member from 

Athabasca and the Speaker and myself at lunchtime had a 

chance to meet with the students’ chaperones. We had a nice 

visit. They asked some questions. I guess we gave them some 

answers and we gave them our experience as MLAs sitting in 

the House. The Speaker did the role of the Whip. And I just 

want to say I’m pleased to see them coming, and I think this is a 

worthwhile event to have students from northern Saskatchewan 

coming . So I commend the government on doing that and 

continue with that program. 

 

And I just want to say to all members that are here and to join 

me with welcoming all the students and chaperones. But I want 

to, of course, being the member from Cumberland, want to 

make sure, make it very clear there is three students and 

chaperones from Cumberland House. I want to acknowledge 

you and say welcome to your Legislative Assembly and ask all 

my colleagues to please join me. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce to you, Mr. Shawn Bennett. Shawn is 

a Grade 12 student from Hanley Composite High. Shawn is 

with the work exploration program. This is his, on his second 

week of that phase of that program, and he’s been doing an 

excellent job working in my office. I would like to welcome 

him and ask all members to welcome him to his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to introduce to you and through you to all members, 

seated in the back row of your gallery, Gary Eagle, who is a 

councillor from Whitecap Dakota First Nation, somebody I 

would very much regard as a friend and colleague. 

 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2012 

One of the special things about Whitecap is that they aren’t 

encumbered by bylaws as the city of Saskatoon is. In the city of 

Saskatoon, you’re restricted to very small lawn signs. Whitecap 

has no such restriction, and I’m pleased that Mr. Eagle had a 

four-by-eight lawn sign that was affixed to his back fence, and 

I’m sure it increased the value of the entire Whitecap First 

Nation. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members join me in 

welcoming Gary to his legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join my colleagues in making sure we make the 

students from northern Saskatchewan feel very welcome. And I 

think it’s important to note that in my constituency, I’m very 

proud of all my constituents that travelled such a great distance 

to be here today, but more so some of the fantastic communities 

that I have in my area, Buffalo Narrows being one of them of 

course as well as the community of Turnor Lake, which is also 

referred to as the Birch Narrows First Nations. 

 

And we have a number of students that are from both of these 

communities that are here in the Assembly today. And I dearly 

wish I would have had their list of their names so I could read 

them into the record, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t have the 

complete list in front of me. But what I want to say to them in 

Cree because I always told them they’re to be proud of who you 

are and where you’re from, and the language. 

 

But very quickly in Cree: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

And of course some of the students are Dene, Mr. Speaker, and 

the bit of Dene I know, I want to say: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 

 

And what I basically said, Mr. Speaker, is it’s a pleasure to 

have them both here and that this Assembly belongs to them 

and all the people of the province, and that as young students 

from northern Saskatchewan to have no fear of this building or 

this Assembly. And I want to make sure that they’re welcome 

here just as much as everybody else is and to point out that it’s 

always great to see people from Birch Narrows, Turnor Lake, 

and of course Buffalo Narrows as well. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton alone and unprotected from 

intruders. We know that positive statistics show that 

convenience store and gas station robberies are down by a third 

since 1999 largely due to increased safety practices, including 

two people working together on late-night shifts. But we know 

armed robberies continue to take place in Saskatchewan, such 

as in Regina and Saskatoon. I’d like to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 

of Lloydminster and from Cut Knife. I do so present. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of improving Highway 

165 near Beauval. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Therefore we, in the prayer, respectfully request that the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan undertake to 

upgrade the section of Highway 165 between Beauval and 

the English River First Nation by adding proper lighting 

for pedestrian traffic, by adding space for pedestrians on 

the highways and its bridges, and by properly surfacing 

the road with the material needed for a busy heavy-haul 

road. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Beauval. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the management and accounting of 

our provincial finances. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards, and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents from 

Swift Current. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 

petition today on behalf of people in Saskatchewan who are 

calling on the Sask Party government to support the 

Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights: 

 



May 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which provide 

Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic security 

and protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

National Youth Arts Week 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to celebrate a successful National Youth Arts Week. 

Beginning on May 1st and wrapping up yesterday, young 

people across Canada and Saskatchewan joined together to host 

the largest youth-led celebration of creative expression and 

community involvement this country has ever seen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, National Youth Arts Week was started nationally 

by the Arts Network for Children and Youth, a national 

non-profit, community arts service organization with a vision to 

create sustainable arts programming for children and youth in 

communities across Canada. I am proud, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatoon held 35 events over the course of National Youth 

Arts Week, the most of any city in Canada. 

 

From crafting workshops to children’s activities to murals to 

serious discussions about human trafficking and Aboriginal 

rights, there was no shortage of interesting activities to engage 

young participants. One of the events of the celebration was in 

my own constituency at the Core Neighbourhood Youth Co-op 

where young people contributed to creating a beautiful chalk 

wall. 

 

This amazing week of arts and youth engagement could not 

have happened without the talent and organizational abilities of 

Saskatoon’s local coordinator for Youth Arts Week, Zondra 

“Zoey” Roy. Twenty-two-year-old Zoey deserves a huge pat on 

the back for organizing and promoting all these terrific events. 

 

I would ask that my colleagues join with me in congratulating 

her for a job well done and for contributing so much for youth 

in her community. A special thank you also goes out to all 

volunteers and venues for providing opportunities for children 

and youth to create, discuss, and think outside the box. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Women Entrepreneurs Week 

 

Ms. Campeau: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

bring to the attention of this House that May 7th to 13th is 

Women Entrepreneurs Week. According to a labour force 

survey by Statistics Canada, approximately one-third of 

Saskatchewan’s small and medium businesses are owned and 

operated by women. This demonstrates a growing and positive 

trend towards the economic growth in both our urban and rural 

communities. 

 

The goal is to promote entrepreneurship for women and to raise 

awareness of the various support programs that are available to 

women entrepreneurs in the province. And that’s where 

organizations such as the Women Entrepreneurs association of 

Saskatchewan can make such a difference. The Women 

Entrepreneurs association of Saskatchewan is working to create 

role models, business contacts, and mentors, all with the same 

goal — to improve the lives of women and to help them 

succeed. 

 

This organization has provided business services to women 

since 1995, and their mission is one that we should all strive for 

— to create a business culture in which the barriers to success, 

recognition, and advancement of women entrepreneurs in 

Saskatchewan are eliminated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this organization is certainly taking that mission to 

heart. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to recognize the Women 

Entrepreneurs association of Saskatchewan and women across 

the province who are making meaningful contributions to all 

sectors of our economy and helping to create jobs for 

Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Jane’s Walks 

 

Ms. Sproule: — It’s my pleasure to rise in the House today to 

shine a light on a special event that took place across North 

America over the weekend. Mr. Speaker, I’m referring to Jane’s 

Walks. Jane’s Walks are a series of free neighbourhood 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2012 

walking tours that help put people in touch with their 

environment and with each other by bridging social and 

geographic gaps. Since it began in 2007 in Toronto, Jane’s 

Walks have happened in cities across North America and even 

internationally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jane’s Walks began as a way to celebrate the life 

and legacy of the late legendary urban activist, Jane Jacobs, 

who championed the interests of local residents and pedestrians 

over a car-centred approach to planning. Jacobs encouraged 

people to familiarize themselves with the places where they 

live, work, and play with words like these: “No one can find 

what will work for our cities by looking at scale models or 

inventing dream cities. You’ve got to get out and walk.” 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what many Saskatoon and 

Regina residents did this past weekend. In my constituency of 

Saskatoon Nutana, there was a walk along beautiful Broadway 

Avenue guided by the Nutana Community Association. And a 

special mention goes to my friend, Cathy Watts, president of 

the Saskatchewan Trails Association, who is truly 

Saskatchewan’s champion of trails. She gave not only one 

walk, but two: one on the Meewasin Valley portion of the Trans 

Canada Trail and one in her Varsity View neighbourhood. 

 

Thanks to all the local organizers, walk leaders, and participants 

of Jane’s Walks. What a wonderful way to learn about and 

embrace your home community. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Phase 2 of Distribution Centre Opens at Global 

Transportation Hub 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in the House today to highlight an important new development 

at the Global Transportation Hub. Yesterday it was my pleasure 

to join with the Premier, the Minister Responsible for GTH 

[Global Transportation Hub], the Minister of Highways, the 

Minister of Government Services, and the member from 

Cypress Hills, representatives of the city of Regina, Canadian 

Logistics Services, and Loblaws at the official opening of phase 

2 of the CLS [Canadian Logistics Services] Regina distribution 

centre. 

 

As part of one of the largest development projects in 

Saskatchewan, the CLS distribution centre will have a strong 

economic impact in the surrounding community and on the 

province as a whole. The facility is comprised of 1 million 

square feet in total area and operates three shifts, seven days a 

week. With access to state of the art supply chain infrastructure, 

warehousing facilities, transportation systems, and trained 

manpower throughout Canada, CLS provides customized, 

efficient, and economical logistics services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the completion of CLS’s phase 2 is great news for 

our province’s already strong economy. It will help to increase 

the Global Transportation Hub’s reputation as Western 

Canada’s best destination for companies seeking to enhance all 

facets of their logistic and distribution services, and serve the 

citizens of Saskatchewan by drawing more people to our great 

province for business purposes and tourism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate all 

the contributors who helped make this project possible. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Ukrainian Dance Festival and Competition 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, May 

4th, I had the honour to bring greetings on behalf of the Premier 

and the Government of Saskatchewan to the 11th Annual 

Kalyna Ukrainian Dance School Festival and Competition 

again held at the Anne Portnuff Theatre at the Yorkton 

Regional High School. The event began on Thursday and ran 

through Sunday from morning to evening, with the opening 

ceremonies on Friday. 

 

The Kalyna Dance Festival for 2012 had well over 400 entries 

from all over the province and Manitoba. It has no longer any 

room to grow. It’s at capacity every year. There is no doubt this 

event brings much to our local economy as there are few, if 

any, hotel rooms available during the event. For 11 years the 

event has been attracting Ukrainian dance schools from 

Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and the United States. 

 

It is so very important to celebrate our heritage and culture, and 

Kalyna through its many organizers, participants, and 

volunteers has been doing a phenomenal job of promoting the 

strong and vibrant Ukrainian culture of Yorkton and our 

province. Involving children and families in activities is so very 

important, no matter the age, and this event has participants 

from 6 to well over 60. Active kids and families are healthy 

kids and families, and it is proven that activities help kids do 

better academically and socially. 

 

I commend the volunteers, organizers, and all involved in this 

event. Congratulations on their past success, and I wish the 

Kalyna Ukrainian Dance Festival continued success for many 

years to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Support for Primary Health Care Services 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today our 

government made an exciting announcement on strengthening 

primary health care services across the province. Our 

government’s Patient First Review told us that people wanted 

more timely access to basic health services through primary 

health care. 

 

Every day in Saskatchewan, thousands of people experience 

primary health care. It makes up about 80 per cent of the health 

services provided, from visits to family physicians, to nurse 

practitioners, to pharmacists, to therapy services. With the 

launch of the framework for achieving a high-performing 

primary health care system, our government has embarked on a 

process to strengthen primary health care in our province to 

better serve the needs of residents and communities. 



May 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

This framework is a road map for patient-centred, 

community-designed, team-delivered primary health care. It 

was developed with the collaboration of over 400 people 

who’ve contributed their knowledge, experience, and time. We 

thank them for their commitment and contribution to improving 

care in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with the release of the framework, 

we are investing $3.6 million to support regional health 

authorities, primary health care providers, and community 

partners to implement eight new models of primary health care 

delivery. These sites will support innovative practices and help 

build a primary care system that provides better health, better 

care, and better value. 

 

Mr. Speaker, primary health care is the foundation of our health 

system, and our government is committed to ensuring a primary 

health care system that is sustainable, offers a superior patient 

experience, and ensures improved access to health care 

services. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Challenges to Natural Resource Industry 

 

Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 

I’m finally starting to understand the NDP [New Democratic 

Party]. At least I now understand why they never had a plan to 

grow Saskatchewan’s economy. They think it’s a federal 

responsibility. 

 

Yesterday, many Canadians, including our Premier, responded 

to the NDP’s wrong-headed suggestion that a strong resource 

sector is bad for Canada because it kills manufacturing jobs in 

the East. Various columnists called the NDP leader’s comments 

a bad economic prescription, a recipe for economic mayhem, 

ill-advised, potentially disastrous, pandering to Quebec, 

ridiculous, divisive, bizarre, ignorant, and economic suicide. 

And what did our provincial NDP have to say about all this, 

Mr. Speaker? Well they completely passed the buck and said, 

it’s a federal responsibility. 

 

When asked by a reporter about the federal leader’s comments, 

the NDP MLA for Nutana said, and I quote, “If there are issues 

around economics, that’s something the federal government has 

to deal with.” There you have it, Mr. Speaker. The NDP would 

hand over responsibility for our resource sector to the federal 

government. And if, heaven forbid, Mr. Speaker, the federal 

NDP were ever our national government, well they would view 

the strength of our resource sector as a disease, a disease that 

can only be cured by slowing down our resource sector and 

killing thousands of jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t need that sort of economic prescription 

for Canada from the federal NDP leader, and the people of 

Saskatchewan don’t need that sort of abdication of 

responsibility from the provincial NDP. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Takeover of Grain Marketing Company 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a perfect example of 

why the Premier should stick to his knitting and attend to the 

tasks here in this province. Mr. Speaker, at the end of March, 

the Premier announced that he was hiring Informa Economics 

to analyze and make a recommendation to the government on 

the Glencore takeover of Viterra. The Premier received the 

report yesterday and he said that it shouldn’t take longer than a 

week to review the report. My question to the Premier: when 

will he make the report public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll be making the report 

public shortly. But in the preamble to his question, the Leader 

of the Opposition, in a passing reference I guess was 

commenting on what his federal leader has been saying about 

the resource sector of this country and specifically the resource 

sector of this province that is this day driving new investment, 

creating new jobs, creating the kind of environment in 

Saskatchewan for people to come literally from the rest of 

Canada and all over the world to find their hopes and 

opportunity right here in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s part 

of the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

And yesterday he had a chance to go out to the media and stand 

up for this province against his federal leader. Instead he sent 

the critic out, who came out, was pretty equivocal. It sounded 

like she supported what Mr. Mulcair is now saying about the 

resource sector of Western Canada. Now’s a good opportunity 

for him as Leader of the Saskatchewan NDP to stand up, 

condemn what Mr. Mulcair has said, and stand up for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Viterra takeover is an 

important issue for this province, and the effects of the Viterra 

takeover deal are going to ripple right across the province. Not 

only do we stand to lose head office jobs in Regina; there could 

be job losses in other communities across the province. 

 

It’s been over a month since the Premier hired US [United 

States]-based Informa Economics to analyze the takeover. My 

question to the Premier: has he spoken with any agricultural 

groups, any producers, any regional enterprise committees so 

he can be better informed when he makes a decision on this 

takeover of Viterra? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, Informa Economics’ report is due right away. I’m 

hoping to have the opportunity to review it this afternoon. We 

all do. We want to have a good look at it. In fact we’re very 

interested to see what it has to say about the jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan and the impact on those jobs. Also 

the impact on competition, whether it’s on the grain handling 

side, whether it’s on elevator structures right across this 

province, how that will work out. And with Richardson and 

Agrium also being involved in the sale farther down the road, I 

think we would like to see what effect that will have on 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2012 

producers and the economy of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But also I think one of the most important issues I think that 

producers have, that we’ve talked to, whether it’s producers’ 

organizations or individual farmers in the province, is on the 

input side where I think many of them feel right now that 

fertilizer prices are very high, and they want to make sure that 

that doesn’t lead to higher prices even into the future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that we are looking forward to see the 

Informa report and will release it either later this week or early 

next week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, approximately half of Viterra’s 

assets will be sold by Glencore in the takeover, and the minister 

has referenced that issue around the inputs for farmers. 

Yesterday when asked about job losses though, Chris Mahoney 

who’s the director of agricultural products for Glencore said, 

“Look, there will some relocation.” 

 

My question to the Premier is: how many head office jobs will 

be lost in Regina, and how many jobs will be lost across 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, to the member, I don’t think anyone knows at this 

point exactly how many jobs will be lost. I think that’s why this 

report is going to be so important, that they’ve done the work 

from an independent perspective to see what the job loss 

possibly will be or the job gain might be down the road. I know 

Richardson and Agrium will have an effect on those jobs, being 

that they’re located outside of the province. But we don’t know 

yet that exact number right now. I think that’s why a lot of the 

information in this report is going to be very valuable to us, 

again coming from an independent body that will be giving us 

that report very shortly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the member would know too that when it 

comes to the fertilizer costs in this province, there’s been 

concerns for many, many years. As grain prices go up, right 

away it seems instantly that fertilizer prices go along with that. 

And I think that both sides of this House would agree that 

sometimes we don’t feel that there’s a justification for that. I 

think what we want to make sure is that this transaction, if it 

goes ahead, will not affect commodity prices of fertilizer and 

will not cost the producers to pay more for that product. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People in the film 

industry have not minced words. They believe the 

government’s new non-refundable tax credit will do nothing 

except lead to the industry’s demise in our province. And yet 

this minister is optimistic that it’s all going to just be fine. It’s 

not clear who in the industry, if anyone, the minister consulted 

who has told him the non-refundable credit will work. Will the 

minister admit he has nothing to back up his claim that the 

non-refundable tax credit will work, except what he has heard 

perhaps from a few well placed people in the Southland Mall 

food court? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question as always. Mr. Speaker, the 

old grant program has created a transient industry that moves 

from province to province and state to state, wherever the 

biggest subsidy happens to be right now. The new tax credit 

program moves away from this bidding war and is aimed at 

building a more permanent Saskatchewan-based industry. 

 

Add in our three-point plan’s increased focus on developing 

digital technology and using it to support film and the other 

creative industries as well, plus transforming the sound stage 

which is currently underused into a new centre of excellence for 

all of them to develop new ideas and new companies together 

under one roof, and you have a solution that is practical, 

innovative, and fair to taxpayers and other industries as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This minister is 

having a real problem with full disclosure on this issue. 

Yesterday he claimed that to be able to receive the full tax 

credit of $1.7 million, a Saskatchewan-based company would 

only have to make $14.6 million. But when asked by the media 

how many Saskatchewan-based film companies would qualify 

by making enough money, the minister had no idea. 

 

It has now been 24 hours, lots of time for the minister to gather 

the information. Will the minister please tell us how many of 

these Saskatchewan-based companies actually make $14.6 

million and would qualify for his full credit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Well in the example presented by the film industry that the 

member references, it was assumed that a $7 million production 

would result in a tax credit of up to $1.7 million. Further, our 

friends in SMPIA [Saskatchewan Motion Picture Industry 

Association] calculated that there would need to be $85 million 

of taxable income to claim this credit. An enormous amount, 

admittedly, but it’s just not accurate. In fact the actual income 

required is $14.6 million. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s taxable income, not profits as 

mentioned by the critic. She’s actually wrong on that. $14.5 

million, by the way, is less than a fifth of the amount that 

SMPIA’s suggesting. Here’s the reason. SMPIA assumed that 

the full $85 million is taxed at the 2 per cent small-business 

rate, which is an easy mistake to make. After the first $500,000 

though, the rate is 12 per cent. And I know, Mr. Speaker, this is 

all rather technical. So let’s skip to the bottom line, shall we? 

 

We have had valuable and forthright discussions with the film 



May 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

industry and support the bonus structure and the all-spend 

approach they proposed. We have more on the table than that 

and we’re looking forward to more discussions with the 

industry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 

minister, who did not answer the question: again, how many 

companies would qualify? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member’s 

referring to the $1 million or thereabout estimate that was 

produced by the Ministry of Finance and our folks from 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Let’s talk about what that means and where it came from. This 

is provided by the officials themselves. We’re proposing an 

all-spend credit which, by the way, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

what the industry representatives have asked from government. 

We’re doing that. Saskatchewan, they go on to say, does not 

have experience with this credit. But because different spending 

will now be eligible, it may be possible that use of the credit 

will increase. 

 

They go on to mention this second point. Digital is now 

included. That’s all brand new too of course, Mr. Speaker. And 

new corporations may become eligible. Again it’s prudent to 

plan for the possibility that greater access to the credit may 

result in additional benefit to Saskatchewan taxpayers and 

companies. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One more time: 

how many companies would qualify for the benefit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, we welcome the 

opportunity to indicate that the member’s trying to change the 

channel because it’s just not working for them. 

 

But I want to bring this back, is something that she raised 

before. You know, Mr. Speaker, one of the keys to success for 

our film industry is to get on board with digital technology. As 

we have mentioned before, digital is changing the way we 

work, communicate, and buy products in an environment that is 

mobile, interactive, and virtual. Developing digital technology 

and adapting to support film and other creative industries is part 

of our three-point plan, and it’s how we’re going to grow 

Saskatchewan-based companies that can compete successfully, 

both in our country and around the world. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears to many 

that the government was so desperate to get out of a political 

jam that it hastily announced a program that even the minister 

cannot properly explain or provide clear details, as we just saw 

here today, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell this 

Assembly if it is a problem with the program, with the minister 

or, more likely, with both? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we 

have said many times in this Assembly — and I’m sure we’re 

going to say it many times more — all industries create 

economic spinoffs, but only one industry gets grants, and that’s 

the film industry. We have a brand new program that will 

benefit any company that pays tax in this province, any 

company. 

 

Now sadly, Mr. Speaker, the NDP wants us to believe that 

Saskatchewan’s film industry can’t possibly survive unless we 

continue to provide these grants that no other industry gets. 

They’re assuming that there’s no ability to pay tax. I don’t think 

that’s true. As mentioned before, we have a lot more faith in the 

ingenuity and the creativity and the resourcefulness of our film 

industry than those folks do. It’s a shame. We’re very 

disappointed in their pessimistic attitude. 

 

We believe that a broadly based program that takes into account 

all production costs — again, something that the film industry 

has actually requested — and actually reduces tax payable, that 

we’re after, is a good start. Even better, we’re proposing a new 

focus on digital technology, as mentioned, and a new home for 

all of our creative industries to work together under one roof. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s leadership. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In an interview 

yesterday, the minister said that despite what the industry is 

saying about the tax credit, he really knows better than they do: 

“I think we’ve got a program that actually meets the real needs 

of the film industry.” 

 

Is it possible for this government and this minister to be any 

more condescending? I don’t actually think so. The people who 

know best are the people who actually work in this industry, 

and spending a day on the set of Corner Gas does not mean the 

Premier has that knowledge. 

 

To the minister: is this minister and this Premier so arrogant to 

believe that they know better than those who work in the 

industry, or are they simply content to have the end of the film 

industry in Saskatchewan be their legacy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

in reference to the member’s question, we’re actually 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2012 

responding to the specific requests of the industry itself. What it 

said was, you know what, we do need a different kind of tax 

credit program, one that includes all the spending. You know, 

what we have right now, Mr. Speaker, is just one that 

recognizes the employment cost. What about transportation? 

What about accommodation? What about food? What about 

equipment rental? 

 

What they said to us was, would you please come up with a 

new program that recognizes and accommodates all those 

expenses? That’s exactly what we’ve done. We’ve actually 

gone farther than that, Mr. Speaker. We recognized that digital 

is the future of this industry and in fact all creative industries. 

We propose to pull them all together into a centre of excellence 

in the currently underused sound stage. Mr. Speaker, this has 

the ability to make Saskatchewan a leader in digital technology 

and in all creative industries support from coast to coast to 

coast. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding For Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we raised 

concerns over education funding shortfalls, particularly the fact 

that funding fails to meet the demands of population growth. 

Educational leaders, directors, and school board Chairs have 

spoken out with concern on this front because of the negative 

impacts for their students. The minister was dismissive of their 

concerns and disrespected them in the rotunda saying, “They 

are crying.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, educational leaders are looking for a good faith 

partner in government. Instead the minister belittles them and 

dismisses real concerns. Will the minister stand up and 

apologize to these educational leaders here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What this 

minister will do, and has been doing, is meeting with the 

different school boards, different trustees, anyone who requests 

a meeting. I have never refused a meeting with any school 

division in our entire province. I have also promised the school 

divisions that we will work with them on the new funding 

formula and we will be listening to the issues that they raise. 

 

And it isn’t just this issue. There’s other different calculations 

that school divisions have questions about. I said that there will 

be a conference or meetings held this fall, which is one year 

from when we first introduced the funding formula calculations 

to the school divisions, in which case they can raise their 

concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I do not believe that giving school divisions over a 20 per cent 

increase in the last five years is disrespectful. I do not believe 

that investing a half a billion dollars into school capital projects 

is disrespectful. I do not believe that keeping communication 

with school divisions is disrespectful. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the education sector hasn’t 

just been disrespected by words but also process. The education 

priority capital list is a place to provide a transparent and fair 

mechanism for the education sector, for parents and students, 

and for communities as they work towards improvements in 

their schools. It provides a clear order. The number one school 

on the 1A priority health and safety capital list and the number 

three school on the list received funding. This is good. But 

strangely, Pleasant Hill, the number two school on the list, was 

overlooked entirely. Why was Pleasant Hill passed over? Why 

was the priority list not followed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m more 

than happy to give that member opposite the answer that I gave 

to the Saskatoon Public School Division, because I met with 

them and they raised this question. And it was an opportunity 

for our government to clarify that position. It was interesting 

though. I heard from many trustees that it used to be the past 

practice to randomly pick on the priority list, and our 

government had never done that, not once. We have put 

through over 50 projects, and we have never, ever looked at 

somewhere else on the list. 

 

The reason is this, Mr. Speaker. The reason is this. The critical 

capacity in Martensville has reached a very, very concerning 

level. Martensville is the fastest growing city in all of Canada, 

and the space pressures in Martensville is becoming alarming. 

So that is why Martensville, the expansion in the Martensville 

High School, went up on the list. I know that we however are 

committing a lot of dollars in that Pleasant Hill area in St. Anne 

School. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, either government has an 

objective process or it doesn’t. Not only was Pleasant Hill 

jumped over, as it’s been stated, by the number one and the 

number three project, but also by Martensville that was 

highlighted here. 

 

Certainly this too is an important project. But that being said, 

the priority list of the ministry is clear. Projects on the health 

and safety list come first. The process has been set aside in 

favour of arbitrary choices of that government who intervene to 

scrap the process, cause schools to jump the queue. And how is 

this fair and transparent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

it’s interesting. Today and yesterday, the minister was 

demanding that this government take consideration to growth. I 

mean he is demanding that we’re overlooking growth. In this 

situation I just explained, this was getting critical of pressure, of 

capacity, and we made the decision to expand a school in 

Martensville because of the astounding growth — the fastest 

growing city in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I correct the school that I spoke earlier. It was St. 

Mary’s that we are building a brand new school in that area. I 



May 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

have talked to the trustees of the Saskatoon Public. I explained 

the situation that it is not a crisis with a one-year delay. But you 

know, what they can count on is each and every year this 

government has committed money into major capital projects, 

unlike the previous administration who ignored capital 

pressures year over year over year over year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Review of Labour Legislation and Workplace Safety 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this week is North American Occupational Safety and 

Health Week, a time to renew our commitment to workplace 

safety. And we all know that in Saskatchewan we have the 

second highest injury rate in Canada. Unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, though, this omnibus so-called labour consultation is 

all about labour standards and trade unions and clearly not 

workplace safety. My question to the minister: there are 185 

sample questions in this document but not a single question 

about occupational health and safety. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today we 

are going to have a Bill before the House that deals with 

occupational health and safety. In particular, Mr. Speaker, that 

Bill increases penalties for breaches regarding occupational 

health and safety. The member opposite asked questions about 

the Bill last night and we provided some very specific answers. 

Mr. Speaker, we take health and safety in our workplace very 

seriously. 

 

I spoke yesterday at the North American Occupational Health 

and Safety lunch in our province, and I made comments 

regarding the need for us to improve safety. It is a problem that 

we have had for many years in our province and it is going 

away. In spite of the fact that we are still the second highest, 

our injury rate and our death rate has continued to fall. We have 

a lot of work to do, Mr. Speaker, in that area because the only 

acceptable injury rate is one of zero. We have a Mission: Zero 

program with occupational health and safety and Workers’ 

Compensation. We will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill that he’s referencing, the 

occupational health and safety Bill, Bill 23, is part of a 

requirement of that legislation that requires that it is looked at 

every five years. So this is something that should be done and 

of course is being done because it’s a legislative requirement, 

not anything that this government does on their own. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, clearly this minister should be resolving 

outstanding issues in this department, especially issues like 

essential services, but there aren’t discussion questions about 

retail workers and making their workplace safer, especially late 

at night. Of the 185 discussion questions in this sweeping 

review, not one is about workplace safety. There’s not any 

suggested discussion questions about safety concerns on farms, 

for example, or for migrant workers or transportation home at 

night for late-night shift workers. These kind of questions 

would make some common sense to be included in this kind of 

discussion. 

 

To the minister: why is the minister ignoring important areas of 

occupational health and safety in this review? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I cut the 

member opposite some slack because he’d been away and 

hadn’t had a chance to read the paper. Obviously he was in 

committee last night, and he hasn’t read the paper yet. If he 

reads through the paper, it asks a myriad of issues and a myriad 

of questions. Mr. Speaker, we are having that discussion. The 

very Bill, the very Bill that the member opposite is referencing 

that’s before the House, one of the key points of that Bill is to 

increase the penalties and increase the fines, and increase them 

by a very substantial amount. It also will allow for summary 

offence tickets to be given out. Mr. Speaker, that’s the purpose 

of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite says we have a mandate to 

do that. We followed through on that mandate. The mandate 

says we’ll look at the Bill. We looked at the legislation, and one 

of the things that we’re doing is we’ve introduced major 

changes to that legislation. It doesn’t need to be in a discussion 

paper because we’re not talking about it any more, Mr. 

Speaker; we’re doing it, and we’re going to continue doing it, 

Mr. Speaker. In spite of what that member opposite says, we’re 

doing it. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this minister is all over the map. 

This report is full of holes. Yesterday he said in the Hansard, 

and I’ll quote page 1432: 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are doing nothing more than asking the 

question whether people want to continue that practice, 

bury the practice, or make it more streamlined or easier. 

There is no preconceived notions in this whatsoever. 

 

But then he’s reported in the paper as saying this about 

holidays. This is what he says, and I quote: 

 

“I just want to make it clear. If the document isn’t clear, I 

want to make it clear. There will be no reduction in the 

number of holidays,” Morgan said. 

 

So he’s asking these questions, but he’s saying that the answers 

are already fixed. I say to the minister: this is the time; 

withdraw this sham and do it right. But today he’s got it all 

wrong. Do it right; withdraw it now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, workplace safety is 

something that we take very seriously in our province. Through 

the good work done by Workers’ Compensation Board and the 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2012 

people at OH & S [occupational health and safety], we have 

driven down injury rates. We have a lot more work to do 

because the members opposite left us a terrible rate. It has gone 

down in each and every year that we have been in government, 

Mr. Speaker. We will continue to do that process. We have a 

Bill before the House today and I’d urge . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Will the Opposition Whip come to order. I 

recognize the Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I will conclude by saying 

this. It is Occupational Health and Safety Week. Mine workers, 

for an example, play an important role. We have a high injury 

rate in our mines. 

 

I’ll tell you what we’ve done. We inspect mines more 

frequently than any other workplace. The mine safety unit 

conducted last year 499 inspections and issued 344 notices of 

contravention in 2011, up from 287 in the previous year. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the type of thing we’re doing and that’s the type 

of thing we’re going to continue to do. And I’d urge the 

members opposite to support the legislation when it goes 

through. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. 

 

The Serious Violent Offender Response 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to stand in the House today and talk about the details of 

an important initiative announced earlier this morning. 

 

In 2011, our government promised to make communities safer 

by targeting high-risk violent offenders. The Ministry of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing and the Ministry of 

Justice and Attorney General will invest 1.9 million this year as 

the first instalment of a 3 million, four-year commitment to 

reduce violent crime in the province. We made this election 

promise to the people of Saskatchewan last fall, and once again 

we are keeping our commitment. 

 

We are calling this commitment the serious violent offender 

response. It builds on best practice and past successes and will 

enhance services for serious violent offenders. My ministry, 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, will invest 1.23 million 

to hire four police officers, six probation officers, two support 

staff, and one clinical director. These folks will be located in 

the Saskatoon area and North Battleford area. They will work to 

better track high-risk offenders in those centres as well as the 

smaller rural and northern communities. 

 

The Ministry of Justice and Attorney General will be adding 

five prosecutors and five support staff. These individuals will 

be dedicated to handling criminal cases involving high-risk 

offenders. I believe this is the right time for this program. Our 

government is committed to reducing the risk of reoffending by 

violent offenders, and research indicates that close supervision 

and comprehensive case management make a big difference in 

decreasing their reoffending behaviour. And that is exactly 

what the serious violent offender response will do. 

 

We are building on a number of programs that have produced 

great results so far. The one-year courage to change field study 

worked with in-custody offenders to look at their own criminal 

behaviour as a way to change them. It resulted in a 30 to 50 per 

cent reduction in violence and misconducts. The Regina auto 

theft strategy provided intense supervision to known young 

offenders and some adult offenders. It reduced auto theft rates 

by 62 per cent. 

 

Community safety plans for high-risk, violent young offenders 

decreased reoffending by 30 per cent. And the Saskatoon crime 

reduction partnership provided intense supervision to known 

young offenders and some adult offenders. This helped reduce 

break and enters by 50 per cent. So we’re not only preventing 

and reducing crime and violence; we are reducing the amount 

of re-offences as well, and that is great news. 

 

I’m pleased to announce, along with the Minister of Justice, 

that the Government of Saskatchewan is building on those 

successes. Thanks to the Minister of Justice and his ministry for 

their support, and to our public safety partners. We appreciate 

working with them on this very important initiative. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

rise and respond to the ministerial statement just delivered in 

the House. I thank the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing for providing a copy of the remarks before the 

House convened today. 

 

We think that, to speak on behalf of the official opposition, we 

think that these are good investments. We think that these are 

reasonable investments. We think that in general, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not just enough to be tough on crime. You need to be tough 

on causes of crime and you need to be smart about how you 

fight crime. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, we’re glad to see, in 

these investments, that thoughtful, intelligent approach to 

fighting crime that needs to be taken with these measures. 

Again the instalment of $1.9 million this year, the first of a total 

$3 million investment over four years, we’re glad to see that 

enlisted in the fight against violent crime, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ll be interested to see how the four police officers, the six 

probation officers, the two support staff, and the clinical 

director are deployed. But again, Mr. Speaker . . . And what the 

rationale was behind the particular geographic deployment of 

those individuals, how that works in conjunction with the way 

that the situation is presenting across the province. We’d like to 

get a bit more information about that, Mr. Speaker. We’re glad 

to see the investment in the Ministry of Justice around the five 

prosecutors and five support staff. Again important, important 

parts of the system if you’re going to respond effectively. 

 

But I guess the thing that we are most encouraged by seeing in 

this announcement, Mr. Speaker, and that we think is important 

if you’re going to fight crime not just fiercely but intelligently, 

we’re glad to see the impact of evidence-based practice on this 

effort. We’re glad to see the referencing of the courage to 



May 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

change field study. We’re glad to see this being brought 

forward in the terrain of the Regina auto theft strategy. We’re 

glad to see this brought forward in the terrain of the community 

safety plans. And we’re glad to see this brought forward in the 

terrain of the Saskatoon crime reduction partnership. Again, 

Mr. Speaker, those targeted, focused efforts in fighting crime 

bore some fruit and certainly have resulted in overall declines. 

 

We’re glad to see this approach being brought to bear on the 

situation with violent crime. But it does leave us with other 

questions, Mr. Speaker, in terms of how these good efforts on 

the one hand are impacted by the changing situation as regards 

the implementation of C-10 and what the federal government 

might be passing on to the province in terms of demands and 

stresses on the provincial system, and how that in turn impacts 

the situation around fighting crime. We’re interested in seeing 

how the current anti-gang strategy measures that are so 

important in terms of this targeted approach to fighting crime, 

how they are supported or not supported in terms of work the 

federal government is doing and how the province is partnering 

alongside that. 

 

But to recap, Mr. Speaker, we think this measure in and of itself 

is worth support. We’re glad to see it coming forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Strengthening Primary Health Care 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

ministerial statement as well. Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to 

announce today that our government is investing $3.6 million to 

support our goal to strengthen primary health care services in 

the province. Our government is firmly committed to a health 

system that provides better health, better care, and better value. 

That is why we have set bold targets to improve access to high 

quality, sustainable care. 

 

As part of our efforts, we are strengthening primary health care, 

which is a foundation of our health care system, and the routes 

most patients use to access basic health services. Primary health 

care is not new to Saskatchewan. We have many positive 

examples across the province. However our investment today in 

primary care is guided by the release of a new framework called 

the Framework for Achieving a High Performing Primary 

Health System in Saskatchewan. This framework was 

developed over many months with the participation of 

communities, municipal organizations, patients, health 

professionals, and the Ministry of Health. It recognizes the 

efforts in the past to impose a rigid model of primary health 

care that was designed in isolation by government was not the 

right solution. 

 

That is why I am pleased to announce today the $3.6 million in 

funding will contribute to the patient-centred, 

community-designed, team-delivered approach to primary 

health care in the province. Eight primary health care sites have 

been identified, and they’re at varying stages of development. 

 

They are: the Meadow Lake clinic, where service design is 

improving access for patients to a whole team of health 

professionals; Moose Jaw, where the team will focus on an 

integration of services like immunization and Well Baby 

clinics; Yorkton, where they will take a team approach to the 

management of chronic disease; Regina in its inner city, where 

enhancements, after-hour access, and new ways of linking to 

other community services will be integrated; in Lloydminster, 

where a team will be developed and work with, commence the 

redesign services around the patient; Leader, where technology 

will be used to support communications between urban and 

rural team members; Whitecap Dakota First Nation in the 

Saskatoon Health Region will partner to begin integration for 

the First Nation and health region services; Fort Qu’Appelle, 

Balcarres, and Lestock will work with the All Nations’ Healing 

Centre in Fort Qu’Appelle in a multi-community partnership 

that will ensure enhancement of care delivery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank everyone who contributed their 

time and expertise to the development of the primary health 

care framework and to the work that is under way to ensure 

these eight sites are successful. Primary health care is truly the 

foundation of our health system, and by strengthening primary 

health care, we will ensure that we have a more sustainable 

system with superior patient experience and better ensure 

access to all health care services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to have a chance to make a few comments about 

the ministerial statement that was just provided. Certainly 

primary care is so very important in the delivery of health care 

to Saskatchewan people, and that applies to our cities, our large 

cities, our medium-sized cities, our small towns, and rural 

areas, Mr. Speaker. And so when we see the possibility for 

improvements and the possibility for additional resources for 

the delivery of primary care, Mr. Speaker, I think that is a good 

thing, and I think that’s what many Saskatchewan people do, in 

fact, want to see. 

 

It is often, Mr. Speaker, when dealing with primary care 

delivery, challenging to have different professions working 

together under one roof and developing those relationships, so I 

look forward, Mr. Speaker, to seeing the results of the different 

locations that the minister listed, to see what sort of progress 

and changes can be made for the better. At the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, we recognize that there are concerns still in many 

communities beyond the ones the minister listed with respect to 

physician recruitment or recruitment of nurse practitioners or 

the availability of OTs [occupational therapists] and speech 

language pathologists. So you know, Mr. Speaker, there does 

remain a tremendous amount of work to do for a tremendous 

amount of patients and communities in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I thank the minister for the remarks. I look forward to seeing 

the outcome of the dollars that were allocated today, and we on 

the official opposition will continue to watch what is occurring. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2012 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 19, The Assessment 

Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill now be 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 19, The Assessment Appraisers Amendment 

Act, 2011 and that the Bill now be read a third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 

 

[14:45] 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Assessment Appraisers 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 19, The Assessment Appraisers 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m again 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 20, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 20, The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill now be read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 20, The Planning and 

Development Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am further 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 41, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment 

Act, 2012 without amendment. 

 



May 8, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 41, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal 

Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 41 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal 

Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 
 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 41, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 

2012 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 17, 

The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read for the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 

No. 17, The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill 

now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 17, The Child Care Amendment Act, 

2011 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 27, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011, a bilingual Act, without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 

No. 27, The Education Amendment Act, 2011 and that the Bill 

now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2012 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 

2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 27, The Education Amendment Act, 

2011 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the committee on 

Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 28, The 

Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered before 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 

No. 28, The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

and that the Bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 28, The Education Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 380 through 384. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 380 to 384. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees both this afternoon and this 

evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Wednesday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:52.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1437 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1437, 1438 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1437 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1438 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1438 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1438 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1438 

  Vermette ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1438, 1439 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1439 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1439 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1439 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1439 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1439 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1439 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1440 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1440 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1440 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1440 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1440 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1441 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Youth Arts Week 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1441 

 Women Entrepreneurs Week 

  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1441 

 Jane’s Walks 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1441 

 Phase 2 of Distribution Centre Opens at Global Transportation Hub 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1442 

 Ukrainian Dance Festival and Competition 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1442 

 Support for Primary Health Care Services 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1442 

 Challenges to Natural Resource Industry 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1443 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Takeover of Grain Marketing Company 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1443 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1443 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1443 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1444 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1444 

 Funding For Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1446 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1446 

 Review of Labour Legislation and Workplace Safety 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1447 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1447 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 The Serious Violent Offender Response 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1448 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1448 

 Strengthening Primary Health Care 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1449 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1449 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1450 

 



 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 19 — The Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1450 

 Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1450 

 Bill No. 41 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Affairs — Municipal Taxation) Amendment Act, 2012 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 

 Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1451 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1452 

 Bill No. 28 — The Education Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1452 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1452 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


