




















































Hansard: March 13, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 14B  TUESDAY, MARCH 13, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 511 

 March 13, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — The time now being 7 o’clock, the House is 

resumed. I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility 

Standards Amendment Act, 2011 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s great 

to rise once again in the debate for Bill No. 15, The Uniform 

Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act. Having 

participated just before the adjournment on it at some length, 

and others on this side having said their peace about it, it’s the 

considered opinion of the opposition at this point, Mr. Speaker, 

that we’re ready to move this Bill to committee and give it the 

more considered approach that committee invites. So at this 

time in the second adjournment debate of Bill No 15, The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 

2011, I would move that we send it on to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing that Bill No. 15, The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Amendment Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 16 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 16 — The 

Correctional Services Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to wade into the discussion and debate tonight about 

Bill No. 16, The Correctional Services Act, 2011. This Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, is not just some amendments to a previous Act, but 

it’s basically a total repeal and replacement of a previous Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some things that I’d like to point out in 

this Bill that are of some concern. I know that the minister in 

his remarks had talked about many, many organizations with 

whom the government had consulted, but he didn’t actually 

point out what the results of the consultation were. This has 

some implications and ramifications for those in correctional 

facilities. And organizations like the John Howard Society or 

Elizabeth Fry are organizations that do their work to ensure that 

inmates have an opportunity to have some of their rights 

protected but also the opportunity to come out of their time 

after they have served their debt to society for crimes that they 

have committed, to come out and lead better, more exemplary 

lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So some of my concerns again are just wondering not only with 

whom the minister consulted but what was the outcome of 

those consultations. There’s no reference in those remarks at all 

to the kind of feedback the minister received. He mentioned 

that he did consult, but what was the feedback? Were all of the 

groups with whom he consulted in favour of this legislation? I 

would have been interested in hearing in the minister’s remarks, 

certainly the number of groups that he mentioned. I could be 

mistaken, but I suspect that there was probably some concern 

flagged with some of these changes. 

 

So as always, anytime, consultation just isn’t about sending out 

a letter or saying what do you think about it. It’s about the work 

that’s done before a piece of legislation is drafted. It’s about 

connecting with these organizations beforehand, before the 

legislation is actually drafted to ensure that the legislation is 

meeting the needs that you think it is. 

 

This Bill actually, the minister pointed out Bill No. 16, The 

Correctional Services Act, 2011 actually came out of a report 

called The Road Ahead which came out of some escapes that 

happened, I believe, in 2008. And this report where this 

legislation is said to come out of was a result of, as I said, those 

escapes. And the minister at the time actually had . . . I wasn’t 

in this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, I 

think I was at home with my one-year-old when all this 

transpired. But I remember in the news hearing that the minister 

of Corrections at the time didn’t even realize that there was a 

problem with gangs in our correctional facilities. I don’t work 

in correctional facilities, but my daughter’s dad was a 

corrections worker and is a police officer. I didn’t work in a 

correctional facility, but I was very well aware myself that there 

was, living in the community in which I do, you can’t help but 

know that there are issues with gangs in not only our 

corrections facilities but elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The one thing the minister also mentioned, which is incredibly 

timely, he points out that the inmate numbers in our corrections 

facilities are the highest levels that they’ve been for many, 

many years. Well the reality is, after the passing of the 

Conservative crime Bill last night, those numbers are about to 

get even higher. And we don’t have a good sense of what that 

cost is going to look like here in Saskatchewan for us as 

taxpayers. And I’m of the belief that yes, we definitely have to 

get the punishment side of the equation wrong but we also need 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

to ensure that we are being proactive and preventive. 

 

I’m the daughter of a police officer who served the City of 

Saskatoon for almost 30 years, Mr. Speaker. I’m a big believer 

in community policing and proactive prevention of crime in the 

first place. I would much rather spend money on the upstream 

side of things to keep people out of corrections facilities in the 

first place, and that involves education. That involves housing. 

That involves investment in child care, all kinds of services, 

Mr. Speaker, on that front end will ensure that we don’t have 

the vast need for the number of correction facilities. 

 

I’d also point out too that we need to think about who is vastly 

overrepresented in our corrections facilities right now. And I 

don’t have the number off the top of my head, but I do know 

that our Aboriginal population is grossly overrepresented in the 

number of people in our corrections facilities. 

 

And again going back to that education piece and the proactive 

prevention piece, we had an opportunity today, Mr. Speaker, in 

this legislature to come down as opposition and government on 

the same page to say that we commit to ensuring that 

Aboriginal outcomes . . . that there shouldn’t be the inequity 

that our First Nations students on reserve currently face. My 

child goes to the Saskatoon French school, is getting more 

money per capita than a child living on a First Nations reserve. 

 

So we had an opportunity to speak as a unanimous united voice 

here calling to the federal government to ensure that these 

outcomes, that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I can hear the 

Minister of Finance heckling across the way saying that this is 

in fact the federal government, the federal government 

responsibility. 

 

But we could have spoken with a unanimous voice here as a 

provincial government, as a provincial, as a provincial 

government. We could have spoken with a unanimous voice. 

We could have spoken with a unanimous voice saying that it’s 

absolutely imperative that we level the playing field for our 

kids so our kids all have the opportunities to start at the same 

place, which is currently not what is happening right now, Mr. 

Speaker. My child who goes to a school in Saskatoon has vastly 

more resources than a child who goes to school on a First 

Nations reserve, which is absolutely unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know the members opposite talk about it and can say it 

off the record, but it would have been very fabulous today, Mr. 

Speaker, like in the House of Commons, we would have had the 

opportunity, we would have had the opportunity here to speak 

with a united voice. So anyway this goes again back to that 

piece around prevention and being proactive versus addressing 

crime on the end that has hurt many, many people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m speaking from, again, a place of experience. I firmly 

believe that we do need to address those who have perpetrated 

crimes. I’ve been the victim, Mr. Speaker, of a crime in the 

mid-1990s with my family hiking in California and was 

brutally attacked. And I saw the effects, Mr. Speaker, of an 

overcrowded correctional facility or correctional facilities and 

what happens when those facilities don’t have the space and 

governments don’t have the money to service those facilities. 

 

My family and I were attacked while hiking, and the fellow 

who attacked us, less than a year later, Mr. Speaker, he had 

been found incompetent to stand trial, ended up in a facility to 

deal with some of his mental health issues. But less than a year 

after that, Mr. Speaker, nobody knew where he was in the 

system. He was no longer in the system because they didn’t 

have the resources. They did not have the resources to keep this 

individual, to provide him with what he needed. He had mental 

health issues, Mr. Speaker. He had mental health issues, Mr. 

Speaker, and he needed some help and support to be able to go 

back into the community as a healthy individual. He didn’t get 

that, nor did he get any of the . . . He did not serve a reasonable 

length of time, less than a year after the incident, Mr. Speaker. 

And that was primarily to do with overcrowding of correctional 

facilities in the state of California. So I’ve seen that first-hand 

and I can tell you, as a victim of a crime, that it is incredibly 

disturbing to not know where the individual has gone because 

the system couldn’t manage him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s another piece of this legislation that I know creates 

some difficulties for an already vulnerable and marginalized 

population. We talk about the need to be able to . . . When 

you’re in a correctional facility, the end goal is to come out of 

that correctional facility with the capacity to not reoffend, first 

of all. That’s absolutely imperative. But it shouldn’t just be 

about not reoffending; it should be about being able to become 

the best possible person that you could become. We should all 

have the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to be contributing citizens, 

that we all are born with that gift to be able to contribute in our 

own ways to our communities. 

 

And one of the things that will have an impact undoubtedly on 

individuals in correctional facilities is the emergency 

involuntary transfers. This would be particularly onerous for 

people who perhaps live in remote communities. It is hard 

enough, I am sure, to try to maintain familial ties and 

relationships when you’re in a correctional facility. Sometimes 

that’s all some of these folks have is someone on the outside 

who is there for them and who will be there when they get out 

and to help them stay on the straight and narrow, Mr. Speaker. 

And with an emergency involuntary transfer, how far away is 

this individual going to be further from his or her support 

network? So we do have some concerns about that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again I think the big thing for me is the focus on prevention. 

This government has an opportunity to make an investment in 

keeping people out of correctional facilities. We can talk about 

Housing First and that need to ensure that people have a roof 

over their head to deal with some of the issues that might land 

them in a correctional facility at some point in time. 

 

Housing First is an amazing model that the great socialist state 

of Alberta is using. I’m being facetious there, Mr. Speaker. But 

Housing First, Housing First has proved to be an incredibly, 

incredibly positive tool for dealing with homelessness and 

helping ensure people have the supports they need to pull their 

lives together. 

 

And not everybody starts from the same place, Mr. Speaker, 

and we all have different struggles and challenges that we deal 

with. But one of the most important things for someone to be 

able to deal with these challenges is to have a good roof over 

their head, and then you put the services around them. 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

And in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, many business people and 

community organizations proposed this idea, and the 

government hopped in front of the parade because they saw that 

it worked and it had many champions. And they’ve seen a 

reduction. They have seen a reduction in homelessness, Mr. 

Speaker, in Alberta, which should be our end goal. Our end 

goal as a government and as a society should be to ensure that 

people have the opportunity to be contributing citizens to our 

great province. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, with educational 

opportunities, with housing crises, there’s all kinds of things 

that lead people to commit crimes, Mr. Speaker. Desperation, 

racism, poverty, all of these things, Mr. Speaker, are some of 

the things that lead to people ending up in correctional 

facilities. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we have some concerns about Bill 16, 

The Correctional Services Act, as I said, which is a total rewrite 

or replacement of a previous Bill. We would like to think that 

the government would spend as much time and energy and 

resources on the preventive, proactive piece. This is a fairly 

lengthy Bill, Mr. Speaker, and the minister spoke at great 

lengths about this. I would love and we would love on this side 

of the House to see the government invest that much time and 

energy in something like housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I know that I have colleagues who are interested in 

entering the debate, not only on this Bill but other Bills that are 

before us. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move 

adjournment of the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 16, the correction services amendment Act, 2011. Does the 

Assembly adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 17 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 17 — The Child 

Care Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

in on the discussion on Bill No. 17, An Act to amend The Child 

Care Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is after a busy day in the legislature with 

a number of things going on, and through question period and 

through condolence motions and through adjourned debates in 

this afternoon. But in all that we do, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

focus of our activity here in the legislature really should be and 

comes down to the issue that this piece of legislation discusses, 

and that’s the children of this province, something that 

everyone in this Assembly speaks positively about as, Mr. 

Speaker, children are our most precious little ones that we have 

in our lives, whether it’s in our own families or in our 

communities, wherever the situation may be. There’s nothing 

like the presence of a child that can brighten one’s day and 

remind one why exactly we do what we do here in the 

Assembly, as it is for future generations. 

 

So with that opening, Mr. Speaker, it does give me or I am 

happy to have the opportunity to be able to speak to this piece 

of legislation because I think it does address the very important 

issue of child care. And while the issues that the minister is 

putting forward in this amendment to the legislation are 

somewhat of a housekeeping nature and aren’t necessarily a 

complete reform, to say the least, or overhaul of what is 

occurring in child care in Saskatchewan, they still of course are 

very important because of the issue that the reforms are 

addressing, and that is the care of our children in our various 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that child care is something 

that we often hear about as a priority and a concern among 

Saskatchewan people. And I know that is a common, common 

sentiment we hear from constituents, whether we live in the 

north of Saskatchewan or the South, whether we are in a large 

community or a small community, in an urban environment or a 

rural environment, whether we’re in one of the smaller or 

medium sized cities in Saskatoon — or in Saskatchewan, 

pardon me — we know that child care is an issue. 

 

And I’ve been elected since 2007 and since that time have had 

the opportunity to visit a few different child care facilities in 

different places and different communities. And it’s always 

encouraging to see the good work that child care providers 

perform in Saskatchewan and the huge relevance and 

importance that that has for families. But at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, when seeing the facilities and from talking with 

families, we know that the need is very, very great. And 

something we’ve often talked about on this side of the 

Assembly is the need for a comprehensive approach and 

strategy when it comes to child care in the province and a plan 

as to determine what is the best way to get from where we are 

now to where we need to be and ought to be. 

 

I actually think of, Mr. Speaker, some travels that I had 

recently. I was with the member from Athabasca and we were 

travelling up in his constituency in the Northwest. And the 

visits that we were doing were primarily about health care, with 

a number of stops at health care facilities and talking to health 

care providers in the North and talking to community leaders in 

different communities. We stopped in Ile-a-la-Crosse. We were 

in Beauval. We went to La Loche. We went to Buffalo 

Narrows. And it was good to hear what people’s concerns and 

comments were on the issue of health care. 

 

But the visit and the tour wasn’t only about health care. It was 

also about child care as it is connected to education. And we 

stopped at the regional college in Buffalo Narrows, at the 

campus there, and had a good meeting with instructors there 

but, more importantly, wonderful conversations and discussions 

with many of the students who were pursuing, who are 

pursuing their education upgrading skills. We met with one 

class that was focusing on pre-trades training and we saw a 

wonderful facility, but also the partnership with SIAST 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

and the supply of materials and teaching equipment. 

 

And we visited some individuals pursuing grade 12 education, 

young men and women who were looking at upgrading their 

skills with the hope of getting into health care programs, 

whether it be an RN [registered nurse] or an LPN [licensed 

practical nurse] or a care aid course. And it was so encouraging 

to meet these students, to see these individuals who were 

receiving education, pursuing their education, hoping to better 

their lives and play an active role in the local economy. 

 

And I give that preamble to say that when I met with these 

students, a good number of them, Mr. Speaker, were women 

who were also mothers, were also parents. And well some of 

them were, many of them of course were men who were also 

parents. But the issue of child care was most present with the 

discussions that I had with some of the mothers who were there. 

And they talked to me about how access to child care has been, 

in some situations when it is available, has been a huge help to 

their studies and pursuing their long-term goals, but in other 

instances it’s been a real stumbling block to success as they’ve 

sought to re-enter education and think about long-term career 

plans. 

 

And so that’s one story, one interaction that really stands out in 

my mind, Mr. Speaker, from time in Buffalo Narrows and 

hearing from the people. And I remember two of the people we 

spoke to, they actually were from La Loche and they were 

down during the week for studies in Buffalo Narrows, one with 

their family, and the other individual actually left her children 

with other family in La Loche while she was in Buffalo 

Narrows during the week pursuing her studies. 

 

I say that because it highlights the importance and the relevance 

for what the province pursues when it comes to education, 

especially education in the North. And we can’t isolate these 

issues. So we know that child care has huge relevance to our 

approach to education and in situations . . . I guess the issue of 

Aboriginal employment numbers and participation in the 

workforce has been a hot topic over the past number of months, 

and I think as I raise concerns about the government’s approach 

and strategy when it comes to employment and job 

opportunities for First Nations and Métis people, I think it’s 

important to keep the issue of child care in perspective. 

 

In my own community, Mr. Speaker, in the constituency of 

Saskatoon Massey Place, of course it’s actually a similar story 

that I have heard from young families, families looking for 

child care opportunities. And in situations where they are able 

to find the child care facilities, cost can also be a huge issue for 

families. And it’s a vital area of importance because we all of 

course love our children and want the very best for them. And 

as a dad and someone with a young daughter and a growing 

family, child care is a huge issue and it’s something that each 

couple or each family needs to work out and figure out what is 

the best approach. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that the provision of licensed and 

regulated and subsidized child care spaces is so vital and 

important to families in Saskatchewan because it means that 

families can pursue the education that they need in many 

situations. It means that they can participate in the economy in 

the ways that we want all people to be able to participate. And I 

think that’s important when we are looking at changes here 

which are, as I said, not a complete overhaul of child care in 

Saskatchewan. It’s important to remember that the issue we’re 

dealing with here is of huge significance and of huge 

importance to many, many people. 

 

Another piece of evidence that would indicate that it’s of great 

relevance, this morning and this afternoon I had a chance, with 

colleagues from both sides of the House, to meet with some of 

the young university students who are here as part of the 

Women in the Legislature initiative that has been started by 

students. And it was very interesting to hear the comments that 

they were talking about and the questions that they had for 

elected officials and non-elected officials about . . . I guess a 

common question that I heard over and over was about balance, 

about family balance, about how individuals pursue and achieve 

their professional goals and how to be successful in the 

professional realm but also to have success and a high quality 

of life in the area of family. And individuals want that type of 

balance and they expect that kind of balance. And I mean the 

discussion today was about how that works into the context of 

the legislature, but it’s the same discussion that people have, 

whether an individual happens to be a plumber or a teacher or a 

tradesperson of any type or working in retail or in any number 

of professions. 

 

Our families are important to us. They are the lifeblood of our 

communities. They are why, I think, if we polled members of 

the Assembly and we talked about why we do what we do, most 

people would point to children — either our own children or 

our grandchildren or even our neighbours’ children. 

 

So looking at this piece of legislation, which is Bill No. 17, and, 

Mr. Speaker, the minister provided a second reading statement 

or speech on December 13th, 2011. It’s on page 169 of 

Hansard from that day. And the minister’s remarks aren’t 

especially lengthy, but they do highlight what the proposed 

changes through the amendment are about. 

 

After a preamble and some of the normal comments one would 

expect a minister to make, there are some comments stating the 

goals. And the first area that these amendments seek to do is to 

eliminate a board to do with appeals or complaints that licensed 

child care providers may have or when . . . Pardon me. Let me 

start again. When a licensed child care provider has a 

complaint, when they have a concern about licensing, as the 

legislation suggests according to 1990, there has been a board 

where that appeal can be heard. As the minister stated in her 

second reading speech, since 1990 there have been seven 

occasions when there has been some type of appeal, and in 

reality a board hasn’t heard the appeal. It has been heard and 

ruled on by the deputy minister. So what this piece of 

legislation is asking is that the provision for that board to 

oversee the appeal could in fact be, would be eliminated so that 

it would no longer be about an appeal to a board, but it would 

be through the deputy minister. 

 

Now as the minister stated, this has happened seven times since 

1990, so it’s not like the frequency of the appeals is high. We 

know that it’s a fairly rare occurrence, based on the fact that it’s 

happened just seven times since 1990. But I provided those 

lengthy introductory comments, Mr. Speaker, because I wanted 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

to highlight and I wanted to emphasize the important role that 

child care plays in society and for Saskatchewan people — as I 

said, for the security of families, for individuals to pursue their 

educational dreams, and for people to realize their professional 

accomplishments. So even though this proposed change in 

eliminating the board to review appeals may seem minor, I 

think because of the subject content — that being our children 

and how they are provided for, how they are cared for — I 

think it is still of great significance and still of great 

importance. 

 

As the minister stated, I will state what she provided in her 

speech so that listeners at home who weren’t tuned in on 

December 13th might have an opportunity to hear what the 

minister views as what this piece of legislation will accomplish 

first. And she stated that: 

 

The current legislation with the proposed removal of the 

family services board gives the ministry ample ability to 

effectively deal with requests we receive. This change 

will in no way interfere with any person’s right to an 

impartial and timely review of a licensing decision. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will take the minister at her word that the 

reviews will still be done on a basis of impartiality and of 

fairness, and that will be the general orientation that will guide 

the deputy minister in reviewing and making a decision. And it 

is my sincere hope that that is in fact the case and what will 

occur. 

 

[19:30] 

 

I will talk about the second point that this piece of legislation, 

of what it accomplishes, but I do want to skip towards the end 

of the minister’s remarks as it is relevant to the first bit of 

information that she identified and because the minister clearly 

stated on the record that: 

 

Discussions have taken place with the Saskatchewan 

Early Childhood Association and the Saskatchewan 

Association of Child Care Homes Inc. on the proposed 

amendments and they are supportive. 

 

So I think that is important to clearly state that and I thank the 

minister for being very clear that consultation with these groups 

occurred and that it not only occurred but that they are in fact 

supportive. I think that is important to put down in concrete 

terms. It is important that it is in Hansard and that serves as a 

reference that if there is ever a discrepancy in the future about 

this change, it is the position of the minister and of the Sask 

Party government that consultation occurred and that the most 

relevant groups are in fact in favour. 

 

So again, the first change, Mr. Speaker, that this amendment is 

making, is that the appeal process would not be done through a 

separate board that would be created but in fact that it would be 

done by the DM, the deputy minister, and that this would occur 

on an ongoing basis. 

 

The second component, Mr. Speaker, which is somewhat of a 

housekeeping or a housekeeping/streamlining rationale, I would 

suppose, is changes to do with the subsidy that is provided to 

licensed facilities. And what the minister is hoping to do here 

through the amendment is that, over the course of budget 

cycles, as the subsidy is increased according to the budget, that 

is not necessarily, that funding decision is not in sync with the 

other calendars that determine the funding for an organization. 

So what this legislation here is proposing to do is allow for 

regulations to do with that subsidy in the amount the child care 

facility has received, to allow those regulations to be changed 

retroactively so that the funding can flow once a decision is 

made about a change in funding levels. 

 

As the minister stated in her remarks, it has been the practice 

that the funding, when there is changes, has been provided to 

the licensed facilities, but it has been done through order in 

councils, which is an additional step as opposed to allowing for 

the changes to occur within the ministry and allow the dollars to 

flow through that means, as I understand it according the 

minister’s second reading speech. If I don’t quite have all that 

straight, I welcome to be corrected on that issue. 

 

But as it is about a subsidy, as it is about occasions when 

increased funding is provided to a licensed provider, I see, Mr. 

Speaker, why the relevant associations would be in favour of 

such a change as it allows the dollars to flow in a timely 

manner. And that is the second purpose of this amendment, Mr. 

Speaker. And once again I will restate, as I did about the first 

point, that the minister clearly states on the record that the 

relevant associations have been consulted and that they are in 

agreement with these changes, and I will obviously trust the 

minister in that remark. And I’m glad that it is down in 

Hansard forever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in my remarks on this piece of legislation, Bill No. 17, I’ve 

done a few things, Mr. Speaker. I opened up and began my 

remarks about the importance of child care in Saskatchewan, 

licensed child care facilities, the provision of child care, 

subsidized spots for individuals in the province, and how the 

need is great, whether we’re in the North or the South, rural or 

urban, whatever our background may be. When parents go off 

to work, participate in the economy as we want people to do, 

parents want the assurance that our children are taken care of, 

that our children are safe, that our children are receiving the 

type of personal development that they need to be wonderful 

little people in our lives and our families and in our 

communities, and growing up to be wonderful adults as well. 

 

I talked about, Mr. Speaker, how the changes here proposed by 

the minister, the first one has to do with when there are 

complaints and a review is requested by a licensed provider, 

how the legislation since 1990 has talked about the need for a 

board to do this. In practice there have been very few, about 

seven, and the DM has normally done this job. And the minister 

suggests that this be the standard course of practice and that 

reference to a review board would be eliminated. 

 

And the second change proposed by this amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, is that when there are adjustments to funding through 

the budget, that that process would be streamlined to eliminate 

the need for OCs [order in council] and to simply allow 

retroactive changes to be made so that the funding can flow 

appropriately. And the minister has clearly stated that she 

consulted with the relevant organizations as I listed them and 

that they are in support. 

 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have enjoyed the opportunity to speak a little 

bit about child care because it is important. We love our 

children. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that other members on our 

side want to also talk about how important child care is to their 

families and to their constituencies, and on that note I will 

move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 17. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 17, The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 18 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 18 — The Degree 

Authorization Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 

great interest that I rise in the debate this evening on Bill No. 

18, The Degree Authorization Act. And it’s a pretty intriguing 

piece of legislation; I’ll be honest with you, Mr. Speaker. 

Apparently everybody else finds it intriguing as well or perhaps 

not, Mr. Speaker. Usually there’s a bit more chit-chat. It sort of 

stopped me in my tracks there, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I thank the member from Canora-Pelly for his 

encouragement. So it’s very kind of him. 

 

Anyway, but degree authorization, I guess first off I’d probably 

want to state my bona fides in this discussion, Mr. Speaker. I 

come to this as somebody who’s got a bachelor’s degree from 

the University of Regina. I’m currently enrolled in the master’s 

in public administration program in the Johnson-Shoyama 

Graduate School of Public Policy, a joint program between the 

University of Regina and University of Saskatchewan. 

 

I have taken a class at SIAST, Mr. Speaker. My father was a 

tradesman and my mother is a graduate of Briercrest Bible 

College, as was my younger brother who graduated from 

Briercrest Bible College. I have also had the pleasure of doing a 

public policy review on questions of affordability and 

accessibility in post-secondary education and served a stint as 

the minister for Advanced Education and Employment. So from 

a number of perspectives, Mr. Speaker, I come with a great 

degree of interest in this debate. 

 

I think some of the essential questions involved in this, you 

know, again, how do you bolster accessibility but at the same 

time retaining quality assurance? And then it’s reflected in what 

are identified as the three key tenets of the legislation. The 

minister, in the second reading speech, identified accessibility, 

quality assurance or, as the Minister of Advanced Education 

stated, a robust quality assurance process — certainly we’re all 

in favour of robust quality assurance processes on this side of 

the House as well, Mr. Speaker — and thirdly, to protect the 

long-standing reputations of the University of Regina and 

Saskatchewan, University of Saskatchewan. 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting process by which 

the provincial government has arrived at this proposed piece of 

legislation because there was a study conducted, a public 

engagement process conducted by a Mr. Alex Usher of Higher 

Education Strategy Associates. Those who know him from his 

work at the Millennium Scholarship Foundation and in other 

movies know that he’s a fairly well-engaged individual when it 

comes to higher education policy throughout Canada. 

 

And you know, some of it, there’s some points that Mr. Usher 

has made in the past around questions of tuition fee levels, for 

example, that I myself might not agree with. But certainly he 

has bona fides as one who has long been engaged in questions 

of post-secondary public policy, and I think has done an 

interesting and admirable piece of work here in terms of 

engaging the sector and in terms of trying to square off a 

number of circles. I think one of the things that’s interesting 

about what is proposed here is that it seems to strike a middle 

ground in terms of the . . . I think it does a good job of trying to 

learn from the experiences in other jurisdictions as they have 

sought to expand their degree offerings while at the same time 

again retaining quality assurance. 

 

So as to the degree offerings, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got 

everything in Canadian jurisdictions. In Canada, of course, 

post-secondary education is a provincial jurisdiction. You’ve 

got everything from the University of Quebec system in Quebec 

where you’ve got different campuses of the University of 

Quebec: University of Quebec at Montreal, University of 

Quebec at Trois-Rivières, University of Quebec at Quebec. You 

know, there are a number of campuses of that somewhat 

modelled on the regent system of what I think has been offered 

in California in the UC [University of California] system. 

 

So again all those institutions being brought forward or being 

brought into law and having drawn their authority from the 

University of Quebec legislation with some changes within, and 

then what had been done for quality assurance for each of those 

individual institutions, having that brought under the University 

of Quebec legislation. Or you look at Nova Scotia, Mr. 

Speaker, where there is a profusion of universities certainly. 

And I’m not certain, but I think that each of them possess their 

own legislation. 

 

Or you look at a recent experience in the province of British 

Columbia, Mr. Speaker, where a great number of community 

colleges have been rolled over into becoming new universities, 

and I think of the different program offerings that are available 

there. I think of the law school of Thompson Rivers. I know 

that the Leader of the Opposition, the member from Lakeview, 

carries a great interest in University of the islands, is it? . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . University of Vancouver Island, the 

former Malaspina College, I believe. 

 

But the idea that a number of colleges in the province of British 

Columbia that have been rolled over into universities, also the 

long-standing role that Trinity Western has played in that 

province, you know, there is some public policy experience to 

be drawn on from there, or the different sort of technical 

institutions that have gone to degree granting offerings. 

 

And the province of Manitoba, for example, with authorizing 

Red River College to provide a bachelor’s degree in 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

construction management as referenced in the work of Mr. 

Usher. That’s of interest. 

 

But again, alongside that, how do you maintain quality 

assurance? And certainly the autonomy and the regulation of 

the university in Saskatchewan, The University of 

Saskatchewan Act, or The University of Regina Act, and then 

their attendant federated colleges within those systems, it’s a 

fairly well-defined process. And it has a great number of 

safeguards built into it for providing quality assurance, Mr. 

Speaker, but even there we have, you know, there have been 

problems throughout the recent and not-too-recent past in terms 

of, again, squaring those circles of autonomy while at the same 

time requiring quality assurance. 

 

So what this Act sets out to do, in terms of providing sort of an 

initial sort of case study approach to expanding the 

authorization of degrees and seizing upon a request for case 

studies from SIAST on the one hand and Briercrest Bible 

College and Seminary on the other, we find that very interesting 

and how this rolls out in Saskatchewan and again, at the same 

time, how that should not take away from the prestige or the 

excellence that is inherent in the degrees at the University of 

Regina or the University of Saskatchewan. We’ll be interested 

to see how this mechanism being proposed to provide the 

quality assurance works or does not work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Certainly the fact that we’ve got two universities in this 

province to begin with is, in and of itself, an evolution. And we 

just on Monday had the condolence motion for Allan Blakeney. 

And certainly that was an individual that played a key role in 

establishing what had been the University of Saskatchewan, 

Regina Campus, establishing that institution as the University 

of Regina — full stop, period — complete with its own 

legislation and its own bicameral system of governance and 

quality assurance. 

 

So we’ll be interested to see. We’re not historically as a party, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not against the way that these institutions 

can evolve. And we’re very interested to see how this actually 

works out and to hear more from different folks on the various 

pros and cons of this proposal. 

 

It does seem to hold a fairly significant role for cabinet in 

providing an oversight of the different things that will be 

attached to this. That in and of itself is, again, it’s an attempt at 

striking a mid-ground between providing fairly close 

supervision as to the new offerings that I think would usher 

forth in this era, Mr. Speaker, and at the same time not trying to 

encroach on the powers invested in the University of Regina 

and University of Saskatchewan in their respective pieces of 

legislation. 

 

But again, the legislation is its own sort of protection for those 

two institutions. And I know from very definite experience, Mr. 

Speaker, that that autonomy inherent and involved in those 

pieces of legislation is something that is jealously guarded by 

the universities. And there’s an important discussion to be had 

about how you balance off the arm’s-length nature, the 

independent, autonomous nature of the universities and the role 

of the people’s representatives in their legislature and in 

Executive Council to propose and implement changes to those 

pieces of legislation. 

 

And I guess in this circumstance, in the mechanism that’s being 

proposed under The Degree Authorization Act specifically, I’d 

just like to touch on this in my remarks, Mr. Speaker. The 

quality assurance body that is proposed, this is from the 

minister’s second reading speech of December 13th, to quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the quality assurance body will be a small 

arm’s-length board appointed by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council. It will have no less than three members who 

will have expertise in quality assurance, and have 

extensive experience, both academic and 

administratively, in post-secondary education. Through 

institutional self-assessments and expert panel reviews, 

the quality assurance body will assess the institution’s 

capacity to offer degree-level programming, as well as 

the quality of the proposed and specific degree program. 

It will then make a recommendation to the minister as to 

whether to support or deny an authorization for the 

proposed degree program. To ensure transparency and 

accountability, the minister can only authorize a degree 

program with a positive recommendation by the quality 

assurance body, thereby ensuring again the high standards 

and traditions of quality that have been associated with 

Saskatchewan degrees for more than a century. 

 

So in that case, Mr. Speaker, the tribunal that is set up, or the 

three-member quality assurance body, a lot of this of course 

depends on who is appointed to that body and on whose 

shoulders that authority and that responsibility will rest. But 

again it bears noting that these individuals, though there’s the 

language around expertise and quality assurance and extensive 

experience both academic and administratively in 

post-secondary education, the proof will be in the pudding, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we’ll see who winds up on that critical body, but one thing 

that is known for certain is that that creature is a creature of 

cabinet and will be appointed as such through order in council 

appointments. And again that will bear some definite scrutiny, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of who is appointed there and what kind 

of agenda they might bring to the table and what they might be 

interested in doing in that circumstance. 

 

Something else interesting, Mr. Speaker, is again from the 

second reading speech where the minister stated: 

 

If granted, an authorization will be only for a certain 

period of time, after which the institution must apply for 

renewal, thereby ensuring that the quality is sustained for 

our students, for their families, for our communities, for 

employers, and for the people of Saskatchewan. This will 

involve the institution having to undergo some or all of 

the quality assurance review process again. 

 

So what that time limit specifically will be, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

most interested in that. Again these things will be evolved. 

 

And the importance of regulations is always there in legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, but I would submit, all the more so in the case of 

this piece of legislation. And again in terms of trying to square 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

these things off and not get overcommitted to a certain 

program, time limiting, I think, is not in and of itself a bad 

thing. And allowing for that checkup on where things are at 

with the, you know, whether or not the quality assurance 

clearance to begin with was warranted and whether it continues 

to be merited, it seems to be a fair enough mechanism. But 

again, we’ll see. We’ll see how this fares out. 

 

And we’d also do well, Mr. Speaker, to remember that how 

important it is to get this right from the first time. Certainly the 

ability to check these things up after a later date . . . You know, 

say something did go wrong under this, and you did get 

students that spent years of their lives and tens of thousands of 

dollars getting degrees, only to have a quality assurance review 

process kick in later on and cast some doubt upon the worth of 

their degree. It’s very hard for those individuals to then say, you 

know, we’d like our money back or give me my four years back 

or I thought that this was a reputable degree and where are we 

now. 

 

So I state that just by way of underlining, Mr. Speaker, how 

important, how critical it is to get this right in the first place and 

to recognize the impact that it could have on people’s lives if 

this is not gotten right to begin with. 

 

I guess a couple other endeavours under the heading of 

accessibility that I’m interested in, Mr. Speaker, at least in this 

context. I note with interest the work that has been done in 

Manitoba under the University College of the North system and 

the way that that has brought greater accessibility and 

opportunity in the post-secondary sense to the people of the 

North in Manitoba. 

 

There are different things that have been done over the years in 

Saskatchewan. I think of the NORTEP [northern teacher 

education program], NORPAC [Northern Professional Access 

College] concentration in La Ronge that my colleague from 

Cumberland is very familiar with, or the work that Northlands 

College has done generally throughout the North. And I think 

of the different efforts that have been made out of both the 

University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan to 

provide sort of distance programming for students in the North. 

 

It occurs to me that we’d do well in the public policy debate 

around accessibility for post-secondary education to be 

continually looking at other jurisdictions and what are those 

best practices, and is that something where we’ve got the 

critical mass of interested students and the critical mass in 

terms of post-secondary infrastructure to bring together to 

provide an enhanced offering vis-à-vis something like the 

University College of the North in Manitoba? 

 

And I know that it’s been looked at in different respects, and 

certainly those kind of inquiries led to things like the founding 

of NORTEP, NORPAC to begin with and certain distance 

offerings of other educational institutions in the North. But that 

is one in particular that it occurs to me that, if this is a piece of 

legislation or, you know, a couple of items out of a series of 

recommendations on increasing accessibility, an exercise that is 

concerned with increasing accessibility for post-secondary 

education in Saskatchewan, if that is in fact the case here, then 

I’m also interested to know where we are at in addressing the 

needs in the North. 

And I often think of work that I was doing as, at the time, the 

Corrections minister and also doing work on accessibility and 

affordability review for post-secondary education. And the 

ways that it seemed that there was a much better job to be done 

in terms of deploying opportunities and deploying learning 

opportunities for northerners so that if you . . . There were 

different jobs as it stood at the time within the sphere of 

corrections; there was a potential labour force there. And I think 

what was needed was that educational opportunity to thread the 

needle, to give people the tools so they could get the job done. 

And again in terms of northerners serving northern needs it 

made, I think, good sense from a number of directions. 

 

Too often, I think, the answer has been to the North, that to get 

opportunity they should leave the North, or that northern needs 

should be served by people coming from outside the North to 

the North. And again, it’s a big province and it’s a place of 

beauty and opportunity and there should be some better 

balance, I think, to be struck in terms of making full use of that 

potential labour force in the North and providing those 

educational opportunities to do the jobs in the North and, as far 

as I can understand, Mr. Speaker, there will plenty of 

opportunities for southerners into the bargain. But again that’s 

something that governments would do well to be watchful of, 

and how they are either succeeding or failing in that regard. 

And again, for a piece of legislation that one of its concerns is 

the question of accessibility, that is something that we’d like to 

hear more on — not just the measures contained in this 

legislation, but what is being done to, you know, learn from the 

example of something like our own indigenous northern 

institutions and the example in other jurisdictions, such as the 

experience with the University College of the North in 

Manitoba. 

 

Another area that I think about this particular endeavour, Mr. 

Speaker, another sort of lens that I consider it through or view it 

through is the experience with SaskCAT [Saskatchewan 

Council for Admissions and Transfer] or with the whole 

question of credit transfer. And certainly one of the more 

important initiatives that I think is out there in terms of 

providing greater accessibility to post-secondary education 

across the province is the work that has been done with 

different of our regional colleges and other institutions in the 

province to provide university classes that are on a first- or 

second-year basis, but still serving in partnership with the two 

main universities or the work that is done with Gabriel Dumont 

technical or through SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies] and First Nations University in working with 

First Nations populations, working with Métis populations, but 

providing those institutions that overcome the barriers. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And as regards SaskCAT in particular, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

something that has very much, in my experience of it, worked 

to strike that balance between quality assurance but providing 

the accessibility through distance learning opportunities that 

overcomes one of the greatest barriers in the province of 

Saskatchewan to access to post-secondary education, which is 

distance. We’ve got, quite frankly, a lot of geography in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. And I am seated beside the member 

from Cumberland and, let’s see, I’m behind the member from 

Athabasca. And therein you have two constituencies alone, Mr. 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

Speaker, where you could fit greater parts of Western Europe 

within their boundaries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think about students that I had the opportunity to talk to 

that were taking up offerings at Great Plains College out and 

around Swift Current, or the folks in Weyburn, or in Parkland 

College up Yorkton way, and different people that were 

availing themselves of university offerings through distance 

education, but also through the work of coordinating credit 

transfer through SaskCAT. 

 

So I think that is something else that we want to hear more 

about, is where is the government at in terms of coordinating 

the important work of credit transfer, whereas I think 

sometimes the approach of . . . And again, the universities are 

rightfully jealous of their degree-granting authority and the 

association of that with excellence. But again, striking that 

balance between accessibility and quality assurance, and is 

there better work that can be done with SaskCAT to ensure that 

those opportunities are there throughout the province — we are 

interested in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I guess, I know that other of my colleagues are definitely 

interested in this debate and certainly as it pertains to again the 

stated goals of increasing accessibility, the provision of quality 

assurance, and the safeguarding of the reputations of the 

universities of Regina and University of Saskatchewan in the 

way that this legislation proposes to protect the utilization of 

the word “university,” and who can grant what degree and a 

sort of a case-by-case process that is proposed under the quality 

assurance body. 

 

But we’re very interested to see how this works out on the 

case-by-case level. We’re very interested to see how the 

regulations match up to the state of intent of this legislation. 

We’re very interested to see the individuals that might be put 

forward for this body. We’re very interested in that relationship 

between the quality assurance body and cabinet, Mr. Speaker, 

and whether or not, how that impacts the agendas of these 

people. We’re interested to see how you can actually 

operationalize something like the time limit on the approval 

provided by the quality assurance review process and again, 

Mr. Speaker, the consequences of that or the importance of that 

needing to go right, and the consequences of that, if it goes 

wrong, for people as they seek to improve their post-secondary 

education in this province. 

 

I guess with that, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my remarks 

on Bill No. 18, The Degree Authorization Act and move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 18, The Degree Authorization Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 19 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 19 — The 

Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to stand tonight and enter into the debate on Bill No. 

19. It’s got quite a title: An Act to amend The Assessment 

Appraisers Act, to make a related amendment to The 

Agrologists Act, 1994 and to make a consequential amendment 

to The Assessment Management Agency Act. 

 

So it’s quite an important Act, I mean, and I think it’s one that, 

you know, we often don’t think about the people who do this 

kind of work, the appraisers, the assessment appraisers and how 

this all fits together. And critically important when we talk 

about our taxes and the value of our property, and we want to 

make sure we have the very best people and they have the 

knowledge and the experience, the training. And this really 

speaks to the requirements that’s needed to ensure that we can 

have faith in the people who are doing this kind of work. And 

so as I’ve read through it and I’ve read through the minister’s 

comments, and we’ve reached out and canvassed the people 

who we should be talking to and we feel that many of our 

questions at a general level, that we feel confident that we could 

see this move forward. 

 

But I do want to make some comments into the record tonight 

and review the minister’s comments because I think it’s 

important that the folks at home who may be watching this 

tonight have a sense of what we’re talking about. And it’s one 

that again it’s about confidence in the system and confidence in 

the association and confidence in those people who go out and 

do the appraisals and work with SAMA [Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency] to make sure the numbers 

are right and fair. And fair is the key word in many ways, 

because people can get quite — and rightly so — upset if 

they’re feeling that they’re not being treated in a fair manner. 

 

So the minister did raise this issue and he talks about how it, 

The Assessment Appraisers Act, provides a legal framework for 

a regulated occupation of the assessment appraisers who do the, 

they value property for municipal property tax purposes, and 

that this Act in fact first came into regulation on November 1st, 

2002. 

 

And so he talks about how this Act has really three purposes. 

He lays it out fairly straightforwardly. One, first to clarify the 

Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers’ Association, also known 

as the SAAA or S triple A, has a role in certifying and licensing 

all the assessment appraisers involved in valuing property for 

the municipal property tax purposes and what that means, 

whether they’re members or not, but it will ensure that their 

credentials are verified. And as I said, that’s hugely important 

that people know that when they’re doing this kind of work that 

their credentials are important. 

 

And it goes on to say, which is interesting because it removes 

requirements — this is the second group — the amendments 

are, that there are amendments needed to remove requirements 

related to their residency, employment, and membership, and in 

fact including one that’s in The Agrologists Act, 1994, but in 

fact moves it over to being much more of a knowledge base, 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

skills base, education base, and experience base so that this is 

more in line with other jurisdictions in terms of labour mobility. 

And I know in terms of professional associations this is very 

important, that if you are working in Alberta, Saskatchewan, 

Manitoba that you can practise your profession across the 

board. And this is really important. So we take this has some 

value to look at further. 

 

And also in this . . . I have some experience in terms of this. I 

mean I know we’ve done some amendments around The Social 

Workers Act a few years ago, and many more professional 

associations’ Acts that have come forward as we really 

professionalize many of the groups over the last 5, 10, 20 years. 

That really talks about the regulations around practices, 

especially in terms of professional development and their role 

vis-à-vis the public, particularly around discipline hearings, that 

type of thing — that the public has an ability to launch or lodge 

a complaint with the association about a member or one that the 

association has verified to have the proper credentials. And I 

think this is an important thing. So we see how we’ve seen 

many of these pieces of legislation come forward, and I think 

this is an important thing. 

 

One group I have to say that the government has in front of it, a 

piece of legislation around The Residential Tenancies Act and 

the landlords group. I’d like to see that maybe fall more in a 

line with this. But that’s another debate for another time. But I 

would like to see more attention to that because when you have 

a professional group and it’s professional work that impacts on 

the public, there should be care taken to make sure that we have 

standards. And I know at one point I will be able to talk to The 

Residential Tenancies Act. 

 

But it’s critical that this kind of expectation by the public is 

right across the board, that when you have a professional 

organization . . . And I know we all kind of like to use that 

word, professional. We sure like to use it and it doesn’t matter 

what we do; we’re a professional this, we’re professional that. 

But it’s important that we truly are professionals and that there 

is some backup to that. 

 

I know of my own profession as a teacher, I know we take a lot 

of pride in terms of who can say that they are teacher and 

having a teacher’s licence. I’ve got into an interesting 

discussion vis-à-vis teacher and educator. You need to have a 

licence to be a teacher in this province actually, and I am very 

proud of that fact. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think this is key when we talk about 

professional organizations or those who put themselves out to 

be professional and the impact it has on the public and the 

public confidence. And who’s responsible? Who are the 

stewards for that public confidence but ourselves, the provincial 

legislature. Because we’re the ones who set the regulations and 

who make those demands, those expectations known to the 

professional organization. And it’s a whole range. You know, 

as I said, whether it’s social workers, teachers, computer, we 

had people who . . . the computer designers, technologists, 

computer technologists. I remember that day when we passed 

that legislation a few years ago. 

 

But it’s important. And it’s hugely important because in this 

world, you know . . . And I heard the minister earlier talking 

about how he was defending the right or the idea, the concept of 

not including people younger than 18 in The Constituency 

Boundaries Act because people move about. Well in fact, young 

people move about, older people move about and so that talks 

about the labour mobility. 

 

So I think this is important. And I know the minister in his 

remarks said that, and I want to quote him, says: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize here that the 

amendments contained in the Bill, along with the 

companion amendments to The Assessment Appraisers 

Regulations relating to qualification requirements, still 

ensure that only the qualified individuals will be able to 

be certified and licensed to assess land for property tax 

purposes. This includes agricultural land valuation. 

 

So it’s still really key. He’s saying that only those folks will be 

able to do that work, and I think this is really key. 

 

It is good to see that the SAAA [Saskatchewan Assessment 

Appraisers’ Association] group were included in this 

development of these amendments. As I went through the 

explanations, explanatory notes, it became clear that they were 

instrumental in this. And I know that any profession, and I 

think their group would be part of this, who want to be 

consulted and actually involved in the development of the 

amendments. 

 

So while there are some that are interesting and, you know, we 

might have a good discussion in committee about, for example, 

I saw one that changed the dates from when the list of the 

members would be from February 1 to January 1. I mean those 

are all interesting things and we’ll probably go through that in 

committee. I know it talks about the definition of the business 

day, so that’s important. And these folks are pretty specific — 

meticulous is a good word — because nothing gets by them. 

And that’s a good thing. It’s quite a piece of work here, and I 

think this is important that we take some time to review this. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And so with that I think that we’ve had a chance — and I know 

a few of my colleagues have had an opportunity to speak to this 

— I think that with this that we are ready to move this to 

committee. I think that I’ve had enough of the comments I 

wanted to raise. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

move Bill No. 19, The Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 

2011 to committee. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 19, The 

Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 19, The Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 

2011 be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 20 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 20 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise in the debate. I can only presume that the 

minister from Regina South is teched up and ready to go, very 

interested in the debate. 

 

But it’s a pleasure to rise tonight on The Planning and 

Development Act, 2007, or the Act to amend it. But again, 

planning, development — all very important subjects, Mr. 

Speaker. Because again, if you get the framework wrong, as is 

cited in the second reading remarks from the current minister: 

 

The framework provides municipalities with clear, 

consistent, and effective tools for land use planning, to 

promote economic growth, environmental stewardship, 

social and cultural development, and co-operative 

partnerships with other municipalities, governments, First 

Nations, Métis entrepreneurs, and interested stakeholders. 

 

All very important things, Mr. Speaker. So I guess one of the 

things we find very interesting is — and certainly that we’ve 

heard back from the sector — is the extensive planning that has 

gone into The Planning and Development Amendment Act. The 

fact that stakeholder consultations have taken place from 2009 

on through 2010 on through 2011, it’s interesting that it’s taken 

that long to get to this place, Mr. Speaker. But we’re glad that it 

could show up for consideration and are hopeful that this does 

in fact improve the planning and development regime in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Although we’ll see how that works 

out, Mr. Speaker, because certainly there are different 

developments in the province that we can’t help but wonder 

what’s gone wrong in some of the planning aspects already in 

place. 

 

But back to the second reading remarks of the speaker, or of the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, from December 14th, again there was a 

fairly extensive stakeholder consultation process cited going 

through the years 2009, 2010, 2011, consultations with 

municipal business community stakeholders. They’re looking 

to improve the transparency of fees, better describe the range of 

eligible items for fees and levies to be collected, the servicing 

arrangements between municipalities, the application of 

architectural controls to development, and the dispute 

resolution for district planning commissions. 

 

They’re also setting out to: 

 

respond to pressures arising from intermunicipal disputes, 

the need to improve the options for intermunicipal 

co-operation, the complexities of decision making in large 

planning districts, and regional infrastructure and 

servicing challenges. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, and I know certainly in the city of 

Regina and district, work that has been done — the sort of 

planning and development aspect of things like the Global 

Transportation Hub or the different sort of vagaries of what has 

happened in the RM [rural municipality] of Edenwold, or the 

way that suburban and exurban regions — the different sort of 

planning and development challenges around those. 

 

I know there’s the mayor of White City in describing one of the 

joint processes that White City and Pilot Butte and others of 

their neighbours had gone through. I believe Mayor Tim 

Sterzer, what he had said at that time was, instead of trying to 

push the elephant, they were going to ride it. Instead of doing 

things in an unorganized, uncooperative fashion, bringing those 

different municipalities and RMs together to do a better job of 

the very kind of things that are outlined in this legislation or in 

this proposed amendment to legislation, I can’t help but wonder 

how that process would have been improved and how it would 

have made the job easier for those folks and whether or not that 

will be the case going forward. 

 

So returning to the consultation process from the government, 

Mr. Speaker, it enumerates municipal governments and 

associations, industry sector groups, agricultural and 

environmental agencies, the heritage sector, planning districts, 

transportation sector, professional associations, and provincial 

ministries. Again that’s a fairly extensive list. 

 

But what we don’t see in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is any 

particular involvement of First Nations. There is certainly the 

involvement of one First Nation cited under WaterWolf in the 

minister’s remarks, but in terms of the specific involvement of 

individual First Nations or, say, trying to engage the lands and 

resource committee of the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] or individual tribal councils or groups — 

individual First Nations such as the Whitecap Dakota First 

Nation and the kind of challenges that they have been having on 

servicing agreements and sort of the exchange of population 

that we know they are having and we know that have been 

mentioned or pointed to by this government — we don’t know 

that those insights have found their way into this legislation and 

again how this impacts different things such as the joint use 

around different industrial projects or mining endeavours. 

We’re very interested to see how those are countenanced in the 

consultations as well and how that involves or doesn’t involve 

First Nations. 

 

I guess the joint partnerships, joint initiatives, inter-municipal 

planning, again these are all fine thing. But the proof’s in the 

pudding, and we will see how these things work in conjunction 

with things like The Cities Act and the current municipalities 

Act, and again whether they strike the balance between 

properly involving community and those who should be 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

involved and at the same time providing relative ease of access 

and navigability for the regulatory regime. 

 

I guess one last thing I’d like to cite, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the way that this provides opportunity for district planning 

authority status, we’ll be interested to see how the district 

planning authorities, or the DPAs — which again are explained 

in the speeches being corporate bodies authorized by their 

member councils to make planning districts on official 

community plans and zoning bylaws, administering the 

planning process and issuing development permit — again 

we’ll be interested to see how this works for providing better 

ease of access and, you know, easing complexity while at the 

same time balancing off community engagement and 

community oversight through the existing terrain as regards 

municipalities, rural municipalities, and on. 

 

So we have a lot of interest in this legislation. We’ll see how it 

actually works to facilitate planning and development in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We’re interested to see that First 

Nations aren’t explicitly mentioned as having been involved in 

this, which we’ll look to get more clarification on that as this 

debate goes on. But I know for a fact that others of my 

colleagues are interested in this debate and I will, at this time, 

in the interest of letting that debate continue and ensuring the 

participation of other of my colleagues in providing oversight, I 

would move to adjourn debate on the Bill No. 20, An Act to 

amend the Planning and Development Act, 2007. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 20, The Planning and Development Amendment Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 21 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 21 — The 

Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill No. 21, An 

Act respecting Commissioners to administer Oaths and making 

consequential amendments to other Acts applies to every single 

member of the legislature because this is the piece of legislation 

that allows for each one of us to be a Commissioner for Oaths 

when required at the constituency office or in other places 

where you’re asked to do that. 

 

I think what’s interesting about this legislation is that it comes 

forward from the Department of Justice after they identified 

some issues. I think last year they took a harder look at the 

legislation itself and realized that it was time to do a complete 

review of the legislation relating to commissioners. And so 

what we have this year is a piece of legislation that tries to 

provide a 21st century perspective on commissioners. And it 

was interesting to note that the first legislation like this was 

from the 1940s, and then this legislation has not really been 

changed very much for just about over 20 years. 

 

And what’s the effect of this? I think the most telling effect will 

be to eliminate different kinds of recording of how the 

commissioner prepares the commission between if you’re in the 

province or if you’re outside of the province. And this follows 

the legislation in a few other provinces. And I think it does 

make sense to have something very straightforward, simple that 

allows for the people who are named to do this work to do it 

without much fuss. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of conditions around 

the appointment of a person to be a Commissioner for Oaths. It 

is interesting that many times the appointment is by virtue of 

the job that you hold. And one of the comments made by the 

minister, which I agree with, is that one thing that that 

facilitates is that people are not able to take the ability to 

commission oaths after they’ve left the job where they’ve had 

that particular right as part of the job. And so this will allow for 

a little more control on the people who are doing this particular 

work. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Now the process for appointment for people who are not in a 

job which whereby they become commissioners directly has 

been simplified. That makes sense as well, Mr. Speaker, 

because this work is relatively straightforward, and it is of 

service to the public to have people available quite widely 

within the community. But there’s also powers for the minister 

or effectively the staff within the Ministry of Justice to revoke 

appointments where there are difficulties. And clearly these 

relate to failing to comply with the Act or being convicted of an 

offence against the Act or misrepresentation or fraud or where a 

person has not told the whole truth when they have applied to 

be a commissioner. 

 

It also adds a discretionary clause which is clause or section 

7(2)(e), where the minister can revoke the appointment if he 

considers it appropriate to do so. So I think that’s probably 

called a whim clause, but primarily it’s to deal with that weird 

circumstance where somebody has done something which 

doesn’t come under any of these other breach clauses but it’s 

very clear that you don’t want that person commissioning oaths 

any more for whatever reason. I’ll leave it to the minister’s 

imagination to figure out which of those clauses or which of 

those kinds of situations you will use that in but it is, I think, an 

appropriate place for discretion. 

 

So the other parts of this legislation set out the people who 

become commissioners by virtue of their office or status, and I 

think that’s the part probably that most people would be curious 

about. And there are some definitions, but effectively the 

people who are commissioners by virtue of their office or status 

are as follows: Provincial Court judges, lawyers, members of 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, officers in the 

Canadian Armed Forces, court officials, police officers, 

government officials, and any other person prescribed in the 

regulations. 

 

And once again there’s some ministerial discretion which 

would clearly be defined in the regulations at some point. And 

so effectively it’s a broad range of people that one would expect 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

to be commissioners with . . . Obviously the key point is that 

you can find these people, and if they’ve commissioned 

something inappropriately, there are methods of discipline in 

each of the kinds of positions that people hold. And the 

importance for that obviously is that we want there to be a 

sense that, if an oath is commissioned, it’s done so 

appropriately. 

 

Now the legislation then goes on further to set out the areas 

where the Premier and cabinet can make regulations, and those 

appear to be all relatively straightforward and effective to 

facilitate the whole system of providing commissioners for the 

community. 

 

After a thorough review of all the legislation, there are a couple 

of pieces of legislation that need to be amended to have those 

pieces of legislation in compliance with this legislation. And 

it’s interesting to note that they are The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act and The Wakamow Valley Authority Act. So I 

have no objections there, and basically agree that that’s entirely 

appropriate to make those amendments. So, Mr. Speaker, when 

I look at this legislation, it’s a 21st century revision of 

legislation which is very useful in the community. It appears to 

have been done in a straightforward manner that deals with all 

of the issues that are of concern. 

 

And I don’t have any further comments here in the legislature 

and will look forward to asking any other questions about any 

other issues that may arise in this legislation. So I would like to 

move this Bill 21 to the committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 21, The Commissioners 

for Oaths Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 22 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 22 — The 

Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 portant modification corrélative à la loi 

intitulée The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill No. 22, The 

Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011, 

effectively amends the bilingual version of this Act or 

introduces that, and also makes some changes to The Evidence 

Act so that it’s in compliance with legislation to recognize that 

we no longer have commissioners who operate in and for 

Saskatchewan and without Saskatchewan. It doesn’t have any 

further consequence than to make those simple changes, but 

does it in both French and English in The Evidence Act. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that this matter can, this Bill No. 

22 can be dealt with without much difficulty when we get to the 

committee. It may be possible that we will have to look at The 

Evidence Act to see what the consequences are in The Evidence 

Act, so that what is done ends up making sure that we’re 

completely modernized in those particular pieces of legislation. 

But I know that when we are in committee that we will be able 

to answer any of the questions or concerns that we have about 

Bill No. 22. So, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that we move this to the 

committee as well. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 22, The Commissioners 

for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 22, The 

Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011 

be referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill shall be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 23 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 23 — The 

Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 

that I rise to speak to the Act to amend The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act from 1993. Obviously this Bill is, or the 

Act is almost 20 years old and I understand that there’s been a 

considerable amount of work put together to come up with this 

particular Bill and the changes to The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act from 1993. 

 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

The minister stated that these amendments were aimed at 

improving workplace health and safety in the province by 

supporting the goal of eliminating all work-related illnesses and 

injuries. The minister indicated in his introductory remarks that 

he wanted to thank the Occupational Health and Safety Council 

and I understand there was a considerable amount of work 

going into that council and a large number of stakeholders, 

business and labour stakeholders who participated in the 

consultations for the changes. 

 

I know that we have done some consultation ourselves with 

stakeholders and I understand that, by and large, the changes 

that are being proposed here are acceptable. There’s some 

exceptions to that and I hope to speak to them in the next little 

while. But to begin with, I think my original plan is to just 

speak to the changes themselves. 

 

So if you look at the Act to amend, Bill No. 23, we could see 

that there are some new definitions and changes to the 

definition clause. So the definition clause — which is always 

found at basically clause 2 of any Act — right now there is a 

clarification that biological substance in the Act also includes 

infectious micro-organisms, which seems to be a good addition 

to that particular clause. There’s a new definition for competent 

which means possessing knowledge, experience, and training to 

perform a specific duty. Sometimes it’s curious as to what 

words get additionally defined in definition sections, and this is 

one of those because it basically states the dictionary definition 

of competent. So I’m not sure why that was necessary in this 

Bill, and there is no explanation for that. The, I guess, 

significant definition changes, the change to compliance 

undertaking — because that is something very new to the Act in 

section 30 which I’ll speak to later — but that is a fairly 

important definitional change and one that will have 

consequences for occupational health and safety committees as 

they go about doing their work in workplaces. 

 

A number of other fairly inconsequential changes — ministries 

replacing department where appropriate, and there’s a new 

phrase, notice of contravention, which has also been added. 

And that is again a somewhat new change or a change of 

approach that we find in this amendment to the original Act. 

For some reason, a new definition of train has been put into the 

Act, that means giving “information and explanation to a 

worker with respect to a particular subject matter and to require 

a practical demonstration that the worker has acquired 

knowledge or skill related to the subject matter”. And then 

again we have an additional definition to the word worker, and 

in particular that is describing a worker as “a prescribed person 

or a member of a prescribed category of persons.” 

 

I spoke to this the other day, Mr. Speaker, where we see a lot of 

meaning and authority in Acts being devolved to the regulation 

section. And that’s a habit — more than a habit I guess — but it 

is of necessity in complicated Acts where we actually move 

work or meaning or interpretation to the regulatory sphere. And 

it is something I will speak about from time to time when it 

comes up because I know it’s a concern to legislators because 

we don’t really know the full impact of the Act until the 

regulations are completed. So this is one of those examples. 

 

[20:45] 

 

Notably a worker does not include an inmate or someone who 

is in a correctional facility. I’m not sure why that’s there and 

why those people aren’t being included in the definition of 

worker. I assume there are other rules and regulations that apply 

to inmates and people in the correctional facilities. 

 

There’s a new subsection added after subsection 2(2), and it’s 

allowing an employer or a contractor to be responsible only if 

they ought reasonably to know. So those are the important 

words in that section, whether they ought reasonably to know 

the provisions that the Act. I’m not sure which contractors 

shouldn’t reasonably know the provisions of the Act, but 

presumably the minister thinks there are certain circumstances 

where there are people, contractors who don’t need to know the 

provisions of the Act. 

 

So that’s pretty much it for the definition section, Mr. Speaker. 

The next clause that’s of interest is clause 3 and it’s actually 

being repealed in total and a new subsection is being added, 

subsection (b). And this clause describes the general duties of 

employers and the new clause is that they are obliged, every 

employer shall, in this case, make a reasonable attempt to 

resolve concerns raised by an occupational health committee. 

 

I think that’s a very good addition to the Bill, that employers 

are responsible to make reasonable attempts to resolve. Because 

too often I think occupational health and safety committees get 

together, they make good suggestions, or they identify serious 

concerns in the workplace, and there’s no obligation on the 

employer to act on it or resolve it. Then it can just be shelved. 

And I think this is an important addition to the Bill is that the 

employer shall make a reasonable attempt to resolve concerns 

raised by an occupational health committee or occupational and 

health safety representative. 

 

An additional clause to the general duties of employers is found 

in clause (f), and that’s also very important. The employers 

shall now ensure that the workers “are trained in all matters that 

are necessary to protect their health, safety and welfare” and 

that “all work at the place of employment is sufficiently and 

competently supervised.” 

 

And the final change in that section is in clause (g) where the 

employer is required to designate an occupational health and 

safety representative for a place of employment, they should 

ensure that all written records of meetings are, that all records 

of meetings are written and that records are kept and readily 

available at the place of employment. 

 

Clause 3.1 is new, and it describes the new duties of 

supervisors. And again, this is a list of things that the 

supervisors are responsible for. As soon as possible, they have 

to ensure that the health and safety of all workers are looked 

after. They have to ensure that workers comply with the Act. 

They ensure, as far as possible, that all workers are not exposed 

to harassment at the place of employment. And again, this ties 

into my earlier comments today about the importance of the 

Human Rights Commission in Saskatchewan for vulnerable 

workers who are exposed to harassment at the place of 

employment. And that is another venue for those workers when 

the supervisor or the employer are not complying with this 

particular clause in the Act. And they need to co-operate and 

comply. So basically, those additions to the Bill are very 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

reasonable and seem to further the work of occupational health 

and safety in the workplace. 

 

There’s a new section, section 6.1, and this is one that is quite 

useful for workplaces where there are multiple employers. And 

the Bill basically here designates that there has to be a prime 

contractor. So in the case where there are multiple employers, 

there has to be one person designated as the prime contractor 

and they are responsible for the occupational health and safety 

at the workplace. 

 

Again there’s another subsection here which describes 

designated activities and, in this case, it means “prescribed 

activities or operations.” So once again that goes back to my 

comment about devolving meaning within the Act to the 

regulatory side. So we’ll have to wait and see what those 

prescribed activities are before we know exactly what 

designated activities means. 

 

A fairly lengthy section, and it goes on to describe the 

responsibilities of the prime contractor who’s been identified 

where there’s more than, there are multiple employers at a 

workplace. And I guess the whole idea of this is that the prime 

contractor, whoever that is, is going to need to coordinate all 

the employers. And I think that is a very wise addition to this 

occupational health and safety Act because there is one person 

responsible and then nobody falls through the cracks. So 

they’re responsible for gathering names of all the individuals 

that are working at the work site. They have to prepare a written 

plan — and the plan has to address how the requirements of this 

clause are being met — and deliver the plan to all employers 

and self-employed persons before they or their workers 

commence working at the work site. So it’s a very good way to 

make sure that all the activity that’s going on at the workplace 

and all the potential occupational health and safety concerns are 

being monitored and supervised by one supervisor — the prime 

contractor in this case. 

 

I think dryness is an occupational health cause in this building. 

I’m not sure. 

 

Next clause is change to clause 8, and the big change here is 

that they’ve removed biological or chemical from the 

description of substance. So it’s a very minor housekeeping 

type of phrase, and I’m not sure why it was there in the first 

place. It makes more sense now to not have that specificity in 

that particular phrase. 

 

Section 9 is also amended and 9(2) is amended by striking out 

“provide all required information” and to say that the employer 

is now responsible to “keep readily available all required 

information and provide . . .” So it’s not only give it to them, 

but keep it available readily. The employer needs to have that 

information in place. 

 

Section sub 7 11(1) is minor housekeeping changes there; same 

with section 12(1) and 12(3). There’s a new section in 12(4), 

and that says that “Nothing in this section is to be interpreted as 

limiting or replacing the duties or requirements imposed on 

employers and workers by this Act or the regulations, including 

any duties related to occupational health committees or . . . 

representatives”. And that is clause 12(4). So there aren’t a lot 

of changes in that subsection other than . . . It’s not limiting 

anything else in the Act. 

 

So it’s 12(4). Just one moment. Oh, that’s 15. Okay. Just trying 

to follow both sides of this document, Mr. Speaker. I’ll get 

there. There we go. 

 

Section 13 has also been amended. And it is a new subsection 

after the end of the original section. And what it does is it gives 

the director now of The Occupational Health and Safety Act the 

authority to order an employer or prime contractor to establish a 

program at a place of employment. So this is something that’s 

new, and I think it would be welcomed by all the people that 

were consulted because if the employer or the prime contractor 

is not in compliance with the Act, then the director can order 

them to come into compliance. And as we know, it’s important 

to have health and safety programs for everyone in the 

workplace, so I think that is a positive addition to the Bill. 

 

Section 14 is now changed. And basically what the change is to 

this particular section is to have . . . The prevention plan has to 

clarify the existing duty or minimize the risk of violence in the 

workplace. This is a difficult part of occupational health and 

safety, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to violent situations in the 

workplace. And we know that sometimes things happen in the 

workplace of a violent nature that are . . . it’s very difficult to 

have foreseen them, and indeed often acts of violence are very 

random and unexpected. But this clause attempts to have at 

least the employer put their mind to the situation when violent 

acts could occur, or in case they have occurred, that there be a 

plan in place to deal with those types of situations when they 

arise again. 

 

So not only is the employer required to have a written policy 

statement, but he is also required to have a prevention plan in 

place to deal with potentially violent situations. As an employer 

I think that can be something very difficult to do because you 

can imagine all sorts of situations where violence can erupt, and 

it would be difficult to have a plan for them all, but I suppose, 

as much as possible, they would have to have a safety plan. I 

guess you could think of something like a bank where robberies 

can be expected. That might be something where an actual plan 

would be more easy to develop. But in terms of random 

violence, I think it is a very difficult clause for employers to 

adequately address simply because of the randomness of the 

violence that can occur. 

 

Subsection 15(4) is really not changed a whole lot, although 

there is a clause here which says you can’t be designated as a 

member of a committee who represents workers unless you’ve 

been elected for that purpose by the workers or appointed in 

accordance with a constitution or bylaws of a trade union. So 

the only change there is that it’s referred to the constitution or 

bylaws, and I think that’s reflective of how some places are 

organized. Often you are organized by bylaws and may not 

have an actual constitution. That is certainly the case with some 

of the non-profit corporations that I’ve been involved with, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There is a new subsection 15.1. This one is a little bit 

controversial, based on what I’ve read and from the response of 

the unions, Mr. Speaker, because what it does is allows the 

director to order new committees. And we do have some 

response from unions, which I have looked at briefly, which 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

indicate that this could undermine the work of the initial 

occupational health and safety committee. So there’s some 

concern there, where the director has the ability to impose a 

subsequent occupational health committee, and I can’t find 

anything in this section that says why or when the director 

would do that. 

 

Indeed section 15.1(1)(a) says that he can add, “an additional 

occupational health committee if, in the opinion of the director, 

the place of employment would be better served by more than 

one committee.” 

 

There’s a lot of vague language there, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not 

sure where the director would exercise that authority because 

it’s definitely only in the opinion of the director whether it 

would be better served. And those are fairly vague words that 

cause me some concern because it’s not sure when the director 

would step in to do that. And if there was a dispute between the 

work of the occupational health committee and the employer, 

the director could step in and overrule the work of the 

occupation health safety. 

 

And this order of course has to be in writing, and the director 

should . . . There is some criteria that the director is directed to 

look at in making that order: the nature of the work performed; 

a request to establish an occupational health committee made 

by an employer, a prime contractor, or worker, or trade union 

representing workers at the place of employment. So again it’s 

not sure when the director, if at the request of an employer was 

to create a second health committee, why that would ever be 

necessary. So I think there are some concerns about that ability 

of the director to act in that manner. So that’s clause 15.1. 

 

The next change to the Act is in section 19. And there’s a new 

clause that’s added at the end of that class section which 

basically, Section 19 deals basically with the duties of the 

committee, so outlines the duties of the occupational health 

committee. And there’s a new subsection that’s saying that the 

employer or the contractor has to ensure that the duties of the 

committee are not diminished by any other committee. So 

there’s no explanation in the minister’s introduction to this Bill 

about the reason for that particular change. I don’t get a sense 

one way or the other if this is detrimental to the work of the 

committee or detrimental in any other way, but it’s not clear to 

me why it’s necessary. 

 

The big, big change, I think for many in terms of this Act, is the 

amendment to sections 30. And what happens in section 30 

originally is that the health officer could serve a notice of 

contravention on a person if they are in the opinion that they’re 

contravening the Act or that the contravention will continue. 

The amendment establishes in legislation a compliance 

undertaking, which is an additional tool for occupational health 

officers to use when they have encountered non-compliance. 

 

[21:00] 

 

The explanatory notes explain this is an agreement entered into 

by the parties to take steps to ensure compliance with the 

legislation in a prescribed manner within a prescribed time 

period. And the way the section is set up, Mr. Speaker, is that 

there’s now a new level or a new ability for the officer to issue 

a compliance undertaking or a notice of contravention. 

Again, I’ve read this through and I know it’s late in the 

evening, but I’m not sure why the two are there and what the 

distinction is. The compliance undertaking requires a signature 

by the person who is not in compliance. So that is one obvious 

distinction. And there’s nothing in here that tells me what 

happens if one’s served or the other, but I think a lot of that is 

its embedded language and I think it requires careful, very 

careful reading. And I know my colleagues will be examining 

this clause in great detail to ensure that we are all in the 

understanding of what it’s intended to read. 

 

Basically the compliance undertaking has the person sign their 

commitment to comply. I think it gives it a little bit more teeth, 

but there’s no direction in the section as to whether the officer 

should issue one or the other. The only guidance and that is 

subsection (4) where: 

 

an occupational health officer should not allow a person to 

enter into a compliance undertaking if a provision in this 

Act requires that a notice of contravention be issued. 

 

So the notice of contravention seems to be a lesser form of 

admonishment, and I think is giving the directors some tools or 

the officers some tools to look at when deciding how to deal 

with contravention in the Act. 

 

Sections 34 and 35 have been repealed and there’s new clauses 

in place. And basically the only changes there are where the 

word “compliance undertaking” is added to the notice of 

contravention. So it gives both, again, both options for the 

committee or the representative. So that’s just some 

consequential amendments really to the additions to section 30. 

 

Then we’re into section 43. And a lot of these now are very 

much housekeeping changes — section 43, 48 — some 

inconsequential changes in section 50.  

 

And then there are some interesting changes to sections 56 and 

56.1 which deal with the appeals to the Court of Queen’s 

Bench. And I guess I should point out to you that section 44 is 

the power of Lieutenant Governor in Council to make 

regulations. There have been a few changes to that. Additional 

powers of the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make 

regulations, and again my concern here is that the prescriptive 

nature of that is allowing lesser scrutiny by this House and 

more activity at the executive level which then requires us, as 

legislators, to go back after the regulations are passed. It is 

difficult to comment on the entire impact of the Bill without 

knowing what the regulations will be. So that’s the regulatory 

clause in clause 44. 

 

And then we’re going on to 56, which is the changes to appeal 

to the Court of Queen’s Bench. And in that case, the new 

changes clarify that only a person directly affected by the 

decision of the adjudicator can appeal to the court. So it limits 

the ability of who can actually make the appeal. It changes also, 

it shortens the time frame for appeal. I am not sure why these 

changes were necessary. It certainly narrows the scope of who 

can appeal in the length of time that they have to make their 

decision. 

 

Sections 56(3), (4), and (5), which are new subclauses in 

section 56, have been added to establish provisions respecting 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

the appeal process. So these are procedural clauses which seem 

to reflect normal procedures in court. 

 

Section 58 is amended. The fines are being increased which is 

always, I think, a consequence of modernization of legislation 

because fines increase accordingly. So those seem to be 

appropriate. And there is a number of other sort of 

consequential changes to the clause. 

 

So at this point I think, Mr. Speaker, going back to the 

minister’s comments about this Bill, the attempts here are to 

improve safety practice standards in all sectors to reduce 

workplace injuries and increase workplace productivity. What I 

see in this Bill is some fairly administrative-type changes. I’ll 

watch with interest to see whether in fact it does improve safety 

practices standards. I guess the idea of notices of contravention 

and the changes to that clause will give directors and officers 

more authority. And I think some of the tightening up of the 

language is certainly going to be helpful for the people involved 

in these occupational health and safety committees. 

 

The addition of the directors’ ability to impose a second 

occupational and health committee, not certain that that’s a 

good thing. And I think we’ll watch carefully to see what the 

impact of that is on the workplace because it’s not clear from 

the comments of the minister why that addition has been made. 

And there are some comments from our research that indicate 

that may be of concern and take away some of the autonomy or 

power, I guess, of the existing occupational health and safety 

committees that are established. 

 

But certainly, I think overall, the reviews and the comments we 

have received on the changes to the Bill are positive. And I 

think, in the interests of time and having my other colleagues 

speak to this Bill, I would just at this point move to adjourn. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 23, The Occupational 

Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 24 — The 

Advocate for Children and Youth Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter tonight into the debate on Bill No. 24, The 

Advocate for Children and Youth Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what this Act basically does — it has a sister Act in Bill No. 25 

which is a Bill regarding the Ombudsman’s office — but what 

this Bill is, it takes the content of the Ombudsman and child 

advocate Act and split it into two pieces, such as Bill No. 24 

and the sister Bill No. 25. As the office of the Children’s 

Advocate was modelled on that of the Ombudsman, the two 

Bills create offices very similar in structure. 

 

So some of the key changes in this legislation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, one of them is actually the modernization around 

language, recognizing not just children but the term youth. And 

children, for those of us are parents, that term child is, I think, 

all-encompassing. I know at the age of 41, you’re always your 

parents’ child. So it’s interesting the messages that language 

say. So it’s not that a young person was excluded from this Act, 

but the feeling was that, say, a 14-year-old didn’t see 

themselves reflected in the word child, so I thought perhaps that 

the services offered weren’t reflective of their needs. 

 

I have learned in my own life and my own experiences that 

language very much is everything. So one of, as I said, one of 

the pieces of this Act is adding the word children and youth, but 

the second piece is using gender-neutral terms, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And there was a time in my life actually when I started 

my career as a reporter in my early 20s where gender-neutral 

language, I thought, oh pshaw, what does that matter whether 

you use him or her? And I really didn’t think it was a big deal, 

and carried that with me — language, what’s the big deal? 

 

But actually it was when I became a mom, and you’ll hear me 

often in this Legislative Assembly talking about my experience 

of being a parent and becoming a mother because it’s very 

much a big part of who I am. And I believe, I’m a legislator, but 

I also am a woman and a mother and it’s a big part of who I am. 

And I was an at-home mom actually when my first daughter 

was born, for several years. And it always, language always 

used to intrigue me, actually used to make me very upset when 

people would say, oh, so what do you do? And I’d say, oh well 

I’m a mom. I’m at home with my kids. And people would say, 

oh so you don’t work. And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

language is everything. Or you refer to mothers and parents 

who work outside of the home as working parents, but the 

reality is whether you are a parent at home with children or a 

parent who is in paid employment, you are a working parent. 

 

So it was at that point in my life where I really started to see 

that first-hand in my own experience that language really does 

matter. And subsequently through my own education taking a 

social work degree, you talk more and more about what 

language means and sort of the embedded cultural meanings 

that language sends and tells us all. Language can send a 

message to all of us about whether you are included or 

excluded. So I think that this particular change is a very good 

one, adding the term youth and as well moving to 

gender-neutral terms. Because language does matter, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

One of the other things that this piece of legislation is doing, it 

adds clear jurisdictional definitions to include the advocate’s 

authority over health agencies and entities. So as the minister 

pointed out in his remarks, so now it more clearly defines the 

advocate’s authority to include regional health authorities, 

health care organizations and affiliates, and the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a very good thing. I think the 

opportunity to have agencies that are publicly funded to ensure 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

that there is a process by which people who are dissatisfied can 

have their voice heard, I think is a very good thing. 

 

Just one thing to note. The one thing that is missing from this 

Act that I believe the Children’s Advocate would have been 

interested in having, is having school boards falling under this 

Act as well. And that is not a piece that’s included in this. And I 

believe, looking at the stats I think in 2010, there were 40 

complaints received specific to the Ministry of Education. So 

that might have been something to consider in this Act as well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

What else does this piece of legislation do? It expands the 

mandate to become involved in advocacy and conduct research 

relating to the rights of children and youth. This obviously is 

the children and youth advocate. A big part of advocacy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is research. How can you possibly advocate 

for something if you’re not doing the research, looking at best 

practices, looking at what’s going on elsewhere in the world 

specifically to the rights of children and youth? So that 

expanded mandate to conduct research relating to the rights of 

children and youth I think is a good, positive step, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And it’s a very complicated area, human rights and the 

rights of children and youth. 

 

I think the other thing this Act does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 

No. 24, The Advocate for Children and Youth Act, it provides 

the opportunity, it gives explicit permission for government 

ministries and agencies to share information voluntarily with 

the advocate to resolve complaints in a non-adversarial and 

timely manner. Well we all know that when you’ve come up 

against a situation that isn’t good — I think most of us will see 

this in our offices, casework when you’re trying to get an issue 

resolved for someone who lives in your constituency — that 

any time someone has a problem with a government agency, 

being able to handle it in a non-adversarial way is probably the 

best way to be able to handle things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

in a timely manner too. There’s nothing worse than feeling like 

you’ve been wronged or that part of the system isn’t working 

and that the problem can’t be addressed in a timely fashion. So 

that is a positive step, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think the other thing that this Act will do, it expands the rights 

for children and youth living in care or custody to be made 

aware of and have access and have privileged communications 

with the advocate. And I’ve never lived in a care home, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but it would be very difficult. I can imagine if 

you are having trouble with the group home, the foster home, or 

the facility that you’re living in and you feel like you have 

nowhere to turn or you’re . . . So I think . . . I’m not sure how 

this will roll out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this looks like, 

ensuring the children and youth have the greatest possible 

access to the advocate. I don’t know what that’s going to look 

like and I’d be interested to see how, as they say, the rubber hits 

the road in a foster home or in a group home, how we make 

sure that the children know that they have recourse for things 

that are happening in their life, real or perceived things that 

they would like to have addressed. So this is positive as well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Like my colleague before me, one of the hazards of this job is 

definitely being a little bit dry, so I might just see if one of my 

colleagues . . . just, sorry. Thank you very much. Thank you. 

Sorry. It’s a hard time of year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s 

incredibly dry in here. And as my colleague before me had said, 

that is definitely one of the hazards of the job — being on your 

feet and speaking and running out of water. 

 

I think one of the things my colleague from Saskatoon Centre 

had pointed out to me, I am the relatively new Social Services 

critic and trying to get a handle on lots of the issues that come 

up. And my colleague had the opportunity, from Saskatoon 

Centre, had served in that position for some time and he had 

pointed out to me that often we’ve got the children’s advocates 

and now it will be the children’s and youth advocates and the 

Ombudsman’s office. But sometimes there seems to be a bit of 

a place where people can fall through, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So you have children and youth going to the children’s 

advocates and you have adults, often individuals, going to the 

Ombudsman, but families who are facing difficulties 

sometimes, they’ll go to the Children’s Advocate and they’ll be 

referred to the Ombudsman, and then the Ombudsman will say, 

well that’s a children’s issue, and they’ll refer you to the 

Children’s Advocate. So I haven’t experienced this yet in my 

time as the Social Services critic, but I know my colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre has seen that on a number of occasions. 

 

And the reality is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s very important 

to talk about children and youth, but the reality is our children 

live in the context of a family. So making sure . . . We don’t 

want anybody ever to fall through the cracks. And we want to 

make sure that everybody has the opportunity to ensure their 

voice and their concerns are heard. So that is one of the things 

that my colleague from Saskatoon Centre has flagged. 

 

Some of the other concerns that . . . In the annual report of 

2008, the child advocate proposed a series of amendments to 

the legislation, and I’ve mentioned a couple of them, but still a 

few of them will remain unresolved. I know this piece of 

legislation does not acknowledge the UN [United Nations] 

Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Children’s 

Advocate, the children’s and youth advocate, after this 

legislation is passed, would prefer this legislation to be 

interpreted and applied with regard to this convention. The 

advocate had also flagged that it does not apply to local school 

boards, which I had mentioned earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and pointed out the 40 complaints in 2010 specific to the 

Ministry of Education. 

 

So this overall, I think, is a good piece of legislation and I know 

both the children’s advocates and the Ombudsman had been 

consulted and were active players in putting this legislation 

together and making sure that the needs of Saskatchewan 

families and individuals were addressed. So this might be a 

good example of fine consultation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 

is something I often speak about in this Chamber as well. So 

this sounds like this piece of work was done in conjunction 

with people who actually know what’s happening on the 

ground. Although there are still a few things, there are still a 

few gaps that I know the current Children’s Advocate and 

previous children’s advocates haven’t seen addressed. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there are other 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

people, my colleagues, who are interested in also speaking to 

Bill No. 24, and so with that I would like to move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 24, The 

Advocate for Children and Youth Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 25 — The 

Ombudsman Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure tonight to enter into the debate on Bill No. 25, An 

Act respecting the Ombudsman, and has just been previously 

raised by my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale. This is the 

sister legislation that goes along with Bill No. 24 regarding the 

Children’s Advocate and how, as legislation evolves, that the 

Children’s Advocate framework was part of the Ombudsman 

legislation, and now we’ve come to a point where we’re 

creating two separate entities: the Ombudsman and the 

Children’s Advocate. And so tonight I’ll just make a few 

comments on the Ombudsman. 

 

And the Ombudsman is an office that we’ve come to appreciate 

in its work ensuring fairness and access to services. And I can 

tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve really come to appreciate the 

good work of the Ombudsman and the staff there and how they 

really have come to mean an awful lot to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the ombudsman, right across the country, is something that 

we saw became the thing for governments to have, particularly 

in the 1970s. And it was interesting that yesterday we talked 

about Allan Blakeney and some of the new initiatives he 

brought forward. And of course the Ombudsman was an office 

that his government created. And it was just a visionary thing 

that moved us forward to the modern era, and I am really glad 

that we have it. And it’s now the opportunity to split it and to 

make some improvements. And I think that’s very worthy of 

some conversation and discourse in this House tonight because 

I think it’s important that we reflect on the Ombudsman as an 

officer of the legislature and how, as one of the five officers . . . 

We have the privacy, the conflict of interest, the Children’s 

Advocate, Chief Electoral Officer, and the Ombudsman, that 

it’s very, very important — and the auditor — very important 

that we take some time and reflect on this. 

 

And I think of some of the things that the auditor or the 

Ombudsman has done in terms of simply solving some issues 

for people in a quiet, matter-of-fact way, either through 

mediation or just asking the ministry to rethink some of its 

ways that it’s done, or perhaps even a simple phone call, and 

things are resolved. Because sometimes we wish that we lived 

in a perfect world and there were no problems and everybody 

understood regulations and policies and procedures all in the 

same way, but they don’t. And sometimes, whether it’s a civil 

servant who’s a little overzealous, reading it quite not the same 

way as maybe its intent or working together to make a solution, 

he’s tackled . . . And I could probably go on for many examples 

tonight but I want to reflect on a couple. 

 

One is of course the overcrowding in prisons. The document 

had talked about the sad state of affairs in Saskatchewan 

prisons a few years ago, that he wrote. And it’s very important 

that people who are marginalized, who have a difficult time, 

and difficult time even articulating their issues because they 

have so many, so many issues that they are dealing with, 

whether it’s addictions or education or just the inability to 

articulate what the problem is . . . And I know, whether that’s 

through anger or frustration, some of us have moments where 

we wish we could say things better. And the Ombudsman can 

add clarity to resolving the issue. And so I really have come to 

appreciate him. 

 

The other one, and we talked a bit . . . I raise this issue around 

one of my issues that face people in my riding quite often — we 

think it’s a minor one — is around identification. And the 

Ombudsman identified how inappropriate it was for SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] to hold back photo ID 

[identification]. They could hold back the driver’s licence if the 

person had tickets or were in arrears in payments to SGI for 

insurance or whatever, but they could not hold back the photo 

ID. If they were . . . If it was being paid for, then the person had 

the right to do that. And that followed a ruling in Alberta. 

 

And that cleared up a lot of issues for many people who have 

come back, come and say, listen, I understand fully I don’t have 

the right to get my driver’s licence because I owe fines, but I 

need my ID. And in society, we do need something as basic as 

that and that shouldn’t be withheld when there are other 

penalties in place. And so the Ombudsman had worked through 

that and had done some very good work, and SGI had accepted 

that. And I think that’s a very, very important idea. 

 

You could probably go through the whole list and, of course, 

the Ombudsman . . . I always enjoy reading the annual report 

that the Ombudsman puts forward because he, I think, sets a 

direction for government, for ministries, for the opposition, for 

the government backbenchers even, to think about where can, 

how can we improve government. What are the big things and 

little things that we can do to make this province a better place 

in terms of delivering services? What are the barriers? What are 

the problems that we have? 

 

And I have as well even raised issues with him in terms of some 

of the concerns I’ve had about government services and he’s 

been very helpful. We wish we could have taken it to another 

level, but he’s been able to help me understand some of the 

challenges that are out there, and until we have somebody 

actually complaining about it, it can’t move forward. I know 

that there is an issue, but there is nobody complaining; then I 

guess everything is okay. And I can’t make somebody 

complain. So what are you going to do? Things must be okay. 

 

So it’s a whole range of issues and I know where there . . . 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

Sometimes Social Services gets under the limelight of the 

Ombudsman, and rightfully so, because they are a vulnerable 

group of people who access services for Social Services and we 

need to make sure that those people have the support to say, 

hey, what about fairness, what about fairness — and that’s 

hugely important. 

 

One of the issues I really have enjoyed about the Ombudsman 

in terms of, and we will talk a little bit about public education, 

but also internal education to government agencies and ones 

around the fair practices office. We see that with workers’ 

comp, that not only is it important that people have an avenue 

or a way to issue, to lodge a complaint about an outcome, but 

sometimes they haven’t been treated fairly or the processes 

haven’t been treated fairly. And we see SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] now has a fair practices office; 

workers’ comp has a fair practices office; many groups are 

looking at that. This is a way to say, has the process been fair 

along the way? No comments about the outcome but about the 

process. And I actually would like to see Social Services 

actually do that. I think that would go a long way in terms of 

aiding with a lot of the issues that come into play. 

 

So I’m excited to see this. I do think that it would have been an 

interesting process if we had an opportunity to have public 

hearings on this because I know when you have the Department 

of Justice bringing this forward — and I think they do good 

work in working with the Ombudsman and clearly they do good 

work — and so you would think two good groups, obviously 

it’s got to be a positive experience. But I think this would have 

been a really interesting opportunity because here we have an 

Act that repeals the old Act and replaces it with a brand new 

one, that this would have been a time to engage the public in 

saying, so what do we think about the Ombudsman here in 

Saskatchewan? I think we’d hear a lot of good things, but I 

think too often this government has not taken the opportunity to 

go forward and solicit from the public. Here we’re rewriting 

significant legislation, and not just tweaking it but doing some 

major changes. And what does the public think? 

 

[21:30] 

 

And I would bet they would probably say a lot of positive 

things, a lot of positive things. But I think it’s always important 

to have that opportunity for the public to say, what about this, 

what about that, and what are the different concerns. And for 

example, my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale highlighted 

the concerns that we’ve had in terms of . . . And we know we 

are going through some tumultuous times over the children in 

care. And there was a major report written by the Children’s 

Advocate a few years ago, broken trust. And I think that the 

issue at that point was we have children who are being looked 

after by the Children’s Advocate, but where were the families? 

Where could the families, the adults, the parents, who was 

helping them? And of course many of them were dealing with 

issues that were not popular in society; many of them dealing 

with addiction issues, abuse, that type of thing. But who was 

their advocate? 

 

And so we talked about a matrix between the advocate and the 

Ombudsman. And sometimes it was strong and sometimes it 

wasn’t so strong. But those people really need . . . They’re like 

anybody else in our province. They have a right to have 

somebody on their side. And regardless of how unpopular some 

of the things they were doing, they still need to have some 

support. And so we raised this with the Ombudsman, and I 

think many ways the issue was addressed. 

 

But I think that it speaks to even in all systems, anything we set 

up, there’s always some room for improvement. And I think 

that it would have been a very interesting opportunity for 

ordinary people to have some input into this legislation. And 

I’m not actually seeing any deficiencies, and I’m glad that it’s 

all there. And so I’m not looking to create more work, but I 

think that when we create that confidence of moving forward, 

it’s a wonderful thing that we can celebrate the passage of these 

two pieces of legislation and knowing that everybody’s had an 

opportunity to have some input. And maybe there wouldn’t be 

very much, but I would have some questions for both the 

advocate and the Ombudsman. Have they selected, have they 

gone out, and how do they measure in the public? How do they 

get at some feedback? How do they know they’re doing a good 

job? And that would be a worthwhile thing to ask, and 

hopefully we’ll be able to have that conversation before we 

pass this legislation. 

 

But I think in many ways this covers it very well and I just want 

to reflect, you know, it goes through . . . There’s six parts to the 

Bill in preliminary matters: part II is the office and appointment 

of the Ombudsman, and that’s straightforward; part III, powers 

and duties, and I think this is the critical piece because it talks 

about powers and duties of Ombudsman from an individual 

point of view, from a citizen’s perspective; special requests to 

review certain matters, we’ve seen that in the legislature. In fact 

I know that in my past career as a cabinet minister some people 

thought some of the things I was doing should’ve been referred 

to the Ombudsman. That was a stormy week in the legislature 

when that happened, but things worked out a different way. 

And referrals to the Ombudsman by the Legislative Assembly. 

Then jurisdiction procedures. I think that’s laid out very well. I 

was reading the refusal to investigate, that section. You know 

we can’t solve every problem and so sometimes there has to be 

some limitations about what we can do and what we can’t do, 

and so that’s important. And then the general section, in repeal 

of the last section, so I think that’s important. 

 

And I think that when we take a look at the powers, I just want 

to take a minute to review the part III, powers and duties. And 

this is really the gist of the matter: what can the Ombudsman 

do? Well he can look at, has the power to investigate any 

“matter of administration affecting any person or body of 

persons in their personal capacity,” a “decision or 

recommendation, including any recommendation made to a 

minister,” and it goes through all those things, that “aggrieves 

or may aggrieve any person” or “any act that was done or 

omitted to be done in or by a ministry . . .” So it’s quite full in 

that, aggrieves or may aggrieve a person. So this is quite well 

set out. And I think this really speaks to the issue of fairness. 

And this is very important that the Ombudsman really makes 

sure that the work of the government is fair for everyone and 

that he has the power or she has the power to look into this. 

 

And that “The Ombudsman may require that a complaint 

pursuant to subsection (3) [it talks about investigations there] be 

in writing” and that also it may try to resolve “any problem 

raised in a complaint through the use of negotiation, 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

conciliation, mediation or other non-adversarial approaches.” 

So that’s a very important step as well, that we’re not talking 

about an oppositional process but one that really speaks to 

using a collegial manner to get to results. And I think this is 

also, and this part is new, I understand: “The Ombudsman may 

become involved in public education for the purpose of 

informing the public about fairness and the powers and duties 

of the Ombudsman.” And I think that’s the critical word, 

fairness. And to all of us, that’s what we try to do. You know, I 

think that it’s key that the legislation speaks to fairness. 

Sometimes, you know, as a teacher we used to get the word 

equity or being treated equal and fair. They’re not necessarily 

the same but I think this is a very important part. 

 

I just want to refer a bit to the minister’s remarks on this. I think 

they’re critical to understanding the purpose of the legislation. 

And he rose in the House to introduce the second reading of 

this. And it talks about the Act applies only if the Ombudsman 

. . . and updates this important legislation in six important ways. 

He adds that it really now talks about, clarifies the 

Ombudsman’s jurisdiction over health care services in this 

province and expands the Ombudsman authority to provide 

public education, particularly on fairness which I just 

referenced just a minute ago. So that’s very important. And I 

know the whole issue around health care is emerging as a 

critical issue that people and policies of this government be 

appropriate and be fair and that it treats everyone in an 

appropriate manner. So this is very, very important. 

 

It goes on to, talks about how it may work with organizations, 

third party organizations. This is very good. It talks about how 

the Ombudsman always had jurisdiction over health care 

services provided by the government but wasn’t necessarily 

clearly stated, and now it will. It clearly defines publicly funded 

health entities, which include regional health authorities, health 

care agencies, affiliates, and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 

So this is, this is very clear that now we can deal with health 

issues in a more full manner. And as I said, the public education 

is a key piece because this is how we move people along in our 

province. And hopefully, you know, in the long run we would 

like to see that there are fewer complaints, fewer issues, but in 

fact if people have a sense of public education, this is a very 

important thing. 

 

The other issue that’s important is that it talks about enhanced 

requirements that will assist individuals in contacting the 

Ombudsman in a private setting. And particularly this is, I 

think, very important, particularly with vulnerable citizens, 

many of whom I have, you know, worked through with my 

office. And I think this is really critical and so this is very, very 

important. 

 

I wanted to talk about this other new, I think this is a newer 

section. This Bill enables the Ombudsman to provide assistance 

in appropriate circumstances to organizations outside the 

Ombudsman’s usual jurisdiction. And the government 

anticipates that municipalities, school boards, self governing 

professions may contract on a fee-for-service basis. And I think 

this is going to be a very good area for the Ombudsman to 

move into. 

 

So I think that was helpful. I know when we’ve contacted the 

Ombudsman and, of course, they’re very positive about this 

prospect of a stand-alone Ombudsman Act. I think that in fact 

he says that he’s pretty excited about it and I think that they 

think that the timing is right in moving this forward with the 

Children’s Advocate office, I think, is very important. 

 

So he talks about the language in the new Bill. It’s been 

updated to include gender neutral language and complies with 

the new legislative drafting conventions, and this is important. 

In the substantive amendments to the Bill are, one, the 

expansion to the definition of agency of government, so that 

can add more clarity around the publicly funded health entity 

and particularly around the new roles, new expectations of 

much more work in the public health area. 

 

It talks about the ability to conduct investigations where 

requested by non-governmental bodies — I’ve just talked about 

that, whether it’s RMs or municipalities — and have the ability 

and authority to conduct investigations under certain 

circumstances when requested by a non-governmental agency. 

And this will be, as he says, a value-added ability to provide 

services with our fairness expertise and complaint handling. 

 

Expansion, and I think this is an important one, expansion of 

privileged communications, privileged communications. The 

Ombudsman in Saskatchewan will now include letters written 

on behalf of persons in custody or confined to an institution. 

These institutions that confine persons will now have to 

establish procedures that permit a restricted complainant to 

communicate with the Ombudsman, and inform the person that 

they have a right to communicate with the Ombudsman. So 

that’s very important. If there’s a concern, the person in the 

institution does not have to worry about retribution because of 

somebody reading letters that probably should have not been 

read. But in fact now they have privileged communication so 

this is really important. 

 

It goes on to talk about the ability to obtain information from 

government agencies on a voluntary basis, and this is important. 

He said actually they have a good track record of co-operation, 

but there was no legislative authority that allowed this process 

to happen, and now it’s recognized through legislation. I think 

that really in many ways this is a great piece of legislation. As 

I’ve said, there’s some things that I wish would have been 

maybe more helpful, but clearly the Bill is before us now, and I 

think this is good. 

 

And we’ve always admired and felt the work of the 

Ombudsman has been really outstanding and has contributed so 

much to the role of government in Saskatchewan. I also think, 

you know, it’s interesting as we go through the debate and we 

think about this decision, this contribution, that contribution. 

His work around the different tribunals and how effective they 

are, comparing the different tribunals of the government, I 

think, has been outstanding work. 

 

But it is time to always to reflect on the legislation and say, is 

this the best legislation we have, or can we do better? And 

clearly the work before us is of that nature that I think that I 

know many more of my colleagues will want to speak to it. But 

I think that on a general level, we’ll have a good discussion 

when the time comes to have it later in the committee. But right 

now, I know many more will want to speak to it on the floor. So 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

No. 25. Thank you. 

 

[21:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 25, The Ombudsman Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 26 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got a 

number of miscellaneous remarks to throw on to the mix on The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011, Bill No. 26 of course. 

 

It’s a bit of a grab bag of course, Mr. Speaker, as you might 

expect from a miscellaneous statutes repeal Act. Again it runs 

the gamut here between The Collective Bargaining Agreement 

Expiry Date Exception Act, The Communications Network 

Corporation Act, The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs 

Act, The Soil Drifting Control Act, The Special Payment 

(Dependent Spouses) Act, and a great number . . . well some 

interesting measures from around the legislative history of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again it’s interesting to rise just in considering the first piece of 

legislation up for repeal, The Collective Bargaining Agreement 

Expiry Date Exception Act. Again I was actually in the House 

when this was passed, Mr. Speaker, the idea at the time being to 

exempt from The Trade Union Act — specifically section 33(3) 

of The Trade Union Act — two collective agreements that had 

been bargained between IPSCO, interprovincial pipe, and the 

United Steelworkers of America, Local 5890, and Shaw Pipe 

Protection Ltd. and the Construction and General Workers’ 

Union, Local 180. And again the effort at that time was to pass 

or to enable collective agreements that were larger than the 

standard three years which was prescribed in the legislation, 

where it had been specifically bargained. 

 

It would seem that that was the exception that proved the rule, 

as the changes in 2008 which were brought forward to The 

Trade Union Act which eliminated the limit on . . . or the 

three-year limit, or the three-year prescription for the length of 

collective agreements and opening it up to longer collective 

agreements. Again the idea, I think, Mr. Speaker, was to have 

something in The Trade Union Act that offered protection or 

provided for a meaningful interval for workers to go back and 

adjust their collective agreements, in accordance with 

negotiations with their employers, to get an agreement that 

better reflected the current circumstance, again three years 

being what had been deemed to be a meaningful period. 

 

I think that’s still pretty much the rule, Mr. Speaker, or I’d be 

interested to see evidence otherwise. It certainly wasn’t touched 

upon in this latest round of remarks from the minister as this 

piece of legislation was introduced. But it’s again, how many 

are sticking around that three-year standard? How many are 

going four years, five years, possibly more? We’ll see where 

we’re at in terms of the latest trends in collective bargaining. 

 

We do know that of course the essential services legislation was 

taken to the Saskatchewan Queen’s court, or was taken to court, 

and that Justice Dennis Ball has ruled that the provisions in Bill 

5, the essential services Act, effectively derogate or effectively 

destroy the ability to collective bargain and the ability of 

working people to withhold their labour in the pursuit of a 

collective bargaining agreement, and that is now being appealed 

up the line by the provincial government. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. When that measure was 

brought forward, of course it was ballyhooed by the then 

minister of Labour as being fair and balanced — of course, fair 

and balanced being the tag line for Bill O’Reilly and Fox News. 

So it’s, I guess, to borrow a phrase, Mr. Speaker, it’s straight 

like a corkscrew, I think would be one way to describe that use 

of fair and balanced. 

 

So The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date 

Exception Act has one part of the changes to labour legislation 

that this government has brought forward. Again we look 

forward to better analysis and a more fulsome discussion of just 

what impact has resulted from changes in 2008, and the way 

that that has rippled forward in collective bargaining as effected 

under the repeal of subsection 33(3) of The Trade Union Act in 

the years since it was passed in 2008. 

 

The next Act repealed by the Bill is The Communications 

Network Corporation Act. As discussed by the minister when 

this was brought forward, the Act that established the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation or SCN, 

carrying on in quotation: 

 

Mr. Speaker, as everyone is aware, SCN was sold to 

Bluepoint Investments Incorporated on June 30th, 2010. 

The corporation was officially dissolved on March 31st, 

2011. Repealing this Act is the last technical step in the 

winding down of SCN as a government-owned 

corporation. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, there’s various of the issues that 

certainly we were concerned about as the official opposition 

at the time of that announcement to sell SCN, which very 

much seemed to be less than well thought out in terms of 

disposing of a government asset but also what that meant in a 

broader sense, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the role that SCN 

[Saskatchewan Communications Network] played in the film 

and video industry in the province of Saskatchewan as well 

as the ability of SCN to tell Saskatchewan stories to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Of course Bluepoint had seemed to be something of an 

expedient stopgap, and that in turn has proven to be less than 

satisfactory and itself being bought out. And what’s happening 

there, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see where it winds up. But the 

educational licence that had been afforded to SCN under the 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

CRTC [Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission] and what happens to that, the role that SCN had 

provided or that it had filled in the provision of distance 

learning, let alone the way that it had served as an anchor 

institution in the film and television industry throughout 

Saskatchewan, those questions are evolving. But we do know 

this, that one of the key sort of tools that we had in terms of 

using public policy to foster and facilitate economic growth, 

and growth and success in the film and television industry, it’s 

the loss of a valuable tool that had a much greater sort of 

multiplier effect in terms of the investment at hand. 

 

And we’ll see — just as that was announced in the budget of 

2010, Mr. Speaker — we’ll see what the budget of 2012 brings 

for other fundamental aspects of the film and television industry 

in Saskatchewan. Will there be a Saskatchewan film 

employment tax credit after this budget? Will they be making 

improvements to the administration of that film employment 

tax credit to better cash flow industries that then in turn use that 

to pay back a multiplier effect into the economy and to attract 

other dollars into the province? Will we see improvements 

made to the competitiveness of that tax credit regime or 

improvements made to the means by which it is processed and 

made more expeditious and more sensitive to the needs of the 

productions? 

 

Or will we see that tax credit and that regime done away with 

altogether by a government that is quite happy to go for photo 

ops with Corner Gas down at the sound stage but has, in a very 

alarming sense, presided over a fairly dramatic diminution of 

the film and television industry in Saskatchewan — which has 

been something of a success and something of a point of pride 

in past, and has been something of an anchor for a lot of 

creative people that bring talents, bring productivity, bring 

innovation to an economy that, you think, would all be things 

that a government would be interested in. We’ll see what comes 

of that. We’ll see what comes of the kind of the Saskatchewan 

sound stage. We’ll see what use is made in an ongoing sense of 

that anchor institution for the film and television industry. 

We’ll see what happens with the Saskatchewan Film and Video 

Development Corporation. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this concerning the legislation that is 

repealing the authorizing legislation for SCN or The 

Communications Network Corporation Act. We’ll see where 

this all winds up. But the past is indeed prologue. There are 

some concerning things that have happened on this front 

previously, and we see a pretty harsh reminder of it in this 

legislation repealing The Communications Network 

Corporation Act. 

 

Other measures being repealed in, or other statutes being 

repealed in the legislation. There’s The On-farm Quality 

Assurance Programs Act being repealed, having come into 

effect in 1998 to provide a way for on-farm food safety 

programs to be recognized in Saskatchewan, having been 

designed to enhance the safety and quality of Saskatchewan 

agricultural products, recognizing producer organizations and 

designated delivery agents that implemented on-farm quality 

assurance programs. Again trying to strike that balance between 

ease of management, ease of administration, while at the same 

time providing quality assurance. And again that had taken 

place before the Canadian Food Inspection Agency agreed to 

having the goal of on-farm food safety or OFFS. So the change 

in the scope of the practice for the CFIA or the Canadian Food 

Inspection Agency and their development of policies and 

protocol for national producer-led OFFS programs, it has 

passed the need for The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs 

Act behind, left it behind, and as such is no longer required. So 

again I’m interested to hear other arguments around that 

particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. But again, if you’re 

surpassed by the federal regime and it’s no longer required, fair 

enough. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I can’t hear a word you’re saying. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I’m being encouraged on by, I think, the 

member from Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A little better. Speak up. 

 

Mr. McCall: — She’s asking me to speak up. Apparently, you 

know, I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, I’ll try to help her out. But 

perhaps we could send an earpiece across to the minister. I’m 

sure all these budgetary meetings have got her hearing tested to 

the max. So we’ll see. Hopefully she’ll be able to keep up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The next statute up for repeal is The Soil Drifting Control Act. 

Again this is definitely an old piece of legislation, having come 

into force in 1941, and having given rural municipalities the 

authority to pass a soil drifting bylaw on receipt of a petition 

signed by at least 40 ratepayers. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, when you think of 1941, you think of 

the institutions like the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act. You 

think about the land management practices at the time that 

exacerbated the dust bowl. It was created by the drought, the 

way that the dirty thirties had left a lasting impact on so many 

lives and minds and certainly in Saskatchewan, the way the 

images are scarred and marked by the Depression and by the 

dirty thirties. 

 

[22:00] 

 

One of those dominant images from that time was the dust that 

would drift and slowly take over farms and represented that 

degradation of livelihoods and lives. And there are some 

terrible images from that time. And if you talk to our seniors, 

the pioneers, Mr. Speaker, certainly they can tell you about the 

way the dust would blow and get into everything . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

Again times have changed somewhat, not just in land use 

practice or land management practice, but the rise to 

prominence of zero till and minimum till and the way that that 

has helped the situation. You think about the different 

hedgerows or windrows that in many, many circumstances date 

back to that time having been planted, that they’re now in full 

effect, Mr. Speaker. Again so many of these things date to the 

dirty thirties. And you know, this is the province of Who Has 

Seen the Wind, and if you’ve seen the wind, Mr. Speaker, you’ll 

know that it can whip that dust up something fierce. 

 

So we’re interested to see that this fairly old piece of legislation 

is being deemed to be outdated and no longer required and that 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

again the producers practise helping out the situation around 

soil conservation and making sure that the land practices are 

keeping up good stewardship and what is the best practice and 

what is helpful as opposed to making the situation worse as we 

saw different events conspire to bring together, most noticeably 

in the dirty thirties. We’re interested to see that end. 

 

We’re particularly interested to see it on a day like today, 

March 13th, Mr. Speaker, where we’ve got a very warm 

temperature. And you know, maybe it’s only in a province like 

Saskatchewan where you could have the, you know, flooding 

one year and then we’ll see what the summer brings to come, 

Mr. Speaker. But certainly we watch with concern as to what’s 

happening around moisture levels and what this summer might 

bring. 

 

And again I think it’s incumbent on us as good Saskatchewan 

people to hope for the best and keep an eye out and plan for the 

worst, Mr. Speaker. But again I think this for me flags just the 

way that mother nature and events can conspire to provide 

some pretty awesome displays of the power of mother nature, 

and we’ll see what, we’ll see what the season will bring. 

 

The final statute being repealed under this Act is The Special 

Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act, having been enacted in 

1999. It provided for an ex gratia payment to widows whose 

workers’ compensation benefit were terminated due to 

remarriage prior to September 1st of 1985. To receive the 

payment, a widow had to apply within a two-year period 

following enactment of the legislation and to then sign a 

waiver. The minister has stated in the remarks, “Given the 

limitation on application of the benefits, there is no further need 

for the legislation. Furthermore, two court challenges to the Act 

have been dismissed.” Again, Mr. Speaker, I’d be interested to 

know if any of the individuals that were affected by this 

legislation are in fact still alive, and if there is any sort of 

accommodation for them under this Act. Perhaps that is 

information that the minister will be able to provide at a 

committee level in consideration of this Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011, 

Bill No. 26, dealing with The Collective Bargaining Agreement 

Expiry Date Exception Act, The Communications Network 

Corporation Act, The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs 

Act, The Soil Drifting Control Act and The Special Payment 

(Dependent Spouses) Act, that these legislation, different 

legislation from again throughout the history of this province 

and interesting sort of points of consideration for the way 

public policy has evolved in this province and different 

historical times, some much less recent and much more 

engaged and evolving, some of them much more firmly in the 

past, but an interesting piece of legislation, notwithstanding. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would move on Bill No. 26, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011, I would move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 27 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure this 

evening to join in on discussion of Bill No. 27, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2011, Mr. Speaker. And the topic of this piece 

of legislation, as the name would suggest for those that are 

following at home, is education and how it operates in the 

province: some of the dates associated with when individuals 

go to school, start the school year; and then additional issues, 

Mr. Speaker, about how school divisions in the province 

function; some of the guidelines as they relate to the province; 

and also additional topics about financing on how education is 

funded and delivered throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, I guess there’s a flow in some of the 

discussions or a bit of continuity between some of the 

discussions in adjourned debates that I’ve had the opportunity 

to speak on today in an earlier speech on the topic of child care. 

And some of the introductory remarks I made on that piece of 

legislation had to do with the huge relevance and importance 

that the provision of child care has in our province. And of 

course, while we as parents and as families want good child 

care for our families and for children, we also want a good 

education system. 

 

We often speak of in this Assembly how education is the basis 

and the foundation for a strong society from a civil society 

perspective. It’s important to have students who are fully 

engaged, know about . . . have a good basis in all of the 

academic fields and have a good understanding of what is their 

civic duty and how they function and operate. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s our hope and our desire as legislators on both sides 

of the House that the educational system achieves the goals and 

prepares our young people to be full participants in society, 

whether it’s from an economic perspective or whether it’s from 

a social perspective or whether it is instilling the values that are 

so important to allow students and individuals to orientate 

themselves throughout the rest of their life. 

 

This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, was introduced by the 

minister in the fall sitting of the legislature, and the minister 

provided her second reading remarks on December 14th, 2011. 

And for individuals or researchers who want to see what 

exactly the minister said in her second reading remarks, they 

can go to Saskatchewan Hansard on page 220, December 14th 

and see for themselves. 

 

So I do thank the minister for the earlier remarks as a means to 

provide some understanding about what she wants to 

accomplish through the proposed amendments in this 

legislation. And I would also thank the ministry officials who 

played a role in crafting the remarks and providing some clarity 

for individuals as, Mr. Speaker, the second reading speech is an 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

important speech in this legislative process because it does 

provide an opportunity for the minister to clearly articulate and 

clearly state what is the purpose of the legislation that he or she 

brings forward, how it will affect the province and why the 

minister thinks the piece of legislation is a positive thing. We 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that it is in fact a positive thing with some 

pieces. And I would say most pieces of legislation that is 

brought forward in this Assembly, it is of a positive nature. 

Many of the changes are agreed to by both, by members on 

both sides of the House. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, from time to time, and with members 

opposite it actually happens quite frequently, there are some 

significant problems with the pieces of legislation that they are 

bringing forward. And the problems can be of a variety of 

types. Sometimes it’s an oversight and, Mr. Speaker, oversights 

happen. People are human. Mistakes happen. I can understand 

how oversights can occur. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, though, the 

intent in the legislation is not what is clearly stated in the 

minister’s second reading speech. And it’s in those instances 

when I have some concerns because when there are 

consequences that are different from what’s clearly articulated 

in the second reading speech, and if those consequences are 

intended, that’s a problem. If they’re unintended consequences, 

that’s also a problem and may indicate that the minister has not 

clearly thought out what in fact he or she is proposing. 

 

So when we look at The Education Amendment Act, it addresses 

and touches on a number of different topics. Some have been 

discussed fairly widely in the province, either through election 

campaigns or through related topics of discussion, and some of 

the topics that the minister identifies in this second reading 

speech and that is proposed in Bill No. 27 are less discussed. 

And this can be for a few reasons. One, they haven’t been in the 

public eye in a way that a lot of people are paying attention or 

would think that they should care right off the bat. And 

sometimes, Mr. Speaker, the changes that are proposed are of a 

more housekeeping routine business nature and aren’t that 

controversial. And that is fine. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, looking at Bill 27, there are a number of 

components to this legislation. And I would say the different 

components have fit into different categories that I just 

identified, some being routine and more of a housekeeping 

nature, and others being of more significance and perhaps a bit 

more controversial or at least a bit more deserving of debate 

and examination. 

 

The first topic, Mr. Speaker, addresses the changes that 

members opposite promised with respect to the start of the 

school year. It was clear, Mr. Speaker, through the election 

process that members opposite want the school year to start 

after Labour Day, and for this to be consistent throughout the 

province. And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this legislation is 

doing. It’s saying that the start of the school date will be after 

Labour Day and it maintains that the school year would be 200 

days or less. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, in reading the piece of legislation, 

actually reading the legislation and then also looking at the 

minister’s remarks, I got a bit of a kick out of the minister’s 

closing few sentences. And it says: 

 

It will also allow us to go to our education partners — 

teachers, schools, and boards — to start the conversation 

on important topics like holidays, vacation, length of the 

school day, and variations in the length of the school 

year. I am pleased to move therefore that Bill No. 27 . . . 

[and so on.] 

 

The figure of speech and the expression here “to start the 

conversation,” it sounds so kind and sounds so well-intended. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it does stand out at me because when it 

comes to the issue of education, I wouldn’t say consultation and 

I wouldn’t say proper discussion with individuals has in fact 

been the preferred approach by members opposite. And it’s 

within a government’s prerogative to make changes like this. 

That’s understandable, but it is important to have the proper 

discussions. 

 

[22:15] 

 

And I couldn’t help but think back to a different piece of 

legislation that we were discussing in adjourned debates. I 

forget the actual title, but it had to do with the planning and 

development of municipalities and cities. It was changes that 

were being made with respect to how municipalities are able to 

charge or provide a fee to developers. And what there was, it 

was reported in the minister’s remarks that there was a 

discussion about whether or not, whether or not it would be 

appropriate to allow municipalities to put a fee on developers to 

help pay for some of the local infrastructure that’s required with 

new zoning and development. And the legislation or the 

minister’s remarks said that well, there was disagreement. 

There wasn’t agreement on this change, and therefore we’re 

just parking it for now and maybe some other day we’ll look at 

it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that kind of discussion and that kind of 

consultation isn’t what we see in the area of education, or it 

hasn’t been to date if we look at the actions that members 

opposite have taken over the course of their last term and more 

recently as well. 

 

So the first section of this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, it 

does talk about the start of the school year and it makes the 

changes. It’s taking out a number of sections of the Act and I 

believe moving some aspects into regulations. But it’s been 

talked about, Mr. Speaker. Different organizations in the 

province have said whether or not they agree with it. Some 

people have been happy; some people not as happy. And it’s 

pretty consistent with what members opposite have been talking 

about. So no real surprises there, I would say. So that’s the one 

section in the initial part of the proposed changes through the 

amendment Act. 

 

There are, however, some additional changes which I will now 

move on to. There’s another section, as identified in the 

minister’s remarks and as obviously stated in the proposed 

legislation, that talks about a number of different areas. The 

minister identifies three areas that are involved. 

 

The one area, Mr. Speaker, has to do with — this is more what 

appears to me, at least at first glance — more of a housekeeping 

nature and that’s repealing some obsolete provisions and 

making some changes with respect to different groups that 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2012 

meet. And one example is given is the education council which 

the minister in her remarks says has been dormant for some 

time, so it’s removing that. There’s also another change that 

involves the merger of the teacher’s certification and the 

certification board into one. And the rationale that the minister 

provided as to why this was a good thing is that there was 

considerable overlap, and therefore it’s appropriate to move it 

into one board, one organization or body. If, Mr. Speaker, there 

is in fact overlap, if there is a bit of redundancy there, it does of 

course make sense to do such a change. And that’s why I say 

this is more of a housekeeping nature. 

 

There is, however . . . Oh, another housekeeping aspect has to 

do with the Copyright Act and ensuring that the school boards 

are in compliance and agreement with federal legislation, the 

federal copyright Act. And that of course is a routine type of 

business. It’s important that our school divisions are following 

the letter of the law. And I don’t imagine there’s much 

controversy around that, at least according to my reading and 

understanding of it. 

 

So in this second section after addressing the issue of the start 

of the school year, there is one section here that is talking about 

repealing obsolete provisions and some other changes based on 

efficiency and based on some common sense. I hope that is the 

case. As I’ve said before, I hope the members opposite say that 

is what they are doing, that it is in fact the case. Most of the 

time, often it is in fact the case, but from time to time we see 

some actions opposite that don’t exactly match up with what 

they said they wanted to do. 

 

Now another component, Mr. Speaker, of this next section has 

to do with educational funding. And this component is 

important, I think, Mr. Speaker. And it is the result of changes 

that members opposite chose to make with the provincial tax 

system, again changes that they were entitled to make and that 

they made. And, Mr. Speaker, this is the ramifications or the 

necessary outcome of some of those changes. 

 

The one has to do with the tabling of documents in the 

legislature. This is an important point, though, that I would 

emphasize to those that are listening because it signifies a 

change with respect to the funding of education in the province. 

With the removal of the ability of local school boards to tax and 

collect revenue, the provincial government now controls all the 

purse strings for education. And it has — as is stated in other 

legislation — because of that reality of the province providing 

all the funding for education, it’s now necessary for school 

divisions to table financial reports in the legislature. So it’s a 

recognition here — this is important — it’s a recognition that 

the province holds the purse string, and it’s up to the province 

to fund education. And consequently there needs to be the 

appropriate oversight, the appropriate examination of financial 

records because the resources are coming from the province. 

 

I think it’s an important issue. And it’s important to highlight to 

individuals that the provincial government is fully responsible 

for the funding of education. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, as 

members opposite know, I often present a petition for my 

constituents who live in the neighbourhood of Hampton Village 

and Dundonald about the need for a new school because it’s up 

to members opposite to provide that new school. I think that is 

an important thing to point out. It’s also important, Mr. 

Speaker, when looking at the issue of funding, to touch on what 

sort of implications that has for school divisions and for boards. 

Since the province is now the body that delivers the cheques 

and determines what the cheques will be, this has affected the 

autonomy and this has affected the ability of school boards to 

do many of their duties and to do many of the jobs that they 

have traditionally done. And as I said, members opposite are 

within their right, of course, to change the way the taxation 

occurs. Governments can do that. 

 

But it’s important for them to be upfront and open and honest 

and clear with Saskatchewan people about what that means for 

different bodies, and one here would be school boards and 

school divisions. I am told, Mr. Speaker, in some discussions 

now that if there’s any sort of decision that a school board 

makes that has financial implications, that now needs to be 

approved by the ministry. 

 

So there’s areas of activity that school boards once did, and no 

longer do they have the ability to simply make decisions based 

on their expertise and based on their knowledge. The one 

example that I’ve been told of by a number of different school 

boards, Mr. Speaker, had to do with something simple like 

moving portables. Most people, I think, would assume that it’s 

within a school board’s expertise and experience and the role 

that they have traditionally done, that school boards do things 

like determine where portables should be moved in different 

buildings. That’s the kind of responsiveness that school boards 

need to be able to do as attendance levels will change. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in order for school boards to make those 

types of decisions, if they want to move portables, they need to 

get approval from the ministry. And that is . . . I’ve been told 

that by different school boards. If that’s not the case, the 

members opposite can correct me on that, but that’s what I’ve 

heard straight from school board trustees and officials about 

how it operates. I think it also, Mr. Speaker, is appropriate to 

emphasize and show how that can be, how the members 

opposite can meddle or influence or have a role in decisions 

that school boards make that aren’t necessarily in the public’s 

best interest, that aren’t necessarily constructive. 

 

The one example I would talk about, and it comes to mind, is 

also on the issue of relocatables or portable classrooms. The 

current Minister of Finance and former Ed minister is pleased 

that I use the term relocatables as opposed to portables. But I 

think most members at home understood what I was talking 

about. But the point being here, Mr. Speaker, ministry officials, 

ministry officials were very firm with school divisions that if 

they wanted new relocatables or portable classrooms, that they 

were supposed to get them, Mr. Speaker, through a provider in 

Swift Current. And the price, Mr. Speaker, and the associated 

logistics with transferring these relocatable, portable classrooms 

from Swift Current to different school divisions further north, 

Mr. Speaker, simply didn’t make sense to a lot of school 

divisions. And it didn’t make sense because of the logistic 

problems with moving them from Swift Current to different 

communities. That was one problem. But beyond that, Mr. 

Speaker, it didn’t make sense to them because it was a lot more 

expensive than them doing them in-house by themselves, the 

type of work that they have always done. 

 

So you can understand, Mr. Speaker, how some divisions 



March 13, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

would have a bit of a problem when the type of work that 

they’ve normally done like determining where relocatables go, 

how many they need, and how they want to build them and at 

what expense, when the ministry is now telling them — as what 

has occurred here in the province — that they needed to go to 

Swift Current to buy these relocatables and then transport them 

further north a considerable distance, and then, Mr. Speaker, 

actually pay more than if they just built them on their own, 

based on their own expertise. You can see why more than a 

school division said, no thanks; we’ll do our own. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, they were promoting portable classrooms 

from Swift Current to be moved hundreds of kilometres north, 

that’s a very good question, one that we’ve talked about here in 

the Assembly. And perhaps members opposite want to 

comment on that as well; I don’t know. But to me, Mr. Speaker, 

it doesn’t make sense. It proves the point though, Mr. Speaker, 

that while there are changes here, while there’s changes in the 

legislation that may appear to be one thing, there are 

implications. And there’s implications for our school divisions 

and there’s implications for members’ ability opposite to get 

their fingers into things and to be doing things that aren’t in the 

public’s best interest, such as promoting the purchase of 

portables from Swift Current instead of allowing school 

divisions to simply build their own portables at a lower cost. It 

doesn’t make much sense. 

 

The third point, Mr. Speaker, in this following section that the 

minister identifies, has to do with the change in rules to do with 

funding. And what this is doing, Mr. Speaker, is changing some 

of the rules for school divisions as to how they would finance 

projects. It’s interesting. In the remarks here by the minister, it 

talks about an investment in infrastructure and all these projects 

on the go. It’s interesting though. 

 

The one project of the many that are listed is the new school in 

Willowgrove. And off the top of my head — I don’t have the 

news release in front of me — I think that was announced in 

2010. Is that correct — 2010, was Willowgrove announced? 

Somewhere around then? It was approved, Mr. Speaker, in 

principle and there was some initial funding provided for the 

planning. 

 

The last report I had, and maybe it’s changed in the last few 

weeks, is that the plans for Willowgrove — it’s now 2012 — 

the plans for Willowgrove have not been approved and funding 

has not flowed for the construction of the Willowgrove school 

even though it was announced in 2010. So I think it’s also 

important for members opposite to be totally clear with what 

has occurred here, and it causes me great concerns for 

communities like mine in Hampton Village to see when in fact 

some of these changes will occur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes here in . . . Well the minister here is 

accusing the Saskatoon public school of sitting on it. That was 

the direct words that the minister said. And we’ll see if 

Saskatoon public schools agrees that they’re sitting on 

Willowgrove, and whether or not the holdup is on the ministry 

side of things or whether the holdup is on the public school 

division. To me, Mr. Speaker, I think public trustees are pretty 

aware of what the needs are in Willowgrove and want to move 

the project along, I would assume. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, here is on the third component 

identified in the minister’s remarks. This has to do with the 

ability that they are providing in here for school boards to go to 

financial institutions to receive money to provide their share. 

With the change, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite made, 

with school boards no longer setting the mill rate and collecting 

taxes, that would make changes. As I’ve already covered, it 

meant that resources had to come from the province, solely 

from the province. With what I see here occurring, Mr. 

Speaker, in this third portion here, is a shift and a change and a 

desire in members opposite. And I’ve had different colleagues 

on our side have talked to this issue and raised some concerns. 

And it has to do with, our concern has to do with transparency 

of members opposite in being completely upfront with issues 

like borrowing, with issues like debt, and clearly stating what 

the true cost and implications are for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as I stated earlier on with the school divisions 

now having to table their reports here in the legislature, the 

schools boards having to indicate, have their books audited, and 

the reports coming to the legislature, it’s pretty clear, Mr. 

Speaker, that when it comes to issues of debt, when it comes to 

issues of the expenditures in divisions, it’s within the public’s 

interest to have a full and complete picture of what are the debt 

loads in the different areas. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, some of the concerns that we’ve raised 

around this issue is how the expenses associated with this 

approach may in fact be greater than other alternatives available 

to the government. It would not be wise, Mr. Speaker, if there 

were options available to the government to allow for 

borrowing at a lower level for school divisions and not, and not, 

Mr. Speaker, to be upfront with Saskatchewan people about 

what are the true implications for the province. Is my hope, it is 

my true hope, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of adjournment, 

this House stands adjourned to 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 511 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 511 

 Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 511 

 Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 513 

 Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 516 

 Bill No. 19 — The Assessment Appraisers Amendment Act, 2011 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 519 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 521 

 Bill No. 20 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 521 

 Bill No. 21 — The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 522 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 523 

 Bill No. 22 — The Commissioners for Oaths Consequential Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 2011 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 523 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 523 

 Bill No. 23 — The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 523 

 Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 527 

 Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 529 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 532 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 534 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


