




















































Hansard: March 29, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 24A  THURSDAY, MARCH 29, 2012, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 875 

 March 29, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I am excited 

to introduce two of the four school groups that are here today, 

two from Regina Douglas Park. First of all, a group of 23 grade 

7 and 8’s from St. Augustine School in Regina. Just a sidebar 

with that one, I attended grade 1 at St. Augustine School in 

1951, Mr. Speaker. I’ll let the students do the math. And 24 

grade 7 and 8 students from Regina Douglas Park School, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The students are here today to participate in the initiative of a 

day at the legislature, the Legislative Building, Mr. Speaker, as 

part of the 100th anniversary celebrations of this great building. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, although it’s a celebration and an 

anniversary, it’s more than that for our students. It’s an 

opportunity to experience the curriculum first-hand. It’s a living 

curriculum. I applaud the initiative, and I welcome all of our 

students. And I ask all of the members of the Assembly to 

welcome the students, their teachers, and chaperones to their 

Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may make one more introduction while I’m on 

the floor. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize and introduce Ms. 

Gwen Jacobson to the Assembly, a former colleague of mine 

and good friend who was instrumental in the formation of this 

program with her colleagues at the Capital Commission. So 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly, Gwen. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I am pleased to join in with introductions here 

today as it relates to the 100th year anniversary project for 

students here today. And I’m so pleased to welcome that bright 

group of students that are sitting right up here, Mr. Speaker, and 

this group of grade 8’s are from St. Joan of Arc in Regina 

Rosemont. It’s my pleasure to have these students join us here 

today. I’d like to also introduce their teachers, Ms. Kenny and 

Ms. Fischer. 

 

It’s a pleasure to have the students and the teachers here today 

for the proceedings, for the activity, for the interactions. I know 

there’s opportunities to ask questions to members here today, 

and I look forward to our meeting here today at 2 o’clock. So I 

ask all members of this Assembly to welcome these bright 

students, these teachers and to be gracious with them and to 

answer their questions throughout the day for this very 

important project here today — an important celebration of the 

100th year anniversary of our Legislative Assembly. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I too have a school group that I’d like to introduce to 

you and through you to the rest of the members, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re from Balgonie, and I believe they’re in the east gallery 

sitting up there. They are also in for a day in the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, honouring the 100th anniversary of 

this magnificent building. 

 

I believe they are going to be spending most of the day here, 

and I look forward to meeting with them at 2 o’clock, Mr. 

Speaker, where hopefully I can answer maybe more questions 

than I answered on the floor earlier in the day. So I’d like all 

members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members, I would like to welcome a group of 

individuals seated in your gallery. And this is a group of 

seniors, Mr. Speaker, who have some concerns about issues in 

the province and work very hard on behalf of seniors 

throughout the year.  

 

These are representatives from the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Union Retirees, representatives from the Saskatchewan Seniors 

Association, as well as representatives from the Saskatchewan 

Seniors Mechanism. So I would thank them for the work that 

they’ve done throughout their working careers in the province 

and the work that they continue to do. And I ask all members to 

join me in welcoming them to the Legislative Assembly. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the legislature today, I’d like to 

introduce 14 students from the Eastend School, comprised of 

grade 11 and 12 participants this year. We have with them 

teachers, Marie Hanson and Shelley Morvik, and the fellow 

driving the bus is Terry Pommier from Shaunavon. 

 

I want to acknowledge the fact that this is the 100th anniversary 

of this tremendous building. And I don’t know if they’re here 

specifically for that program, but this group of students come to 

the legislature virtually every year or every other year. And the 

teachers have been very faithful in making this pilgrimage. If 

they got up this morning, they were up very early. I see 

somebody nodding. That 395 kilometres from Eastend to this 

building is a long trip first thing in the morning. So I would ask 

all members to make them very warmly welcomed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and to all members in this Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 

welcome folks in the galleries here today who are with the film 

and television industry or work in the industry. They’re here for 

the proceedings, to see question period and to watch the budget 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

vote which will have a very negative impact on their careers. 

These are folks who contribute to our economy and enhance 

our quality of life. And they should be supported by their 

government and not told that they don’t contribute enough. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome everybody 

from the film and television industry who are impacted by this 

decision around the tax credit to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, along with my colleague from the opposition, I would 

like to welcome especially Holly Schick who is with the 

Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism. She’s worked very hard to 

ensure that we’re always brought up to date on issues that are of 

concern to seniors. I’ve had the opportunity to attend 

conferences and work closely with the Saskatchewan Seniors 

Mechanism. So we appreciate all of the members here that are 

attending to observe the Legislative Assembly today. So thank 

you very much and welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to introduce a guest to this House: Aaron Nagy from 

Yorkton. And he’s sitting in the west gallery, if you could give 

a wave there, Aaron. Aaron is the driving force behind Jimmy’s 

law, Bill 601. It was his friend, Jimmy Ray Wiebe, who was 

shot last June. And he’s worked very hard on this Bill. He’s 

done a lot of work online getting thousands of signatures and 

really been pushing this to make sure people who work 

late-night hours are safe every night. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member from Saskatoon in welcoming Aaron Nagy to 

this Assembly, a long-time resident of Yorkton. I’ve known 

him and his family for many, many years. He’s well-known in 

the radio industry in Yorkton. And many wouldn’t know, he’s a 

newlywed and welcomed his lovely bride back to our city, 

brought her from Manitoba. So I’d like all members to join me 

in welcoming Aaron to his Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. But we know, Mr. Speaker, that from positive 

statistics that show that convenience store and gas station 

robberies are down by one-third since 1999 largely due to 

increased safety practices including two people working 

together on late-night shifts. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Moose Jaw and Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions from people from across Saskatchewan 

as it relates to the management and accounting of our finances. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m standing today to 

present a petition calling on the Sask Party government to 

support the seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights, which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 



March 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to present a petition in support of the reinstatement of the 

film employment tax credit. The petition mentions the reality 

that the film employment credit is in fact money in rather than 

money out for our province, the reality that this industry has 

leveraged every dollar in the province to turn around and bring 

$6 into the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan continue to 

provide a tax incentive for film, video, and television 

employment to leverage investment, employment, and 

growth in the province’s film, video, and television sector. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Regina and Humboldt 

and complements an online petition that was presented 

yesterday in part, actually more than 7,000 signatures to the 

minister’s assistant yesterday. And that petition is still growing 

strong, going strong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that, I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with traditional resource users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Saskatoon Contacts 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to recognize this year’s Saskatchewan Midget AAA 

Hockey League championships, the Saskatoon Contacts. 

 

The Contacts claimed the provincial title against the Prince 

Albert Mintos with a 2 to 1 victory at Schroh Arena last 

weekend. They finished at the top of the standings in the 

regular season and have appeared in the SMAAAHL 

[Saskatchewan Midget AAA Hockey League] provincial 

championship final the last three seasons. 

 

The team is in Virden, Manitoba today to play in the Telus Cup 

western regionals which are being held March 29th to April 1st. 

The winner will represent the west region at the 2012 Telus 

Cup in Leduc, Alberta. The top two teams face off in the 

championship game Sunday at 1 p.m. 

 

I must admit, though, Mr. Speaker, I have a personal bias in my 

enthusiastic support for the Contacts — that would be my 

brother Marc is the head coach and my nephew Rourke plays 

on the team. But I think it’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatoon Riversdale produces some fine hockey players, to 

which my constituents, the proud grandparents of players 

Dawson Leedahl and Rylan Parenteau, would also attest. 

 

The Contacts also draw inspiration from another one of their 

leaders, Jim McIntyre. The former head coach and current 

governor of the team recently had open-heart surgery. He won’t 

be attending games until he recovers. He was involved in one 

way or the other with the Contacts for over 30 years. They want 

to win it for Mr. Mac, says Head Coach Chartier. 

 

I ask all members to join me in recognizing the players, 

coaches, fans, and volunteers for the 2012 Saskatchewan 

Midget AAA Hockey League championship, the Saskatoon 

Contacts, and to wish them all well this weekend. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 

 

Provincial Budget 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

week we introduced the 2012-13 provincial budget and, Mr. 

Speaker, it is the only balanced budget in Canada. This budget 

makes important investments in Saskatchewan’s future and our 

province is becoming the envy of our neighbours to the east. 

Tom Brodbeck of the Winnipeg Sun said, and I quote: 

 

. . . our Prairie cousins to the immediate west are teaching 

us a hard lesson in Economics 101. 

 

Saskatchewan Finance Minister Ken Krawetz tabled a 

balanced budget this week at a time when many provinces 

are complaining about how hard it is to stay in the black 

these days. 

 

Not in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we are balancing our budget and ensuring a 

sustainable future, the NDP [New Democratic Party] continue 

to cling to their election platform with its promised spending 

increases of more than $5 billon. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to commend the opposition Finance critic for attempting to 

distance himself from this platform earlier, but it’s a shame he 

was forced to recant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall the people of this province soundly 

rejected the NDP platform. They voted instead for a responsible 

approach. Mr. Speaker, we can clearly see that our provincial 

budget is sustainable, the only balanced budget in our country. 

Mr. Speaker, we are keeping the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

Saskatoon Young Women’s Christian Association 

Celebrates 100 Years 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this past year was full of celebration at the YWCA 

[Young Women’s Christian Association] Saskatoon as they 

mark their 100th year of service in the Saskatoon community. 

 

From a one-room cottage in the early 1900s to a facility today 

that serves in excess of 8,000 clients annually, they have grown 

and prospered. Donors, employees, and volunteers have been 

the backbone of the YWCA for 100 years. The past century 

have been marked with challenges, excitement, and 

opportunities. As they enter their second century, they are full 

of optimism and have launched a number of exciting new 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the YWCA continues to provide important 

programming for girls and women in Saskatoon, including 

economic literacy programs, girls’ education programs, and the 

YWCA encore, an eight-week breast cancer recovery program 

described by one of the participants as: 

 

. . . [bringing] together a group of women with diverse 

stories who grew and healed a little [bit] every Tuesday 

afternoon. What the doctors and health specialists didn’t 

tell us, we learned together and shared together at encore. 

 

This is just one example of the YWCA’s commitment to 

women, children, and families in our community. Many more 

stories and examples can be found in a publication from the 

anniversary committee that summarizes the past 100 years, an 

excellent tribute to the hard work and dedication that have 

grown the YWCA, without which hundreds of thousands of 

lives would be very different today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in celebrating 

the YWCA Saskatoon 100th year of service. And I hope many 

will continue to support the great work they do in our 

community. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Provincial Senior Men’s Hockey Champions 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you may wonder why there 

hasn’t been much mention about hockey these days. Well I can 

tell you why. First up we’ll talk about the provincial senior 

men’s D hockey champions, the Kenaston Blizzards. Secondly 

the provincial senior men’s C champions are the Davidson 

Cyclones. And thirdly the provincial senior men’s B champions 

are the Drake Canucks. Well you may wonder what they all 

have in common. Well they’re all located in the constituency of 

champions, Arm River-Watrous. And the only reason we 

couldn’t sweep the senior men’s A championship is because we 

don’t yet have a town large enough. But given the budgets 

we’ve passed and the growth in Arm River-Watrous, we’ll soon 

have a team that I believe can sweep all four provincial titles. 

 

And also I’d like to mention, Davidson won their league. 

Kenaston Blizzards are also in their league final against 

Rosetown, which I fully expect them to win. And also the 

Davidson Huskies peewees also captured their title in the 

Moose Jaw minor tier III league. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me congratulating these 

teams and their victories and being provincial champions. And I 

want to remind everyone, when it comes to hockey, Arm 

River-Watrous rules. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Gairdner Wightman Award 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate an alumnus of 

the University of Saskatchewan, Dr. Lorne Babiuk, on 

receiving the Gairdner Wightman Award for research and 

medical science, specifically for his many years of dedicated 

work in vaccine development. 

 

Dr. Babiuk has an impressive academic background including 

having received three degrees from the University of 

Saskatchewan. He has spent much of his professional life at the 

university, having joined the faculty there in 1973. In 2007 Dr. 

Babiuk joined the University of Alberta. In addition to his 

duties as a researcher and supervisor of Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] candidates at both the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] and the U of A [University of Alberta], he is a 

professor in the school of public health and the Faculty of 

Medicine and Dentistry at the University of Alberta. 

 

Dr. Babiuk was a key figure in the development of the Vaccine 

and Infectious Disease Organization, commonly known as 

VIDO, in Saskatoon. VIDO has grown from an organization of 

just a few individuals to one that now has 170 researchers. 

Since officially opening in September, 2011, VIDO has 

developed seven vaccines, five of which are world firsts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to once again join me in 

congratulating Dr. Babiuk on receiving this prestigious award 

and to thank him for his innovative work in the field of medical 

science. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Fraud Prevention Month 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this 

House to announce that March is Fraud Prevention Month in 

Saskatchewan. Fraud is a concern for 93 per cent of 

Saskatchewan residents, according to statistics gathered by a 

TD Canada Trust poll. 

 

There were many groups working together throughout this 

month to promote education and improve fraud enforcement. 

These initiatives of these groups was to focus on educating 

citizens regarding fraudulent activities and are occurring with 

increased regularity, and test the fraud prevention knowledge of 

Canadian citizens. It is encouraging to note that Saskatchewan 

residents use more care when conducting financial transactions 

and controlling their financial accounts compared to the 

national average. 

 

Financial institutions use sophisticated monitoring and 



March 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

detection tools and work in close contact with law enforcement 

to minimize fraud. However there is always room for more 

improvement. Some citizens will send their credit card numbers 

over an email or tell others their PIN [personal identification 

number] numbers, and some even carry their PIN number in 

their wallet. Criminals love these types of slip-ups, allowing 

them to clean out bank accounts of run up credit card charges. 

 

I would like to thank these groups and take this opportunity to 

thank all the organizations working in our province to minimize 

the negative effects of fraud. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Saskatchewan Surgical Initiative 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to bring 

your attention to our government’s commitment to improving 

access to surgery. Timely surgical care is a high priority for our 

government. Our goal is to provide sooner, safer, smarter 

surgical care for patients. By 2014 we all want Saskatchewan 

patients to be able to have their surgery within three months and 

have a better experience through their surgical journey. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our provincial budget is investing 60.5 million 

this year in the Saskatchewan surgical initiative over and above 

the health region’s base funding. It will help them do 4,380 

surgeries this year. That’s 8,000 surgeries or 10 per cent more 

than in 2009-10, the year before the surgical initiative began. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are optimistic that we can reach our ambitious 

wait time goals. In the past few years, the number of longest 

waiting patients has shrunk dramatically. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

since 2007 the number of patients waiting over 18 months is 

down 90 per cent. The number waiting over 12 months is down 

79 per cent. I am proud to say the provincial wait-list is at its 

lowest level since 2004. Mr. Speaker, we’re excited about that 

and confident we’re gaining momentum. I thank our partners in 

the health regions who are making their great progress possible 

and helping us put patients first. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Seniors 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you want to assess 

the priorities of a government, you can look at its budget. And 

in this budget, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that seniors are not a 

priority. Seniors are being asked to pay a lot more in this 

budget. Prescription drug costs for seniors are going up 

considerably, Mr. Speaker. Ambulance trips for seniors are 

going up. Hygienic supplies for seniors living in long-term care 

facilities are going up, Mr. Speaker. On so many fronts, seniors 

are being asked to pay more. 

 

The Sask Party has no problem asking seniors to pay millions 

more, but then at the same time they turn around, Mr. Speaker, 

and they’re happy to spend millions on more politicians in the 

province. This does not sit well with the seniors that are here 

today. It does not sit well with the seniors that I’ve spoken to in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the minister: how can he explain the 

contradiction that he’s asking seniors to pay more, Mr. Speaker, 

claiming poverty for seniors’ programs, but then can turn 

around and spend millions more on politicians? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite’s question and the premise of his question is wrong. 

We’ve been through the piece on the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly], and he’s completely wrong on his 

assertion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the senior drug plan, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

answered earlier, it was a very tough decision. We looked at 

this program. We wanted to make sure it was sustainable well 

into the future. And, Mr. Speaker, the fee had not been 

increased for five years. It was 16 years of NDP government 

that did nothing for seniors, and on the 11th hour, just before 

the 2007 election, they brought this program in. We thought it 

was a good program. It’s well received. We want to make it 

sustainable, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’ve increased the 

deductible from 15 to 20. Even having said that, Mr. Speaker, 

we pay almost 70 per cent, we subsidize almost 70 per cent of 

drug costs for seniors. Mr. Speaker, the program is worth $97 

million to our Ministry of Health. We want to see this program 

continue because we know it’s well received. 

 

On the piece around the ambulance fee, Mr. Speaker, for 20 

years that fee hadn’t been increased. It’s been increased from 

250 to 275. Again a tough decision, but programs that aren’t 

adjusted, Mr. Speaker, soon have to be cut if those adjustments 

aren’t made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about tough 

decisions. Well the decision facing the minister is either 

providing program support for seniors, as identified in my 

earlier question, or spending more, spending millions on 

politicians in the province. That is not a difficult decision, Mr. 

Speaker. That is a no-brainer. And the priority should be with 

the seniors of Saskatchewan. 

 

I spoke with one couple, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon. They 

informed me that they have a number of health challenges as a 

couple. They’re seniors. They said that for their household it 

means that the changes to the drug plan will mean that they pay 

over $1,100 more per year. And many seniors are on multiple 

prescriptions, in the province. I welcome changes to the senior 

income plan, Mr. Speaker, but the problem is for most seniors 

that’s being eaten up by a higher cost of living and now more 

expensive prescription drugs. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, has millions for politicians, 

millions for their own self-interest, Mr. Speaker, while making 

seniors in this province pay more. That’s simply not correct. 

My question to the minister: when he made this decision to 

increase the drug plan cost for seniors and the other costs as 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

well, did he speak with seniors and let them know? Did he hear 

from them how this would impact their quality of life here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say that there have 

been a number of changes over the last four and a half years 

from the previous NDP government, starting with the senior 

income program, Mr. Speaker, that was implemented under the 

NDP and then not adjusted for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. In the 

first few years of our government, Mr. Speaker, we were able to 

double the senior income program, Mr. Speaker. In the 

upcoming years we’re almost going to triple the senior income 

program, Mr. Speaker. In the last four years, Mr. Speaker, in 

the last four years, Mr. Speaker, the single senior who has an 

income of about $25,000 has seen their income tax drop from 

$1,000 down to 300. That’s a saving of over $700 a year, Mr. 

Speaker, under this government. Never would have seen under 

the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have talked to seniors about this program. They 

love the program and they want to make sure it’s sustainable, 

Mr. Speaker. Under those NDP, it never would have been. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is this minister, it is this 

government that is taking more from seniors in Saskatchewan. 

It is this minister, it is this government that is asking seniors to 

pay millions more in the province of Saskatchewan under his 

watch. Last week, Mr. Speaker, I referenced a recent piece in 

the Canadian Medical Association Journal that highlighted that 

access to prescriptions has already been affected in Canada by 

cost. We know, Mr. Speaker, with the cost of prescription drugs 

for seniors going up 33 per cent, that this will have an effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for ambulance trips in the province, seniors will 

be asked to pay more in order for the government to save 

$675,000. For long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, seniors 

living in long-term care facilities are being asked to pay for 

hygienic supplies in order to save $854,000. Yet at the same 

time, Mr. Speaker, they’ve got millions more for more 

politicians here in the province. 

 

How does this sit with the minister? I know it does not sit well 

with Saskatchewan seniors. My question to the minister: how 

can he be willing to spend millions more on politicians here in 

the province, something that no one in Saskatchewan wants, 

and at the same time ask Saskatchewan seniors to pay more? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Let’s be very clear, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, for 16 years under the NDP government, they did 

nothing to subsidize senior drug costs until just before an 

election that they thought they were going to lose — they did 

lose, Mr. Speaker — and finally they started to cover them. 

We’re going to make sure that program is sustainable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue about $20 a month for senior care 

homes, Mr. Speaker, most health regions in this province 

already charge that. Guess when that charge came in, Mr. 

Speaker? Those charges came in under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

The vast majority of seniors already pay that charge. What 

we’re doing is equalizing it across the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure if he ever got a chance to govern 

again, he’d roll all that back. Oh, I’m sure he would, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they implemented it; we’re equalizing it, 

Mr. Speaker. I know it’s not the easiest for certain seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, but there are seniors that will actually see their costs 

decrease. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unbelievable that this minister 

would say this decision is about fairness. The decision facing 

members opposite is this: they can spend millions more on 

politicians in the province or they can help seniors in a way that 

it is needed through an affordable prescription drug plan. That 

is the decision that members opposite are making. This is not 

about fairness. Well it is about fairness in the big issue, Mr. 

Speaker, and members opposite should do what is really fair 

and not be adding more politicians to the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re asking seniors to pay more for prescription 

drugs. They’re asking seniors to pay more for ambulance trips. 

They’re asking seniors to pay more for hygienic products in 

long-term care facilities. But they’re happy, Mr. Speaker, to 

turn around and spend millions more on politicians. Seniors, 

Mr. Speaker, do not agree with this. Saskatchewan people do 

not agree with this. My question to the minister: will he go over 

to the Premier today and tell him that their priorities are all 

mixed up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you the priorities 

of this government. The priorities of this government are 

reducing the surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker — the lowest 

number of people waiting for surgery since records were kept 

starting in 2004. That’s a priority of this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you the other priority of this government. 

Since 2007 we’ve seen an increase in cancer funding to the 

Cancer Agency by 76 per cent, reducing wait times. That’s a 

priority of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you the priority of that government. They 

would tear up crop insurance contracts, Mr. Speaker, like they 

did in the ’80s. He already said he’d take money from 

agriculture to support whatever other programs he wanted to 

do. He’d rip up revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, from 

municipalities. 

 

That’s the priorities of this government. We follow our 

commitments. We continue to follow our commitments, Mr. 

Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan kind of like it. 

 



March 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for the Film Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In last year’s debate 

about the budget less than a year ago, the minister was proud to 

take a different course than New Brunswick who had just 

cancelled its own tax credit for the film industry. The minister 

said: 

 

The funding here has not been cancelled, Mr. Speaker. It 

has been maintained and [it] has been increased. They’re 

[SMPIA — Saskatchewan Motion Picture Industry 

Association] happy about that and we’re pleased to see 

their reaction. 

 

To the minister: why this extreme change of heart? Why did the 

Sask Party do a one-eighty on the film and television industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

We welcome the member’s question, and we certainly welcome 

members from Saskatchewan’s film community to their 

legislature today. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, a number of people have said they 

wanted to hear the Winnipeg Sun quote again, so we’ll start 

with an abbreviated excerpt of that. You will remember the 

headline says, “Sask. kicking our butts with budget.” And 

here’s the text: 

 

In Manitoba the NDP government has plunged taxpayers 

into a deep, structural deficit with no end in sight to the 

red ink our elected officials have us swimming in . . . So 

why are they doing so much better in Saskatchewan . . . 

The Saskatchewan government has maintained a level of 

discipline in its spending even during relatively good 

economic times. 

 

“Even during relatively good economic times,” Mr. Speaker. 

The article makes an important point. The best way to keep 

Saskatchewan’s finances strong and avoid the debt and deficit 

problems other provinces are facing is to deliver balanced 

budgets. That’s exactly what we’re doing, and we believe 

we’ve made the right choice for Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a foolish 

week of spin and rhetoric from the Sask Party, but the Premier 

has an opportunity to put that behind him. With the budget vote 

today, it’s the last chance he has to do the right thing. After 

seeing the negative impact of this decision, New Brunswick 

restored its film tax credit. And this wouldn’t be the first 

Saskatchewan premier to admit he got something wrong in a 

budget. And you know, that’s okay. We’re all human. This is 

about being a leader and acknowledging that you’ve made a 

mistake that impacts thousands of people and has incredible 

negative impact on the province. 

To the Premier: will the Premier step up, do the right thing, and 

reverse this decision on the tax credit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

NewsTalk radio’s John Gormley, well known to the Leader of 

the Opposition, has found an interesting counterpoint in the 

film employment tax credit discussion. He quotes filmmaker 

Gavin Polone, famous for the movie Zombieland, as follows: 

 

I’ve received funding from the federal government of 

Canada; the provinces of Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba; the 

states of Georgia, Louisiana, New York, and California; 

and New York city. I believe these subsidies, both in the 

US and abroad, need to stop. They’re bad economics. I’m 

not against the credits because I’m a filmmaker. I’m 

against them because I’m a taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think he’s right. That’s why we’re moving 

away from the old model of direct grants that reward companies 

whether they pay income tax in Saskatchewan or not, and it’s 

why we’re working with the film industry to find creative 

alternatives within our balanced budget framework. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Protection for Night Shift Workers 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last night 

I, along with Aaron Nagy, toured Moose Jaw to see the level of 

protection offered to late-night shift employees, and we’ll be 

continuing this tour out this spring. Now we’ve heard from the 

minister that we’re going to have a meeting on this, and this is 

very welcome news indeed. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, other provinces have brought several safety 

precautions, through law, requiring that workers cannot be 

alone during late-night, early-morning hours. And if they are 

required to work, there must be protective barriers such as 

locked doors and protective glass. Last night we saw some of 

these protections. But other locations, it’s still hit-and-miss in 

terms of safety. 

 

To the minister: would he agree that through legislating one or 

more of these safety precautions, we can better protect our 

workers here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

thank the member opposite for the question. I know it’s 

something that he feels very passionately about and I think it’s 

a concern that’s shared by all members of the legislature. To the 

family of Jimmy Ray Wiebe and his friends and supporters, 

we’d like to thank them and commend them for the hard work 

that they’ve done in raising awareness of this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise the Assembly that the folks at OH & 

S [occupational health and safety] are doing some work and 

some research to determine what best practices are. We 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

appreciate that the motion being brought by the members 

opposite would require workers to be doubled up at late-night 

shifts is something that is not viable or particularly beneficial. 

We had an incident in Kyle a number of years ago where there 

were two workers in a convenience store. Both were shot and 

killed. 

 

There are a number of other options that may be better: 

lighting, minimum amounts of cash, protective barriers, locking 

systems, appropriate security systems. Those are the type of 

things that OH & S is looking at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

indeed the Kyle murders was indeed a tragic situation. But very 

positive stats show that convenience store and gas station 

robberies are down by a third since 1999, largely due to 

increased safety practices including two people working 

together. And last night, people who we talked to said it’s the 

simplest answer or the best answer. However, armed robberies 

such as the ones that took place in Regina in January and in my 

own riding just earlier this month show that we still need to do 

more work. We must work to ensure that night shift workers are 

properly protected. 

 

To the minister: would he agree that we must do more to ensure 

greater safety for retail workers who work late-night hours? Has 

this government done enough? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the death of any worker in 

any of our workplaces in the province is something that’s 

simply unacceptable, especially when the person is a young 

person. The fact that this took place is something that is just 

simply not acceptable in our province and it’s something that 

this government takes very seriously. 

 

The people at OH & S are working, trying to develop protocols 

and something they would recommend for best practices and 

best procedures. We will review those to determine whether 

those should be enshrined in legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I thinks it’s fair to say that we would not 

want to see the death of this young man be in vain, and I’m sure 

that’s not what his family and friends would want to see 

happen. They have raised something that is a legitimate concern 

and is a legitimate concern for all of us. We take it seriously, 

Mr. Speaker, and we will work with them and have ongoing 

consultations and do what is absolutely right to ensure the 

safety and security of people that are working in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciate the answer. And I just want to recap that we’ve been 

doing a lot of work on this issue on behalf of Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe’s family and his advocates because of that tragic death 

during a robbery while he was at work. 

 

His friends have proposed the idea of Jimmy’s law, which 

would protect late-night gas and retail workers by ensuring that 

workers work in pairs or some kind of protection, i.e., the 

barrier. And this does seem to be a common sense solution. So I 

want to ask the minister: can he make a commitment today that 

we will have something before the House before the end of the 

session? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member 

opposite and the members of the Assembly that people at OH & 

S are working on this. They take it seriously as well. The fact 

that this tragic death occurred is something that is simply not 

acceptable. They want to have something in place as soon as 

possible and as soon as practical. 

 

They are going through a review process comparing what’s 

taken place in other jurisdictions. I understand, Mr. Speaker, 

that some other jurisdictions have introduced this type of 

legislation and then backed away from it because (a) it wasn’t 

workable and (b) it was an expense that ended up having the 

effect of closing late-night convenience stores, gasoline 

stations. We want to have what is the best practice that affords 

the most safety, and we will do it as expeditiously as we can, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, budgets are only as strong 

as their foundations, and a strong foundation requires cautious 

and common sense resource revenue projections. This budget 

rests on what looks like an overly optimistic estimate, once 

again, on potash revenues jumping to $705 million, an increase 

of 55 per cent or in fact $250 million more than last year. 

 

It was only three years ago, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

was wildly off on their estimates and sent the budget of the 

government off the rails, Mr. Speaker. How did the government 

arrive at this year’s potash revenue projection? What is it based 

on, and how is it responsible? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the budget that we’ve presented, I think, is a very 

unique budget in that we have seen already five provincial 

budgets tabled. We’re going to see a federal budget tabled this 

afternoon that has already indicated that it will be a deficit 

budget. And, Mr. Speaker, our expectations in some discussions 

with the remaining provinces is that this budget will be the only 

balanced budget in all of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know over the last week we’ve had a lot of 

discussions about where $11.2 billion should be spent, whether 

there are priorities in one area or whether there are priorities in 

another area. Same thing, Mr. Speaker, the member’s 

comments about the potash industry. Clearly we rely on input 

from the industry. We rely on that information to project what 

we believe will be a great outcome for the province of 



March 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this minister speaks about 

a budgetary balance, and it’s nonsense, Mr. Speaker. Not only 

is the government putting the budget at risk with overly 

optimistic potash revenue projections; it’s cheating the balance 

sheet by conveniently punting almost $100 million of public 

debt onto the books of universities. Universities are going to 

have to borrow more at higher interest rates than the 

government can source financing at. It simply doesn’t make 

sense. This is not only a wasteful approach but it costs students 

in tuition fee increases and program cuts. 

 

Has the minister committed to covering both principal and 

interest? And can he explain how this wasteful, high-interest 

arrangement is in the best interest of the public and not just a 

blatant attempt to cheat his balance sheet? 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to caution the member to choose 

his words much more carefully than he has been. I recognize 

the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s clarify some of 

the information that is in this budget, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I 

want the people of the province of Saskatchewan to understand 

that we present a very unique situation where we present a 

General Revenue Fund budget and we present the summary 

financial budget, Mr. Speaker. Every bit of information that the 

auditor has talked about in terms of a summary financial 

statement is contained in this document, Mr. Speaker. Every 

number’s contained in this document. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member talks about potash. Isn’t it interesting 

now that he talks about, oh, maybe the potash numbers are out a 

little bit. Mr. Speaker, just last week we have now had our sale 

to China of 500 000 tonnes, Mr. Speaker, with an option on an 

additional 200 000 tonnes at a price, Mr. Speaker, that is greater 

than the price that is projected in this budget. Mr. Speaker, let 

the member get his facts so he can respond to the people of 

Saskatchewan in an accurate fashion. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s one sale, just one 

sale. 

 

The government’s decision to eliminate the film tax credit and 

try to sell it as savings to the province is nothing more than 

spin. The fact is this program has no budgetary impact and its 

impact on this alleged budgetary balance is presenting a phoney 

choice to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

By cutting the film tax credit, it’s impacting an industry that 

drives investment in Saskatchewan, that impacts our economy, 

that drives activity in restaurants and lumberyards, in hotels, 

and certainly generates millions of dollars back into our 

economy. Why has this minister chosen to destroy an industry, 

the young families it provides work for, and all of the benefits 

in millions it generates in our province? Be straight; it has 

nothing to do with the phoney budgetary balance. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, you know, this document 

as well as the estimates are looked at by the Provincial Auditor. 

They have been for years, even when the NDP was in power, 

Mr. Speaker. And we present that information for everyone to 

see. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. The member talks 

about the potash industry. We have had $12 billion worth of 

investment in the potash industry by the existing players, never 

mind all of the other companies that are coming into this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We are seeing the benefits of that 

because of the royalty structure that the NDP put in place that 

allows those companies to use that initial investment as a 

writeoff, Mr. Speaker. And then we’re going to project that 

there indeed is going to be more revenue. 

 

Isn’t it interesting, Mr. Speaker? The member opposite 

wouldn’t say, oh well these numbers must be a little fake 

because the oil industry is projecting $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker, 

$1.6 billion from the oil industry that that member says, oh no, 

well that’s not accurate because this can’t be happening in 

Saskatchewan. Well under the NDP, it didn’t happen. It is now 

happening in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government 

has off-loaded hundreds of millions of dollars onto the backs of 

Saskatchewan people. We’ve got a government failed to stand 

up for Saskatchewan people. 

 

On one matter that’s so significant, closing the Aboriginal 

education gap, we can see it as one of our greatest challenges 

but also one of our greatest opportunities. The benefits are in 

the billions. Well-respected U of S economist Eric Howe 

reports that Saskatchewan could reap $90 billion in benefits 

through savings in health, justice, and social services and 

another $80 billion in economic growth by closing the 

Aboriginal education outcome gap. Yet there’s nothing in the 

budget of this government. And the federal underfunding of 

Aboriginal education is simply unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal budget is coming down this afternoon, 

coming down today. What is the budgetary number we are 

expecting from the federal government to close this gap? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, clearly the member 

opposite is going to have to wait for the federal budget. I don’t 

know what that number will be. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk 

about what has happened in this province since we have 

become government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the advances that have been made in 

health care, the fact that we are now spending $60 million on 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

the surgical wait-list initiative to ensure that people aren’t 

waiting for, in fact, years like they used to under the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that education is critical in this province, 

both in the advanced education side and the K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] side. That is why we have invested 

literally hundreds of millions of dollars more than what the 

NDP did. Mr. Speaker, it has translated into great things. We 

know when we look at year over year, there are 5,900 more 

Aboriginal people working in the province of Saskatchewan 

because of skills training and the advancements, Mr. Speaker. 

There are 38 school projects under way, Mr. Speaker, to meet 

the challenges of ensuring that we replace the deficit 

infrastructure of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more to do, but I’m excited about the 

future of Saskatchewan, unlike the NDP who want to go 

backwards. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly, I’d like to introduce two ladies up in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Theresa Maximnuk is a young lady 

that just started in my office up there, and we look forward to 

working with her into the future. 

 

The other lady I’d like to acknowledge today, and I think 

everybody knows, is Deanne Marshall who, when I started as 

Ag minister, walked in the office at the same time pretty well as 

I did and has been there for the last four and a half years. And 

on behalf of the government and myself, I would like to thank 

her for all the good work she’s done on behalf of the ag 

industry that’s made many calls through our office. And to 

Deanne, I want to thank her on behalf of them. And tomorrow 

is her last day in our office. She’s moving on to a different job 

tomorrow, so we just want to wish her well and thank her for all 

the good work she’s done for us. Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this afternoon to speak to the 2012-2013 budget. And I 

would like to start by saying that budgets are about choices. 

They’re about choosing those things which are important to the 

community. We know we have $11.2 billion that’s being spent 

on behalf of the community and some choices have been made. 

Unfortunately a number of those choices impact people in the 

province in ways that send signals about the future of the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, we are in a situation in our 

province where 28 per cent of the revenue that is being spent 

each year comes from non-renewable resource revenue. 

 

So in this particular budget, on page 37 in the summary, it says 

that the revenue is forecast at 3.1 billion, an increase of 387.2 

million. And that increase is the amount that we’ve just been 

hearing about as that relates to potash estimates. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the more fundamental question comes about 

the long-term future of this province. If you continue to build 

and do what you do on resource revenue that’s one-time money, 

it flows through your system, and you make choices about how 

you do that. So, Mr. Speaker, we end up having to recognize 

that that is what happens in our province. 

 

Now I raise that question because it appears that there have 

been a number of provisions which further facilitate the use of 

the non-renewable resources of the province — effectively 

mining products, you know, drilling for oil, exporting oil, all 

those kinds of things — which then are exported. And we know 

that Saskatchewan is the biggest exporter in Canada. But what 

we also recognize is that, for the long-term future of our 

province, we need to look at the provisions in this budget that 

relate to people; that relate to the long-term success of our 

young people and our middle-aged people and our senior 

people. Because that’s where the future of this province lies — 

it’s in what happens to the people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m raising this point because there are a 

couple of areas that have caused a great deal of concern. The 

first area relates to the North of Saskatchewan and First Nations 

and Métis people. But let’s just talk a little bit about the North. 

 

So we know that this budget cuts the northern economic 

development fund by 30 per cent. We know that it cuts the 

northern industry and resource development by 9 per cent. The 

treaty land entitlement fund’s cut. The First Nations and Métis 

Consultation Participation Fund’s cut. Métis Development 

Fund is cut. And the list goes on. 

 

We know that in previous budgets they eliminated the 

Aboriginal employment development program, and it’s been a 

long, slow process to get something to replace that. I raise this 

because we have very high unemployment with First Nations 

and Métis people within the province, and that particular 

resource has been identified by Eric Howe as an advantage we 

have in Saskatchewan relating to our people. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I think that this budget fails to recognize that valuable resource. 

 



March 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

Also, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the decisions around the 

film employment tax credit, we know that this relates to a 

young, vibrant industry which is attracting dollars to our 

province from all over the world. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

think that the Premier totally understood what was being done 

here, and I don’t think there was a proper choice made. There is 

a chance for the Premier to change this decision and fix this 

particular problem. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it relates once again to supporting young, 

very, very entrepreneurial people who are, many of them, in 

small business, who spend money right across the whole 

economy. Small towns like this. The cities like it. Hotel 

industry, the lumber industry, transportation for sure, all of the 

food industry — they all appreciate the kind of activities there. 

So that’s the economic side of that. But the more important side 

is the vision part, the long-term part of what telling our stories 

in a very direct and very professional way does for the feeling 

about this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk a lot about how 

proud we all are of this province, and I think it . . . [inaudible] 

. . . them. And I just heard the Finance minister say this, that the 

people on this side are not proud of this province. I don’t think 

that anybody accepts that. And I think it’s a very inappropriate 

thing to say even in the heat of an argument, because what 

we’re all here for is to build the long-term future of this 

province. And when we go and attack the cultural industries, 

when we attack those industries which are supporting our vision 

of ourselves — they’re kind of like mirrors that reflect back to 

us who we are — then we’re attacking each other. We’re 

attacking our family and our friends. 

 

I think there’s quite an interesting story from the Second World 

War. And I’ve specifically chosen this story because I’ve heard 

the Premier over the last two months quote Winston Churchill 

on a number of occasions. But there’s a story during the Second 

World War when Winston Churchill was prime minister. And 

they needed money, obviously, for this very expensive war. So 

the finance minister came to him and said, well one area that we 

could cut is the support for arts. And Churchill’s immediate 

response was, then what are we fighting for? 

 

[11:00] 

 

That’s a fundamental question here. If you’re spending this 

much money in Saskatchewan, building the future, and then 

you go and attack those things which make it a good place to 

live, a good place to do business, a good place to raise your 

family, why do you go and attack those things which we’re all 

proud of? 

 

And I defy anybody in this room to say that they haven’t talked 

or explained Corner Gas and the humour in that place or, you 

know, Little Mosque on the Prairie, or even some of the really 

kind of crazy, wild other movies that come out of 

Saskatchewan. Because no matter what the story is, whether it’s 

Hard Core Logo or whether it’s other places, you end up 

reflecting who we are and where we come from. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this budget goes and makes a direct attack on 

that particular issue. And it’s really frustrating because that 

attack was not part of their campaign. In fact if you look at the 

2011 campaign document, the platform from that party, this is 

something that they have right in there as something they’re 

going to support. So why would you then go and wreck it, 

which is I think the only way to describe it, just a few months 

later? So it doesn’t make any sense. 

 

And another thing that they didn’t announce in their platform 

was adding three more politicians, which we know over the 

long term and in the short term is going to cost a lot of money. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think they made some bad choices on what 

they’ve done in that particular area. 

 

And what’s especially frustrating related to the film industry is 

that we have students working on undergraduate and graduate 

programs in the area of arts and filmmaking and all of the 

related aspects. We have people who’ve studied various aspects 

of the kinds of technical support you need for the film industry 

at all of our post-secondary institutions. And these people were 

counting on getting a job in what is a vibrant Saskatchewan 

industry, and that has been damaged. And I’m very surprised 

when I see the Minister of Advanced Education or the Minister 

of Culture defending their decision, when I deep down know 

that they know it’s wrong. And they know it’s wrong, but 

they’re not doing anything about it. 

 

So I say on that particular issue alone, it sends a signal to the 

whole community about where this government has gotten off 

track. And what I also would say, Mr. Speaker, is that they’ve 

made some choices around some of the attacks on seniors that 

are also difficult to understand. And they’re symbols of some of 

these choices. 

 

Now what we have been asking about since the election — and 

even in the election but now — is, well, there’s a boom in 

Saskatchewan, but not everybody is feeling it. In fact I think 

there’s a fair number of people are saying, well if everything’s 

so good, why are these things happening to us? 

 

But the seniors especially are being caught in a squeeze. And 

what we know when you make some choices around increasing 

the drug costs, you have ended up going after a certain segment 

of people who are on fixed income. And I think that there’s 

another example of some choices that have been made, that 

have not necessarily been thought through. I don’t think there’s 

been a whole lot of consultation in that particular area. 

 

Now any budget that is built includes resources and revenues 

for all kinds of good things. And that’s why we’re here in this 

legislature. And sometimes people wonder at why the 

opposition focuses in on some points in a budget that provides 

money for roads and schools and all of the health care needs 

and things that are there. Well part of why we will end up 

focusing on some very specific things is because we know how 

budgets are made. And we look at some of the choices that this 

government has made, and we think maybe that they need to 

reconsider what they’ve done. There’s no great folly in having 

the Minister of Finance recommend to the cabinet and to the 

caucus, well maybe we should amend this budget before we 

finally pass it, and figure out how we can fix some of these 

things. 

 

Now another aspect of the budget which is disconcerting for 

many within the civil service — but I think, more importantly, 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

many within all of the third-party agencies that are part of our 

province — is that there appear to be a number of difficult 

decisions that have been pushed out from government to school 

boards, to health regions, and to municipalities even, where 

decisions have to be made that are going to effectively be cuts. 

 

And those kinds of cuts are even more insidious, more difficult 

because, for example, on school boards they have no ability to 

raise any revenue. They get a fixed amount of money and they 

don’t have predictable, long-term money and they’re stuck. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the numbers came out last week for school 

boards, but they’re working very, very diligently to try to figure 

out, well what does it mean in our part of the province? 

 

We see these as kind of hidden costs, or cuts that are much like 

time bombs that are going to go off in various communities. 

And so the question becomes, well will our school still be 

there? Or what’s the size of the classroom? Which of the 

children in our neighbourhood are going to have to move away 

because their parents have lost their jobs? And it’s those kind of 

questions that matter when we go back to our constituencies 

because people are concerned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues in the health budgets, 

even though there’s an increase, do include some fairly tough 

choices that will be made in Prince Albert or North Battleford 

or Lloydminster or other parts of the province. And we need to 

be vigilant as an opposition to raise those questions as well. But 

practically it’s a budget that has some very difficult news for 

quite a few people in our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the really challenging issues in the 

budget relates to the fiscal framework and how this budget was 

put together. As somebody who has been part of that process 

for many years, it looked to me like what happened was that 

there was a basic number created on the expenditure side. And 

then everybody went back and tried to figure out, okay, well 

how can we get some more revenues or how can we adjust this 

so we can get that $16 million positive number on the summary 

financial statements? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you can see the places where creative ideas 

were used to have that number show up at the bottom. The most 

glaring one is the $100 million to the university. That number 

alone gives the whole thing a deficit budget smell. 

 

But in that case where we have a building project ongoing — 

the Academic Health Sciences building at U of S which has a 

$70 million bill that’s coming due this year — which if you 

would’ve followed, if we would’ve as a Government of 

Saskatchewan followed the way that all of the other parts of 

that building have been paid for, it would’ve been paid this year 

out of cash. 

 

But the message went to the University of Saskatchewan, well 

we’re changing our tune this year because we need to fix the 

bottom line on our budget. So you go and borrow that 70 

million. It’s just far enough away from what we’re doing here 

that it will maybe not be as noticed as some other things. But 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we noticed. I’m sure the auditor 

will be commenting on this when it comes up later. I know that 

the university is noticing it. And guess who gets affected by it? 

Well it will be the students and the families of students at the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

But to add a further bit of frustration there, there’s another 30 

million which is for both the U of S and U of R [University of 

Regina], related to ongoing maintenance of the physical 

facilities on the campuses. An accounting practice was changed 

there to also push that one out, and, bingo, it gets you over the 

line and you’ve got a balanced budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we end up looking at how this has been 

done for the school boards, we know that they’re doing the 

same kind of thing with the health regions. And so what we 

have is not a very clear picture of what the actual finances are. 

Now we know that in February of 1992 there was a special 

commission created to look at the debt that was on the books of 

Saskatchewan but was somehow spread out or pushed out. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think Mr. Gass’s report is one that the Finance 

officials, but more importantly the Premier, should be looking 

at to see where they have fallen back into some of the practices 

that ended up hiding debt. 

 

And to give an example of how that happens is we know, 

slowly but surely, we’re getting information about SaskPower’s 

project up by North Battleford. And it’s a power purchase 

agreement because it spreads out the cost of that agreement 

over 20, 25 years. Now we haven’t ever seen the actual contract 

to know what the capital cost that’s in that payment versus 

what’s the actual cost for getting the electricity. But what we 

know is that it pushed some debt off the books of SaskPower 

onto a private company. And it’s a practice that’s used, I think 

as one accountant told me, it’s often used by companies that are 

having trouble with their cash flow. And if you think about it, if 

you’re running a deficit, which we’ve run the last three years 

after we do the reporting, you end up with that kind of a 

perspective. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t have to be this way. It didn’t have 

to be this way, but the government has made some choices. And 

they’ve chosen more politicians over seniors, over families. 

And guess who’s paying? I mean it’s going to show up in the 

kinds of situations around school boards and the health regions, 

universities. And, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be the families in our 

neighbourhood who are going to suffer. And I think common 

sense people in Saskatchewan don’t like it when you’re not 

clear about what you’re doing and why you’re doing it. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’ll translate into lost jobs, reduced civil 

service jobs which are right across the province. It will translate 

into bigger classrooms for, or bigger numbers, larger numbers 

of students in classrooms. It will transfer into some increases, 

we already know, on your taxes on your home, whether it’s 

related to policing costs or some other areas. 

 

2007 there was a resource boom in Saskatchewan. And 

basically that boom has continued, which is good for all of us, 

and we’re proud of that. But unfortunately the boom could have 

been used to build better classrooms. It could have been used to 

allow all of our people to retire in dignity. It could have been 

used to make sure that the gap on education for First Nations 

and Métis kids and others who are poor in our province would 

be eliminated so that all of these valuable resources could be 



March 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

used for our economy. It could have been used to bolster and 

enhance industries like the film industry or, I think, some of the 

other industries that are based on the intellectual capacities of 

our people so that we would continue to have a province in 

which we are even prouder than we are now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, budgets are about choices. They’re about 

opportunities for people, and they’re about having an idea or a 

vision or a plan for where we want to go as a province. Mr. 

Speaker, on this side of the House, our concern are the common 

sense people of Saskatchewan who want a future that includes 

the best opportunities for the people of the province using the 

resources that we have to complement that. So, Mr. Speaker, 

unfortunately, because of some of the choices made by the 

government in this budget, I will not be able to support the 

budget of the government. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure, it’s an honour 

to be able to participate in the budget debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before I get into the text of my remarks for this morning, I do 

want to again thank the people of Swift Current for the chance 

that I have even to vote on the budget for the province of 

Saskatchewan. I want to thank them for their support in the last 

election. I want to touch a little bit on the last election, but I 

want to thank them for that support and for their ongoing advice 

and input to me as their MLA and in my other capacities, Mr. 

Speaker. I also want to acknowledge, as I try to do every time, 

the support of Tami, my wife, and our kids.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can say that — pretty safely, I think, on 

behalf of every member in the House, certainly every member 

on this side of the House — that just the chance to participate in 

this debate, a real and genuine debate about some of the 

specific measures in the budget, that it’s not a bad thing at all, 

Mr. Speaker. But the chance to participate in it, to voice the 

concerns of constituents and people across the province, to 

work at least to try to give voice to those concerns and then a 

chance to vote on the budget is something that’s not lost on any 

of us. And it’s a great honour, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s interesting, I think, that the fact that this budget comes 

obviously relatively close on the heels of a general election in 

the province of Saskatchewan, some would argue that even 

though later this day we’ll vote on the Deputy Premier’s budget 

— the budget that he’s tabled — some would say that vote 

happened on the 7th of November, 2011, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And I want to touch on that a little bit because much of that 

election campaign became a debate about the fiscal plan that 

each party was proposing for the future of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I think that the ballot question, the 

ballot question very much became, on 7 November, 2011, a 

question of the fiscal health of the province of Saskatchewan. 

How best do we keep this province moving forward in 

leadership in the country? How best do we ensure that that plan 

to move the province forward is based on fiscal responsibility, 

based on fiscal probity? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember that election very well. I know all 

members in the House will. And I remember the specifics 

around that particular ballot question. I remember the debate 

that we were having right up until the 7th of November when 

people made their choice.  

 

Mr. Speaker, in that election campaign, the New Democratic 

Party proposed a platform of $5.5 billion. That was a choice 

they made. They had a number of different measures that they 

had in their budget. They really had promises for everyone. 

And they had spending commitments for all areas of 

government and a $5.5 billion budget that, even with their plan 

to jack up taxes in the potash industry — which of course 

would have hurt the very expansions the Minister of Finance 

was referencing earlier in question period — even with their 

plan to do that and risk the economic development of the 

province, we would have had, had they been elected, massive 

deficits. We would be looking at a deficit budget today, and we 

would be voting on that had the New Democrats been 

successful in the election and had a chance to implement what 

they call their fiscal plan with its $5.5 billion worth of promises 

that they were making with someone else’s money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very important to note that this is a germane 

question that we’re dealing with in the legislature — the NDP’s 

alternative to our budget. I’m going to focus on our budget a 

lot, but this is a debate about two visions and an alternative. 

Because if the New Democratic Party were concerned about 

deficits . . . And the Finance critic stands in his place day after 

day, even after his colleagues ask for the reinstatement of every 

reduction the government’s made and ask for more spending 

and more spending, ironically enough the Finance critic often 

closes question period by standing up and speaking out against 

deficit budgets and speaking in favour of the importance of 

balanced budgets, mercifully free from any sense of irony, 

apparently. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it goes to credibility because I guess the 

honourable member, the Finance critic, could morph into a 

fiscal conservative, into a fiscal disciplinarian. He could do that 

with a great deal more credibility than he can today because all 

of the promises that were made by the New Democratic Party in 

the last campaign, $5.5 billion worth of promises, are still on 

their website. The leader has gone. The leader’s gone but the 

entire platform is still on the website. This is the policy of the 

New Democratic Party. And members opposite should take the 

opportunity for circumspection when they’re talking about 

deficits or surpluses or balanced budgets when they weigh into 

this debate, especially considering the fact that they still stand 

for a $5.5 billion platform that has a lot of promises for a lot of 

people but that would result and return this province into a 

historic deficit situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, on their website there’s the game changer 

calculator you can actually find, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

members in this House on both sides will know when they 

announced this game changer in the campaign, they said, come 

to our website and enter all of the spending promises we made 

and find out how much you save. And for the few souls that did 

that, they found out that not only does the NDP platform work, 

but the game-changing calculator didn’t work either, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact some would point out that the only number that 

kept coming up on the game-changing calculator was 

something like 49 to 9, Mr. Speaker. 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

So, Mr. Speaker, as that party gets closer to choosing a new 

leader, maybe even the Finance critic himself, I would say this, 

Mr. Speaker. By the way, based on question period earlier 

today, if the Finance critic is planning on running for the 

leadership, he ought to stop letting his seatmate, the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place, write his questions because I 

think he set him up in question period in his questions to the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, though the election was about choices, that choice 

between a $5.5 billion platform, promises for everything from 

the members opposite, versus the platform we ran on, the 

platform that was eventually successful on the election on the 

7th of November, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we basically 

ran out of promises to make the Saskatchewan people with their 

own money by the end of the first week in the campaign 

because we took a different approach. We decided that there’s 

too much uncertainty in the world today. There’s too much 

going for Saskatchewan in that uncertain world today, based on 

a fiscally responsible plan, too much of that going to risk, to 

risk all of that with promises with the taxpayers’ money that 

were not sustainable.  

 

And so we campaigned on a much different platform, Mr. 

Speaker. We campaigned on promises that will help people 

with affordability. We campaigned on promises that will keep 

this province moving forward economically. We campaigned 

on promises that treat everybody in this province equally, 

whether they’re in the North or the South or rural or urban, Mr. 

Speaker. And we campaigned again on commitments that we 

knew to be affordable. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it ought to surprise no one that we have kept 

that promise in this budget. That when the Minister of Finance 

rose in his place last week and delivered the province’s budget, 

he was able to list promise after promise after promise after 

promise that’s already kept, months after the last election. And 

when it was all said and done, he was able to say to this 

Assembly, to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

notwithstanding some difficult choices we made in the interest 

of sustainability, in the interest of fiscal probity, 

notwithstanding those choices, he was able to say, Mr. Speaker, 

unlike any of his colleagues anywhere in the Dominion of 

Canada, that this budget is balanced now and through the entire 

year. 

 

There were some difficult choices to make along the way to that 

balanced budget, and we’ve touched on them in this Assembly. 

We’ve had a debate about them. They’ve been raised in 

question period. They’ve been raised in social media, 

effectively, by both sides.  

 

Those issues range, from the issue we talked about today . . . It 

took the NDP till the end of the second week of the budget 

debate really to get in a meaningful way to the drug plan issue 

for seniors, but they raised it today. And you heard the Minister 

of Health say, we took a difficult decision to increase the 

deductible for a drug plan that we support, that we want to see 

last forever, Mr. Speaker. We took the occasion to increase that 

deductible — that hadn’t been increased since 2007 — in the 

interest of supporting seniors and children eligible for that drug 

plan in the long term so that we could avoid a situation that 

other provinces are facing today when some third party report 

comes in and says, these programs are unsustainable. Never 

mind an adjustment, you’ve got to cut those programs, Mr. 

Speaker. That is the forward-looking part of some these 

difficult decisions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we presented them also in context, these 

changes to the seniors’ drug plan. We presented them alongside 

our promise, our commitment that we made in the campaign, 

kept in this budget, to triple the seniors’ low-income assistance 

plan in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In the first 

term of our government, we doubled not only the benefit for 

that plan, the budget for that assistance plan for low-income 

seniors, but we also doubled the number of seniors who are 

eligible for the program in the first place. And now we’re going 

to triple it. And now we’re going to provide extra support for 

those who need personal care home. And now we’ll build 

long-term care beds in this province, the likes of which hasn’t 

been seen in a generation, a generation presided over mostly by 

members opposite. 

 

And in context, Mr. Speaker, there can be no doubt, 

notwithstanding the sustainability changes that we made in the 

drug plan, there can be no doubt that there is more support 

today for seniors in our province, more respect manifest in the 

policies of the government. There has never been more respect, 

Mr. Speaker, than there is today, presented by this government, 

after four years and now heading into our second term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been some controversy as well around the 

issue of REDAs, regional economic development areas of the 

province. Their name changed to enterprise regions when we 

created Enterprise Saskatchewan, but these regions were 

created by the New Democratic Party. I know I was on the 

board of these REDAs [regional economic development 

authority] and, Mr. Speaker, there is good local economic 

development work that happens on these REDAs. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, they are about regional 

and local economic development. And were the situation the 

same as it was under the NDP in terms of revenue sharing — in 

other words, were the issues around revenue sharing completely 

ignored in Saskatchewan today, as they were under the NDP, 

versus the near doubling that most municipalities have received 

in revenue sharing from this government — I guess someone, 

you know, people could credibly say, well you ought to 

continue to support that local economic development function, 

those budgets, and not leave it to localities and regions. 

 

[11:30] 

 

The bottom line though, Mr. Speaker, is we don’t agree. We 

think, with the historic revenue sharing that exists in the 

province today, there is a real opportunity for us to turn over to 

localities and regions that function they perform. If they wish to 

continue with REDAs, they can fund them. 

 

By the way, Mr. Speaker, there are countless communities of all 

sizes who have different ways of funding economic 

development. They’ve been doing it on their own even with a 

REDA program in place. My home community is one example, 

where the city of Swift Current, the ratepayers there have 

always funded their director of economic development. The one 

they have now is better than the one they had prior to 1999, Mr. 



March 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

Speaker. 

 

And we were in Estevan last night with the caucus Chair on our 

side of the House, and there the chamber of commerce is 

contracted by the community to deliver economic development 

and to deliver tourism development services. Here again you 

have communities that have been providing that investment, 

doing that important local economic development work, even 

with the REDA program in place. We just think it’s time, as we 

look for savings, as we look to balance the budget, that we 

move out of that area for all the province so it’s treated equally 

and that these things are delivered at a local level and a regional 

level. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Speaker, we want to do that so we can 

focus our own economic development strategy, our plans, on 

things that the provincial government should focus on, for 

example, like infrastructure improvements across this province. 

We’re going to be hearing much more about that in the years 

ahead. Like for example, the innovation agenda of this province 

that looks beyond this generation and even the next in terms of 

building on a resource economy and building on our strengths 

in that resource economy in terms of innovation and sustainable 

energy and nuclear science, Mr. Speaker, and in agricultural 

science as well. That’s a role for the provincial government in 

terms of economic development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think the role of a provincial government is to, 

in terms of economic development, is also to engage with the 

other partners across the country and the rest of the world to tell 

the, I think, the most amazing economic and fiscal story, 

frankly, around the world so we can continue to attract 

investment to the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

with the help of our officials, with the help of our ministers, I 

can say — I believe this to be very true, Mr. Speaker — that I 

don’t think there’s been a government in recent history in the 

province that has made more progress in telling our story, in 

getting Saskatchewan’s story known around the world, than our 

government. We think we ought to focus on that, and let 

localities focus on local economic development. So we made 

that decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know there have been challenges around 

the film tax credit, the tax grant that exists in our province and 

right across the country and in over 40 states in the United 

States. Mr. Speaker, I’ll deal with it, I’ll deal with it quickly if I 

can. There’s been a lot of very good debate about the issue in 

the province. This is an industry that’s valued. This is an 

industry that attracts and trains very creative people who make, 

who do make Saskatchewan better. And this is an industry that 

in our province and across our country comes at a cost that’s 

higher than almost any other industry in terms of the tax 

system. 

 

The tax system in place today that we have that, yes, that we’ve 

supported, that was put in place in the late ’90s, is a tax system 

that says to a company, if you come in and set up a shell 

production company — and many of the applications are 

precisely this — set up a shell company, a temporary company 

to do the production only, you can earn grant. You’ll earn the 

tax credits, a grant up front, regardless of how much tax you 

pay in the province, regardless of where you’re domiciled. Just 

based on that production’s cost, here’s the rate of subsidy. 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen that tax credit not work very well in 

this province of late, not because we didn’t have it — we did — 

but because other jurisdictions were enriching their tax credits. 

They were enriching these tax grants. They’re doing so right 

across North America. It is a bidding war today. People in the 

film industry, we heard the minister comment, are noting as 

taxpayers that there’s a bidding war happening. 

 

And so it presents a choice. And you do do the evaluation. You 

see how much activity comes from the tax credit, how much of 

the spinoff activity comes from that. And you consider the cost. 

And you consider the future as well in terms of that cost, where 

the industry itself has told us, by the way, you’ve got not to just 

reinstate it, but, in the report that was done, if you’re going to 

keep up with everyone else in the bidding war, it’s another $3.5 

million with a taxpayers’ subsidy to go to the industry. 

 

And so we have to make a difficult choice and be the first one 

in the country to say, when it comes to that bidding war, we’re 

not going to be in the bidding war anymore. We’re happy to 

change the tax credit to a non-refundable tax credit that 

effectively reduces taxes paid in the province, not just on 

productions but from companies. We saw in that same report 

that the minister has referenced, that the critic has referenced, 

that there was a desire on the part of the industry to see it grow 

in the province more substantively, to see a focus on all of our 

policy on Saskatchewan companies. 

 

Well a refundable tax credit can do that because it says to 

companies domiciled here, with roots here in the province, 

paying tax in the province, that you are going to get preferential 

treatment because we want your companies to grow here in 

Saskatchewan and for you to employ people in the industry. 

We’ve also said to them, the sound stage is yours if you like it, 

along with what would be our operating loss for a couple of 

years to capitalize that venture. Mr. Speaker, that is a 

reasonable approach from a government that says, we’re out of 

the bidding war, but we’ll look at other ways, creative ways 

perhaps, to sustain the industry. 

 

I’ve heard the arguments say, well but there’s all these spinoffs. 

Mr. Speaker, if we applied the logic that we’ve heard from 

members opposite and others — and it’s an important debate; I 

happen to disagree with the position, and I’ll say so now — if 

we applied the same logic that these tax grants are good 

because of the spinoffs that occur, we’d have them in every 

other industry. There would be an infinite amount of benefit. 

 

And people say, well they’re cost-neutral. If they’re 

cost-neutral, and they create a 6 to 1 benefit in the economy, 

why aren’t they applied to every other sector? People have said, 

well there’s incentives in the potash industry. Well there may 

be if they do certain things like they expand in the province, but 

there’s still a net tax paid to the people of this province for their 

resource. And by the way, it’s sunsetted. That tax incentive 

ends by definition. And when it ends, they pay the highest 

royalties in the world, and billions of dollars have been invested 

and thousands of jobs have been created, and this subsidy or the 

tax incentive — a real credit, not a grant — ends. 

 

I asked the industry when we met with them with the minister, 

when could we stop this tax credit, this grant thing? When is the 

industry going to be at the point where it doesn’t need it 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

anymore? Because that’s the difference between this and other 

tax measures. Never, they said, as long as someone else is in the 

bidding war. Mr. Speaker, the logic of, well you should do it 

because it’s cost-neutral and there’s spinoffs, it doesn’t hold, 

Mr. Speaker. It simply doesn’t hold. We’ve seen the numbers, 

and it doesn’t hold, otherwise we’d apply it to every other 

single industry from restaurants to the service sector, to 

financial services, to agriculture, to manufacturing, to 

everything. Mr. Speaker, that argument we just fundamentally 

disagree with, and so we’ve made a difficult decision. And 

we’re certainly willing to work with the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this particular issue — and I want to talk about 

some of the specifics in the budget — the member, the critic 

yesterday asked a question. She said to us on this side of the 

House when she was referencing some comments by Paul 

Bronfman Jr. who is a billionaire in Toronto and has companies 

involved in the movie industry, her question was: what message 

does this decision to kill the tax credit send to people like Mr. 

Bronfman? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with great respect, I think there are some 

important messages in this budget for people, for certain 

people, and I’d like to share some of them with the members of 

the House today and the province. If you are in Saskatchewan, 

and you are tired of seeing loved ones languish on a waiting list 

in the birthplace of medicare — a waiting list that stretched 

beyond 18 months, that used to stretch beyond 18 months — if 

you’re tired of those waiting lists, and if you support this 

government’s surgical initiative that comes with a cost in this 

budget, if you are interested in a 90 per cent reduction in people 

waiting longer than 18 months for surgery, or a 79 per cent 

reduction in people waiting longer than a year for surgery, or a 

40 per cent reduction in the people waiting six months for 

surgery, if you’d like to see that in this province, then our 

message is: this budget is for you. 

 

If you have loved ones who suffer with diabetes and you’d like 

to see more help for them in a province that’s prosperous and in 

a province that’s growing, if you’d like to see $2.5 million 

worth of increase in funding to reduce costs for those with 

diabetes by adding two forms of long-acting insulin to the drug 

plan and expanding the children’s insulin pump program from 

age 17 to age 25, we have a message: this budget is for you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you’d like to see more proactive health care like 

screening for certain cancers like colorectal cancer expanded to 

be province-wide so that we can deal with this disease before 

it’s too late — and before, frankly, it’s too expensive — you’re 

going to look at $4 million to expand colorectal cancer 

screening that is in this budget of new funding. And the 

message of that quite simply is: this budget is for you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If you want to see more funding for the Cancer Agency because 

of the good work they do, if you want to see the government 

finally turn around the lack of long-term care funding in this 

province that prevailed for 16 years under the NDP and see 13 

homes continue and see more investment in personal care 

homes, then our message is: this budget’s for you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you’re in North Battleford and you want to see less talk about 

the Saskatchewan hospital and more action on that 100-year-old 

hospital, the message is: this budget’s for you. 

 

If you’re in Moose Jaw and you want to see less talk about that 

hospital, the message is: this budget is for you. There’s action 

on that hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you recognize — maybe you’ve come new to 

the province, and you have a young family — and you 

recognize this is a great place, but boy, we need more child care 

spaces in Saskatchewan, there’s 500 new spaces in this budget 

on our way to keep our promise for 2000. And the message 

from the Finance minister and from the MLAs on this side of 

the House is pretty simple. If you want that, our message is: this 

budget is for you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you’d like to see some new schools built in a 

province that’s growing, first time in a very, very long time, 

where the clamour has been not just for some block funding to 

fix schools — by the way, which didn’t happen under members 

opposite, but took ministers on this side of the House to get 

done — over and above that block funding now, we’re building 

new schools in the province of Saskatchewan. And we know 

there’s catch-up to do and a lot more work to be done. And in 

this budget if you add them all up, the ones that are approved 

and will start construction and more new approvals, I think 

we’re up over 20 brand new schools. If you add all of those 

things up in the province . . . The Minister of Finance is trying 

to do the calculation. I’m sure he’ll send me a note. But I 

believe that’s the case. 

 

So our message to parents and to school boards who want some 

new schools in the province, because classrooms are full with 

the growing population: this budget is for you, too. If you want 

to see sustainable, affordable but important increases in 

advanced education and to the health regions and to the school 

boards, if you want us to continue to invest in innovation in the 

province, to grow that next economy, again the message is: this 

budget’s for you. 

 

If you’re a billionaire businessman from Toronto or any other 

place, though, and you’re looking for a grant before you make 

an investment, this budget is not for you, Mr. Speaker. If you 

want to work with government to find a better way to sustain 

any industry, including the film industry, though, we are 

prepared to work; we are ready to work with that industry to see 

what can be achieved together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was interesting the morning after the budget . . . 

And I’ll conclude with this. The morning after the budget, I was 

watching one of the morning shows on local channels and I 

noticed that the official Opposition Leader was on TV. And he 

was commenting on the budget, and he was critical of certain 

things — and that’s what debate’s all about. He was critical of 

the film tax credit decision that the government made. Fair 

enough. The media . . . The reporter asked him though, the 

reporter, she said, okay, so if there’s more money needed for 

filmmakers, where would the money come from? 

 

Well, this is a quote, Mr. Speaker, “Well practically, there are a 

number of areas where they could have left money for films. 

And one of the things they could have done is look at some of 

the initiatives around agriculture, and look at some of the things 



March 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

they’ve done for municipalities.” Which things? Which things, 

Mr. Speaker? Which things that this government has done in 

agriculture or for municipalities? There’s kind of a bit of a walk 

on that quote that the Leader of the Opposition’s had. A 

potentially very divisive quote. Mr. Speaker, it bears repeating. 

Where would you find the money to give to the filmmakers? 

One of the things they could have done, he said, and I’m 

quoting, “is look at some of the initiatives around agriculture. 

And look at some of the things they’ve done for 

municipalities.” How many years of downloading did 

municipalities face in this province under the NDP? Mr. 

Speaker, they did not act on the request for municipalities for 

revenue sharing. 

 

[11:45] 

 

One of the most fundamental tasks, I think, of a provincial 

government is to understand that the front line of economic 

development, that the front line of growth, that that order of 

government that’s closest to the people are rural municipalities 

and urban municipalities. And when the province can afford it, 

when the province is gaining in revenue . . . And it was under 

their watch. I think when they walked away there was $700 

million in cash, by the way — not just an accounting entry. I 

think there was actual cash in that rainy day fund of the NDP. 

So they had money. What was happening for revenue sharing to 

municipalities so they could keep up with housing demands, so 

they could service more lots, so they could provide better public 

safety, so they could provide better water and sewer services in 

a growing province, so that they could ease the pressure on 

education tax in the rural municipalities? What was happening 

from that NDP government on that fundamental test of good 

provincial government? Nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There were cuts, Mr. Speaker, that’s what there were. And now 

when asked, well where would you get the money then if you 

don’t like this cut, you don’t like that change, where would it 

come from? We’ll take it from the municipalities in the 

province of Saskatchewan, say the NDP. No they will not, 

because I know how the vote’s going to turn out today, Mr. 

Speaker, and it certainly won’t be on the side of the New 

Democrats. It’ll be on the side of rural Saskatchewan, of 

farmers, and of municipalities in this province who ought not to 

be treated with that disrespect that they’ve received over the 

last week from the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that movie before. This province lived 

through that movie before. And I’ve had people reference the 

fact that the province is growing now and asked the rhetorical 

question, well why didn’t that happen before? Well we’ve been 

the first to say, look, it’s not the government. It’s not our 

government that takes credit for economic growth. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve long believed — and it’s been the raison d’être perhaps 

for this party — that government can get in the way of the 

potential of this great province and its people. That government, 

if it’s short-sighted, if it chooses to be divisive and not realize 

the potential of agriculture, the potential of rural Saskatchewan, 

the importance of municipalities . . . If we have a government 

here that divides us, that cleaves us north and south, rural and 

urban, that is a barrier to growth and a barrier to this province 

reaching its full potential. We understand that on this side of the 

House. And after the 7th of November, you’d think that lesson 

would have been heard by members opposite. But it hasn’t, Mr. 

Speaker. It hasn’t. Well the good news is this. The good news is 

this: that approach to dividing this province, that approach to 

frankly putting barriers in the way of this province reaching its 

full potential is restricted to nine members on that side of the 

House — the nimble nine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we will take the tough 

decisions that we need to take to make sure that we can make a 

very special claim across this country and around the world. 

Mr. Speaker, we will take the message from this budget vote 

today to the rest of this country and to the rest of the world 

when we’re travelling and promoting the province that there is 

one jurisdiction, there is one jurisdiction in Canada, there’s one 

of very, very few jurisdictions that we know of anywhere in the 

world that have said in the season of deficits and spiralling 

debt, there’s one province, one place that says no, here we’re 

going to balance the budget. Today and tomorrow and the day 

after that, we’re going to balance the budget because we know 

at the heart of the plan to keep this province must be fiscal 

responsibility, must be fiscal probity. 

 

If we want to ensure we have sustainable programs for seniors 

in the future, it means we need to be fiscally responsible today. 

If we want to have an infrastructure program for our municipal 

partners in the future, it means we must be fiscally responsible 

today. If we want to continue to reduce taxes as we have over 

the last four years in the future, we’ve got to have fiscal 

responsibility today. If we want to continue to pay down the 

debt, 44 per cent lower and counting, we’ve got to be, in the 

future, we’ve got to be fiscally responsible today, Mr. Speaker. 

That is the resolve of the women and men on this side of the 

House. It’s not subject to change. It’s not negotiable. We’ll take 

the decisions we have to take to preserve the Saskatchewan 

advantage and move this province forward. I’m opposed to the 

amendment, but I’m in favour of the Minister of Finance’s 

budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It is my duty to remind members that the hon. 

member, Minister of Finance is about to exercise his right to 

close the debate and, after, all members will be precluded from 

speaking to this question. Therefore if any member wishes to 

speak, let him do so now. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m honoured to be able to close debate on this, my second 

budget and our government’s first budget after the election of 

2011. Mr. Speaker, the development of a budget requires many 

people, requires many contributions. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

going to just take a couple of moments, if I might, to express 

my appreciation. 

 

First of all, to my family. I know I’ve introduced my spouse, 

Gail, in the legislature, but I want to extend to her my greatest 

appreciation, and also to my children. Both Bryce and Lindsay 

periodically do phone, and they phone with advice about what 

they see happening in Saskatchewan, whether it’s in education 

or whether it might be in the natural resources area, with my 

daughter involved in a company that has now purchased a 

number of BP assets and is now based here in Saskatchewan 

and is looking forward to a long future in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And maybe someday, Mr. Speaker, her 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

company will see right to transfer her here as a manager or a 

leader here in this great province. So thank you to my family. 

 

I do also want to extend my appreciation to the Premier. You 

know, immediately after the election of 2011, the Premier made 

it clear that the cabinet ministers were going to remain in place 

and that it was our responsibility to get to work. And I want to 

extend to him my appreciation for allowing me to serve as the 

Minister of Finance. And I want to also thank the Treasury 

Board members because, immediately after that declaration, 

Treasury Board members got to work. And we spent many, 

many days, many, many hours preparing the material that you 

see in this budget. 

 

I also want to extend my appreciation to the officials, because 

there are many analysts and directors and individuals, not only 

within Finance but within every ministry, that review the 

material, review the programs, review the spending, review all 

of the things that government is involved with and decide 

whether or not those are the kinds of things that we should 

focus on. So I want to extend to all ministers and to all staff my 

appreciation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to review, I’ll call them, 

drafts of the budget with caucus, with all caucus members. And 

I want to extend to all of the other 48 members on this side of 

the House my appreciation for your input in ensuring that we 

were recognizing what was important, where we needed to 

ensure that spending could continue and that the programs that 

we had worked so hard, as a government, since 2007 to 

implement, that those programs could continue. And I want to 

express my appreciation to all of you. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, indeed this is a unique budget. As members on 

this side of the House who have spoken and the Premier spoke 

just recently about wrapping up all of the things that this 

budgets contains, and he did that so well that the material that 

I’m going to talk about today is not going to be the specifics, 

because the Premier has mentioned many, many of the good 

things that are contained in this budget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, he and all of my colleagues are right, and so 

are the many people that have commented in the media since 

this budget was delivered. This is a unique budget. Because we 

already have a number of provinces, as I indicated in my 

response this morning in question period. This is a balanced 

budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify for the people of 

Saskatchewan because many times people will ask, well, what 

do you mean by a General Revenue Fund budget? What do you 

mean by a summary financial budget? Because, you know, and 

the Premier asked this himself. And I’ve tried to, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m just trying to supply the notes to make sure that the 

numbers are there because he understands this concept very 

well and knows a lot about this. But, you know, the numbers, 

Mr. Speaker, I have to occasionally provide him with a number. 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is a balanced budget on both instances. It 

is balanced on a summary and it is balanced on a General 

Revenue Fund — so far the only budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I want to encourage every individual in the 

province of Saskatchewan and outside who look at the 

documents of the budget. There are two documents, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is why we do it. We prepare a General 

Revenue Fund budget and this is called the Estimates book, Mr. 

Speaker. And people can see what the Minister of Agriculture is 

spending. Every penny that the Minister of Agriculture is 

spending on all of the great programs of crop insurance and 

AgriInvest and AgriStability, they see that. And they will see 

what the Social Services minister is spending on each of her 

initiatives, and same thing with Advanced Education and all 

ministries. That is contained in this Estimates book, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But also in this document, which is referred to as the budget 

summary, is — and for the benefit of the member opposite, the 

Finance critic — it is the summary financial statement, Mr. 

Speaker. It is right here. It is right here and it, on pages 82 and 

83 and, Mr. Speaker, it lists. It lists all of the entities that make 

up the summary financials, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are many people, there are many people who don’t know 

what is contained in the summary financial statements. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s all contained right here. It indicates what is 

happening in the regional health authorities. It contains what is 

happening in the school boards and all of those instances. All of 

the Crown corporations are listed: the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance, the Auto Fund, Workers’ Compensation Board. 

Every one of those entities is listed here. It is reviewed by the 

Provincial Auditor. And it is indeed the summary financial 

statement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for all of the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, I want them to clearly understand that we don’t 

just do a General Revenue Fund budget. We do in fact do both, 

and I believe it is better for the people of the province to 

understand. Because they can understand what is being spent by 

every minister in each of their areas, but they also can see the 

entire provincial picture by looking at this document, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of mention already about the 

budget and how it relates to the election campaign of 2011. Mr. 

Speaker, I had the opportunity to review this bright orange 

document, and you know, Mr. Speaker, when I looked at it, it 

changed. It changed almost every day. Because at one time it 

was a $3 billion spend and then it was a $4 billion spend and 

now it’s about a $5.5 billion spend. And, Mr. Speaker, you 

know what? As the Premier indicated, this document is still on 

the NDP website. It is their direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Even though the member from Rosemont stood in this 

Assembly, and he wasn’t quite sure. And he went out in the 

rotunda, and he said, you know, I’m not sure about that revenue 

sharing with some other groups. I really don’t think we should 

do that. I think we have to listen to the people because, you 

know, 49 to 9, 64 per cent of the vote for this side of the House 

said, we better, we better review that. Well, Mr. Speaker, within 

24 hours, the member was out in the rotunda saying, whoops, I 

misspoke. I misspoke. We don’t really have to listen to the 

people of Saskatchewan because we’re going to continue to 

follow the $5.5 billion spending spree, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is take a look at this document, 

which is the platform of the Saskatchewan Party. And you go to 

the last couple of pages, Mr. Speaker, where it identified what 

we anticipated for revenue not only for this year but the next 



March 29, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

three, where we anticipated expenditures to go, Mr. Speaker. 

And we listed a number of promises, Mr. Speaker, promises 

that are going to cost about $83 million and are included in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the most important thing, the most important 

thing in this budget, in this platform estimate was that we said 

we were going to spend about $11.2 billion on expenditure. 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know what? The budget prepared, this 

document — exactly the same, Mr. Speaker, exactly the same. 

What we said we would do, we have done, Mr. Speaker. We 

have delivered a balanced budget for these people, for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[12:00] 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, every speaker on this side of the 

House has had an opportunity to review all of the specifics of 

their ministries or, in the case of non-ministers, the opportunity 

to review the different initiatives and programs that are going to 

affect the people in their constituencies. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier has indicated all of the things that we have done, and 

there’s a tremendous number of initiatives that we wanted to 

maintain. And it’s so important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government places health care and education, both 

advanced education and K to 12 education, as a priority. We 

understand the work that Social Services is doing in terms of 

ensuring that those people with disabilities have a great place to 

live in this province, and we’re moving on those programs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We recognized, we recognized that in the housing area that 

indeed we are . . . that is a challenge of growth. There is a 

situation where we need to improve. And we have implemented 

a one-of-a-kind, a one-of-a-kind initiative to developers to 

ensure that we can move forward on the construction of 

low-rental accommodations, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that 

those things are going to happen. We know that with the rental 

construction initiative from last year — tremendous uptake 

from that area — and we know now, coupled with the initiative 

that we have outlined, it’s going to continue to move that 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that we haven’t spoken a 

lot about is the fact that this budget contains no tax increases, 

Mr. Speaker, no tax increases. You know, Mr. Speaker, years 

ago I can recall from my days on a school board when we 

worried about what a government was going to do because, of 

course, the government provided a grant to the school board. It 

was, you know, at times there were minus 4’s and minus 2 per 

cent grant. And of course, for a school board to balance, it had 

to increase the mill rate, Mr. Speaker, increase the mill rate. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that’s changed. We changed that 

in terms of the government taking responsibility for the K to 12 

system. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there still is an education property tax. There 

still is a mill rate that is set, but it is set for the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the mill rates for agricultural 

land, residential properties, commercial properties did not 

change this year, Mr. Speaker. They remained the same low 

rates, Mr. Speaker. 3.91 mills for agricultural land, Mr. 

Speaker, 9.51 mills for residential properties continue to be 

there, Mr. Speaker. So we now have number of years where 

there has been no increase. And people on this side of the 

House . . . I don’t know whether the members opposite have 

ever looked at their tax notices from seven, eight, nine years 

ago. There were tax notices that contained 22 mills of taxation 

for education — 22, Mr. Speaker. And today if you’re in 

agriculture, your mill rate is 3.91, significantly lower, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things I think that must be 

mentioned is that the province of Saskatchewan has something 

called indexation where on January 1st we index everyone’s 

exemptions including seniors, Mr. Speaker. We changed those 

exemptions to make sure that we remain competitive in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, we changed that by a rate of 2.8 per cent 

on January 1st. So that means, Mr. Speaker, well and I’m going 

to just choose the sector of seniors because there has been a lot 

of discussion about the $5 fee and the ambulance fee, the 

additional ambulance fee. Mr. Speaker, over $500 of income, if 

you are a senior who has a taxable income, over $500 is now 

non-taxable. No tax is being paid because we changed the basic 

exemption. We changed the senior supplement, and we changed 

the age exemption, Mr. Speaker, by enhancing those by 2.8 per 

cent to ensure that they can manage with additional costs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So those are significant changes that we want to make sure that, 

you know, the people of this province understand that this 

government needs to work to ensure that the programs that we 

want to have. I have heard from many seniors. You know, I 

don’t want to remain on a waiting list. I have a hip operation 

scheduled, and it was scheduled . . . You know, if you look at 

examples from years past, two or three years of a wait time. Mr. 

Speaker, people want that changed, and we’re moving in that 

direction. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the people on this side of the House 

have very, my colleagues have very eloquently described the 

budget. The fact that this budget is one of a kind, that it is 

indeed a sustainable budget. It is a balanced budget on both the 

General Revenue Fund and the summary financial basis, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know that if the people take a look, good look at 

this budget, they will understand that this budget is going to 

ensure, is going ensure that Saskatchewan remains number one 

in so many of the areas that we already are. 

 

We know that the projection for next year as well as this year is 

that Saskatchewan will lead the economic growth of all of the 

provinces in the province of Saskatchewan. These are qualities 

and characteristics of a province, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t 

want to reverse. We don’t want to go back to the day when the 

population was declining. I love it, Mr. Speaker, when the fact 

that the population in 2011 increased by 17,000, Mr. Speaker, 

the last time that that number was exceeded, Mr. Speaker, is 

1953. That was a long time ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the groundwork has been laid by this budget. 

We want to ensure that it is a sustainable plan, that it contains 

the spending that is necessary to move our programs forward, 

Mr. Speaker. And I am proud of this budget. And I will 

definitely be voting against the amendment and I will be 

supporting this budget. 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2012 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

proposed amendment moved by the member for Regina 

Rosemont, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Centre: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

disagrees with the budgetary policy of the Government 

of Saskatchewan because it fails to appropriately 

address the common sense priorities of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour, please say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed, say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The nays have it. The amendment fails. The 

question before the Assembly is the motion by the Hon. 

Minister of Finance, seconded by the Minister of Social 

Services: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour, say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:08 until 12:09.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 45] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Huyghebaert Toth Bradshaw 

Reiter Duncan Ross 

McMillan Harpauer Harrison 

Hickie Hutchinson Elhard 

Hart Tell Parent 

Brkich Stewart Ottenbreit 

Weekes Campeau Heppner 

Wilson Michelson Kirsch 

Merriman Doke Makowsky 

Jurgens Steinley Doherty 

Lawrence Tochor Moe 

Marchuk Phillips Docherty 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 9] 

 

Nilson Forbes Belanger 

Wotherspoon Broten Chartier 

Sproule McCall Vermette 

 

Clerk: — Those in favour of the motion, 45; those opposed, 9. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 

Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:13.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 875 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 875 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 875 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 875 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 875 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 875 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 876 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 876 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 876 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 884 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 876 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 876 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 876 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 877 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 877 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatoon Contacts 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 877 

 Provincial Budget 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 877 

 Saskatoon Young Women’s Christian Association Celebrates 100 Years 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 878 

 Provincial Senior Men’s Hockey Champions 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 878 

 Gairdner Wightman Award 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 878 

 Fraud Prevention Month 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 878 

 Saskatchewan Surgical Initiative 

  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 879 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Seniors 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 879 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 879 

 Support for the Film Industry 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 881 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 881 

 Protection for Night Shift Workers 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 881 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 881 

 Provincial Budget 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 882 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 882 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 884 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 887 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 891 

 Recorded Division......................................................................................................................................................................... 894 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


