




















































Hansard: March 20, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 18A  TUESDAY, MARCH 20, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 655 

 March 20, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of the Assembly, it is my 

pleasure to introduce students and staff, the 2012 graduating 

class of SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] Kawacatoose practical nursing program. 

 

If everyone could give a wave when I say your name. The 

students: Marilou Bautista-Godhe, Roxane Burym, Leah Hesse, 

Rita Karakochuk, Deborah Patteeuw, Megan Pele, Maxine 

Poorman, and Twyla Poorman. And the faculty: Sharon 

Flaman; Lana Prystai; the coordinator for SIAST, Michell 

Jesse; the coordinator/liaison with SIAST and the Kawacatoose 

First Nation, Cheryl Poorman; and assistant, Daylene Worm. 

 

The partnership between SIAST and Kawacatoose First Nation 

was first formed in 2006 due to the excellent work of 

Kawacatoose Chief Dennis Dustyhorn, who saw the high 

demand for nurses in rural areas and the need in his community 

for education in health care. The SIAST-Kawacatoose 

partnership is the first of its kind in Canada, where SIAST 

provides the practical nursing program to First Nations people 

from the Kawacatoose and surrounding area. This class will be 

the third successful class of students to graduate, and I had the 

privilege of teaching these students for a number of years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in congratulating 

these students on their achievements and welcoming them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the member from Regina Coronation Park in 

welcoming and congratulating these students from the 

Kawacatoose LPN [licensed practical nurse] program. A little 

bit of an addition to the information provided by the member 

from Coronation Park: the late Richard Poorman, the late Chief 

Richard Poorman, I recall the first person I’d ever heard talk 

about this program was him talking about it with then Premier 

Calvert and the vision that was had for the people to make sure 

that you have those educational opportunities where you need 

people doing the work. 

 

So I also had the privilege, Mr. Speaker, of attending the first 

graduating ceremony for the class along with the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place and the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. And it’s really good to see you here today and 

to see that progress and that success being carried forward. 

Congratulations and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

join with both the member from Coronation Park and the 

member from Regina Elphinstone in welcoming the students 

here from the Kawacatoose LPN program. I’d especially like to 

. . . I should say that Quinton is just outside of my constituency 

although the people from Quinton continue to . . . And we 

welcome their calls. It used to be in my constituency. But I’d 

especially like to extend a special welcome to Sharon Flaman, 

one of the instructors, and Megan Pele, one of the students. 

They come from my hometown, and of course everybody in 

this Assembly knows that’s Cupar. And I’d like them all to 

welcome them here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 

two introductions, if I may. 

 

The first introduction, Mr. Speaker, is of the Member of 

Parliament for Regina Qu’Appelle, who I know must be on a 

break from parliament because they really can’t have it without 

him. I think he’s the youngest Speaker in the history of the 

House of Commons. And when we were there in Ottawa here, I 

guess a couple of weeks ago, we had a chance to visit with Mr. 

Speaker and saw, we had a chance to see his offices there and a 

few other appointments that accrued to the officer. Mr. Speaker, 

if you’re aware of those, I’d ask you not to get any ideas. But 

we want to welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. It’s good 

to see Andrew Scheer in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I have a very important 

introduction. We are honoured to have with us the consul 

general of Japan who’s been in the province for meetings, 

Susumu Fukuda and his wife, Alicia. We’ll ask them to stand. 

We’re very grateful they could be here. 

 

Also joining them is the newly appointed honorary consul for 

Japan, Victor Sawa. Maestro, good to see you. And his wife, 

Lesley, it’s great to have you here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would say, would take this occasion . . . 

Because it was 12 months ago right about now that Japan was 

dealing with the horrific results of the earthquake and the 

tsunami and, Mr. Speaker, we want to say on behalf of this 

Assembly, on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan to the 

consul general, how much our hearts and prayers still go to the 

people of Japan as they continue to rebuild after that tragedy. 

 

We also want to thank Japan, through the consul general, for 

the great partnership that we have between the province of 

Saskatchewan and Japan. It was 2011 that Japan overtook India 

as our third most important destination for exports in this 

province, agricultural products and potash. We have a great and 

dynamic partnership between companies like Mitsui at Yorkton 

for example and the canola crushing plant, and also with 

Hitachi, a longstanding partnership with Hitachi and 

SaskPower. 

 

Very recently, in fact this morning, the next iteration, the next 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

step in that relationship with Hitachi took place as we 

announced another carbon capture sequestration plant in the 

province where we’re going to lead in that technology because 

of a partnership with Hitachi at Shand. And there’ll be more on 

that later I’m sure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to the consul general and to his wife Alicia, we want to say 

welcome to Saskatchewan and we want to thank them. Through 

them we want to thank the people of Japan for the great 

friendship and partnership that is ours. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

know the Leader of the Opposition will want to join in that 

welcome, Mr. Speaker, to our guest to this Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too, on behalf of the 

official opposition, would like to extend special greetings to 

Mr. Susumu Fukuda and Alicia Fukudu, and especially to Mr. 

Victor Sawa and Dr. Lesley Sawa who are strong 

representatives of Japan here in Saskatchewan. 

 

As a former member of the consular corps, I understand the 

great importance of the consul general of Japan in 

Saskatchewan because that person is always the head person for 

the consular corps in Saskatchewan and has done that for many 

years. That shows, I think, very much how we in Saskatchewan 

appreciate Japan. 

 

I had the pleasure about a month ago of hosting four volleyball 

players from Japan in our home. And it was fascinating to 

figure out the Japanese and English connections, but it was 

more fascinating to understand how, when we talked about 

popular culture, the Japanese young people and Saskatchewan 

young people knew a lot of the very same things. So on an 

economic basis, we were very much pleased to be co-operating 

on all of the things that we do, but I think the exchange of our 

young people will further the generational friendship that we 

have. And so on that base, I’d like to say welcome very much. 

 

I’d also like to bring special greetings to the Speaker of the 

House of Commons. And I think all of us are anxious to come 

and see your quarters that the Premier’s talked about, so you 

can start lining up your visiting calendar for all of us who show 

up. Anyway, very good to have you here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure today to introduce to you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, four residents 

of Regina seated in your gallery. From Regina South, a 

constituency I have the honour of representing, we have Gary 

and Donna Andrews. Give us a wave, folks. Thank you so 

much. And from the great constituency of Regina Wascana 

Plains, we have Richard and Iona Niebergall. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these good people are here today to watch 

the proceedings, and I told them I hope they get their money’s 

worth. So I encourage all members to help me welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly today. Thank you so much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, I’m pleased to introduce a 

couple of guests that are here today. One, Janice Bernier who 

is, I guess, no stranger to many in this Assembly and in Regina. 

Janice has been a long-time labour leader. She had a career at 

SaskTel. She works in the film and music industry. She’s the 

organizer of the annual dinner for the less fortunate, Mr. 

Speaker, and she also served as the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] candidate in Batoche in the past election. 

 

Now Janice is joined by Peggy Hennig. Peggy is here on behalf 

of the United Way where she works, and certainly we’d like to 

recognize the good work of the United Way all across 

Saskatchewan and in our communities. I ask all members of 

this Assembly to join with me in welcoming both of these 

community leaders to their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of this honoured 

Assembly, Elliott Bourgeault. Elliott is part of the 

Saskatchewan legislative internship program. I’ve been 

working with him for about six or seven weeks now. He had an 

opportunity to come up and do a little bit of a tour through our 

constituency, and I look forward to working with him the next 

few weeks until the end of the program for my part. So I would 

ask everyone here to join me in welcoming Elliott to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 

join with the members and welcome Janice, Janice Bernier to 

the House, and we’re glad to see her up in the balcony there yet. 

Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the protection of 

late-night retail workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know 

that in the early morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray 

Wiebe was shot two times and died from his injuries. He was 

working at a gas station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from 

intruders. 

 

We also know that robberies, armed robberies such as the ones 

that took place in Regina on January 23rd, 24th, 2012 — and in 

fact one week ago tonight in Saskatoon in my riding, an armed 

robbery involving a shotgun — showed that Jimmy’s law is 

needed to give workers added protection in the workplace. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 

of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the management of our finances 

and reporting of our finances. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with a fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina and Maple Creek. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 

petition today signed by people in Saskatchewan calling on the 

Sask Party government to support the seniors’ bill of rights. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, and 

financial abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern to our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearms use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It’s signed by many good trappers of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

2012 International Day of the Francophonie 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, March 20th, 

marks la journée internationale de la Francophonie 

[International Day of the Francophonie], an opportunity for us 

to celebrate the French language and the rich and diverse 

francophone culture here in Saskatchewan and in Canada, but 

it’s also a chance to realize we are part of a much bigger 

community, la Francophonie du monde [the Francophonie of 

the world]. 

 

Je suis très fière de mes racines francophones. Mon arrière 

grand-oncle Napoléon Champagne était le premier francophone 

qui a servit comme le député provincial ici. 

 

Mes deux grand-pères sont originaires du Québec, mais ils 

n’ont pas transmis leur langue à leur enfants une fois en 

Saskatchewan, une réalité qui, j’entends dire, est encore 

présente aujourd’hui. J’admets que je fais partie de la 

génération perdue. Mais parce que la communaté fransaskoise, 

avec son acceuil, avec le travail de son réseau associé 

provinciale, comme l’ACF [Assemblée communautaire 

fransaskoise], c’est grâce à ce rayonnement que mes deux 

enfants feront partie de la génération retrouvée et la 

fransaskoisie fera partie de leur identité culturelle. 

 

Cette année, l’année des fransaskois et fransaskoises, et 

aujourd’hui, la journée internationelle de la francophonie, 

augmentera le sentiment de fierté et d’optimisme de la 

population fransaskoise. C’est aussi une occasion pour le 

Saskatchewan de mieux faire connaître sa vitalité bilingue et 

multiculturelle. 

 

[Translation: I am very proud of my francophone roots. My 

great grand-uncle, Napoléon Champagne, was the first 

francophone who served as a provincial member here. 

 

My two grandfathers are originally from Quebec, but they 

didn’t pass on their language to their children once in 

Saskatchewan, a reality that I hear is still present today. I admit 

that I am part of the lost generation. But because of the 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

Fransaskois community, with its welcome, with the work of its 

associated provincial network, like the ACF [Assemblée 

communautaire fransaskoise], it’s thanks to this that my two 

children are part of the found generation and the fransaskoise 

are part of their cultural identity. 

 

This year, the Year of the Fransaskois, and this day, the 

International Day of the Francophonie, increase the pride and 

the optimism of the Fransaskois population. It’s also an 

occasion for Saskatchewan to better understand its bilingual 

and multicultural vitality.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in saying merci 

[thank you] to all those who have worked so hard and continue 

to do so to ensure a vibrant francophone culture continues to 

enrich the Saskatchewan in which we live. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Keeping Students Free from Tobacco 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. On 

Thursday, March 15th, I had the honour of revealing the 

winning ad selected by grade 6 to 12 students in a 

province-wide View and Vote 4 program at St. Marguerite 

Elementary School that’s located in my constituency of Regina 

Dewdney. St. Marguerite grade 7 students were one of 300 

classrooms who participated in this informative program from 

across the province. 

 

As part of the Ministry of Health’s tobacco reduction strategy, 

more than 6,000 students voted for an ad they felt would keep 

them from starting to use tobacco, or if they already used 

tobacco, the ad that made them think about quitting. Hearing 

students’ thoughts about how the ads showed me that these 

students are getting the important message to stay tobacco free. 

Being a father of three young boys, this issue hits home for me 

as I want them to lead healthy, active, and tobacco-free lives. 

 

I’m proud of what our government has done and continues to 

do in educating our youth on the importance of living a healthy 

lifestyle. In 2010 legislation was introduced banning smoking 

in vehicles with children under the age of 16; around doorways, 

windows, and air intakes of public buildings; and in all school 

grounds. The message to live tobacco free will reach more 

youth as the chosen ad will soon be shown in movie theatres 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing all the 

students who participated in the View and Vote 4 program. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Unions of Regina Christmas Dinner 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On December 

20th, 2011, the unions of Regina held their annual community 

Christmas dinner for Regina’s less fortunate at the Delta Hotel. 

Sadly this dinner drew record crowds. These numbers 

demonstrate the vast needs that exist within our communities. 

Importantly, the Regina & District Labour Council with the 

support of affiliate and non-affiliate unions, the Saskatchewan 

building trades, the CLC [Canadian Labour Congress], and the 

Delta Hotel stepped up to the plate once again and filled the 

need at least for one night. 

 

I was pleased to work alongside these volunteers and 

specifically want to recognize Janice Bernier, the event 

coordinator, joined by the member from Regina Elphinstone as 

always there as well. This year over 1,500 people attended the 

event and both enjoyed and appreciated a full Christmas dinner. 

The children had games and small gifts and a visit with Santa. 

 

We know that the holiday season is a time that can be 

incredibly stressful for individuals and families who are 

struggling financially, emotionally, and socially. The organizers 

of this event recognize this fact and have been able to come 

together once again to give generously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in thanking all those who recognized the broader needs 

within our community and supported the 11th annual Unions of 

Regina Christmas Dinner. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Delisle and District Fire Department’s 100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, on December 10th, 2011, I along 

with many other special guests attended an event celebrating 

the 100th anniversary of the Delisle and district fire department. 

The evening included letters of congratulations from Prime 

Minister Stephen Harper and Premier Brad Wall. Fire Chief Al 

Dreher made a special presentation to Dave Currie for his 

dedicated service of 34 years as fire chief of Delisle and district 

fire department. 

 

In 1911 the fire department served only the town of Delisle. As 

of today, the department covers approximately 1,000 square 

kilometres for fire coverage and approximately 2,000 square 

kilometres for rescues. There are now three fire halls. The main 

hall is located in Delisle, with satellite halls at Pike Lake and 

Donovan. The department has 10 trucks and 50 members. In the 

last year, they responded to 127 call-outs. This includes fires, 

vehicle accidents, medical calls, search and rescue, and 

hazardous goods. The department also conducts fire inspections 

and have a fire prevention program that is presented to the four 

schools in their coverage area. Since the beginning of this 

program, fires started by children have significantly decreased. 

 

The chief and members of the department are very proud of the 

growth and expertise of its members. Mr. Speaker, I would like 

all members to join me in applauding the Delisle and district 

fire department on their many years of exceptional service. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatoon Citizens of the Year 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Friday I had the opportunity to bring greetings on behalf of the 

Premier and our government at a luncheon in Saskatoon to 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

honour the winners of the CTV [Canadian Television Network 

Ltd.] Citizen of the Year Awards, Eleanor and Bill Edwards. 

Saskatchewan is known all around the world for our resource 

wealth, but we can all agree that one of Saskatchewan’s greatest 

assets is the spirit and generosity of our people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the honour of being named Citizen of the Year 

represents the culmination of years of hard work and the 

dedication of Bill and Eleanor. This exceptional couple was 

raised in Saskatoon and has a long history of contributing to 

their city, not only through their business but by working 

tirelessly to support worthwhile groups and organizations. 

 

Bill and Eleanor are well known for the generosity and sense of 

community. They have made significant contributions through 

their creation of bereavement organizations as well as coaching 

and volunteering with organizations such as Meals on Wheels. 

In addition, both have served with various hospital foundations 

and board committees to advance health care in Saskatoon. 

 

I commend CTV on the excellent job they do in recognizing 

Saskatoon’s outstanding citizens with this annual award. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Bill and 

Eleanor Edwards on this well-deserved award and thank them 

for the positive impact on the many lives they have touched. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Estevan Citizen Honoured by Agricultural Graduates 

Association 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise today to speak to the accomplishments of 

Estevan constituent, Darald Marin. On January 7th, Mr. Marin 

was presented with an honorary life membership from the 

Saskatchewan Agricultural Graduates Association. 

 

Since university graduation, Mr. Marin has grown and 

marketed seed, operated and owned custom seed plants, 

pursued the trend of paraplowing soils, and incorporated alfalfa 

into the crop rotation as well as marketing the product to the 

Pacific Rim and the United States. During the winter, he 

instructed farm management classes and offered consulting 

services from the farm office. Mr. Marin achieved national 

recognition in the 1980s for harvesting and selling kochia seed 

while co-operating with Agriculture Canada and the 

Saskatchewan Research Council. The Marin farm practised 

zero till for 30 years up until 2012. 

 

Mr. Marin has been very active member of the Radville 

community, volunteering for many organizations, serving as 

alderman and mayor of the town of Radville, and had a large 

role in establishing the Long Creek Rodeo. Mr. Speaker, in 

addition to his many accomplishments, Mr. Marin is an avid 

historical artifacts collector and president of the Western 

Canada chapter 38 of the International Harvester Collectors 

Club. 

 

Mr. Marin credits most of his success and that of his farming 

operation to the girl of his dreams: his wife, Marlene. I’d like to 

ask all my colleagues to join me in applauding the great 

achievements of Darald Marin. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Focus on Women Trade Show and Sale 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today and talk about the 2012 Focus on Women Trade Show 

and Sale that took place this last weekend in Prince Albert. This 

annual event provided over 80 exhibitors an opportunity to 

demonstrate the latest in fashion and products to over 2,000 

attendees. As women carry out professional work in business in 

our communities, we celebrate the role that women play in our 

history — in the economic, social, political, and cultural fabric 

of our country. 

 

I was in attendance with the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote and enjoyed emceeing the event, as well as 

experiencing the energy and spirit expressed by business 

women of all ages. The trade show was a great gathering, 

allowing for a weekend of knowledge exchange, networking, 

and new products. Twenty-six years ago this event was initially 

organized by rural farm women to celebrate the achievements 

of women in the community and conduct an event specifically 

to recognize local women. 

 

Saskatchewan volunteers are the best in the country, and I 

would like to thank all the committee members and volunteers 

for another successful year and a wonderful trade show. Please 

join me in applauding our outstanding women from every 

corner of the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Takeover of Grain Marketing Company 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last week we asked some very 

important questions about the Viterra takeover deal. The 

Premier was flippant in his responses; he laughed and shrugged 

off the questions. But on Friday, when the Premier did get 

serious, he said: 

 

An enhanced head office presence and more jobs in 

Saskatchewan would be a benefit to our province, both in 

terms of positive impact on the economy and on 

provincial revenues. 

 

My question to the Premier: what is his definition of an 

enhanced head office presence? Does the deal announced today 

meet that definition? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I thank the member for the question. 

 

Obviously the news is out, and there is a proposal for a 

takeover, a friendly takeover of Viterra, which will now be 

subject to a national review under the Investment Canada 

guidelines as well as a potential review in terms of the 

competition issue. 

 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the head office question, this is a 

concern and should be for the province of Saskatchewan when 

any Saskatchewan head office corporation is the target of a 

takeover. Mr. Speaker, the short answer to the member’s 

question is, we’re going to do the homework and find out 

exactly what this takeover means for the presence of the newco, 

of Glencore and the other two partners in the takeover. 

 

We’re going to do that homework, Mr. Speaker, as we do our 

evaluation of the deal. What we will use as our guidepost in 

this, Mr. Speaker, is the best interests of the province of 

Saskatchewan. That was the case 15 months ago, and it’ll 

continue to be the case. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the nature of my questions 

last week were: had the homework been done yet? We think 

that with the change to the Wheat Board, it was fairly obvious 

that things like this would happen. 

 

The Premier said that the takeover of the Viterra would be 

reviewed as it relates to a net benefit to the province. And we 

know that net benefit relates to the economy, provincial 

revenues, and producers. This morning Richardson 

International, which is acquiring about $900 million in Viterra 

assets, said current employees would be required to bid on their 

own jobs. My question to the Premier: what are his advisers 

telling him? Will there be a net increase in the number of jobs 

in Saskatchewan or a decrease? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The simple answer, Mr. Speaker, is that is 

not yet known. We know that over the last number of years, 

there has been some officers of the company of Viterra who 

have located in Calgary. Some of the officers from Winnipeg in 

Viterra’s, the interests that Viterra had after a takeover 

involving Manitoba, a Manitoba company, have moved to 

Regina. But, Mr. Speaker, we know the company, Glencore, is 

indicating an interest in not having an office in Calgary. That 

would bode well for those jobs moving to Regina which they 

say will be their North American headquarters if this deal is 

indeed approved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the rest of the complement of 

corporate office positions, we do not know the answer to those 

questions yet. We have a team of senior officials in place led by 

a cabinet committee. We are going to engage outside sources if 

we feel we need to. And, Mr. Speaker, we will get the answers 

to those questions and will report them fully to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier supported the 

dismantling of the Canadian Wheat Board and experts have 

now shown that this is a direct cause of this particular takeover. 

The CEO [chief executive officer], Mayo Schmidt, at Viterra 

pointed out that the loss of the Wheat Board monopoly would 

mean 40 to $50 million to the bottom line of Viterra. My advice 

to the Premier is . . . What advice did he receive from the 

deputy minister of Agriculture with respect to the effect the 

dismantling of the single desk would have on companies like 

Viterra? And will he table that advice here in this Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, shortly after legislation was 

introduced in the House of Commons to change the Wheat 

Board . . . The Wheat Board still exists. The Wheat Board, if its 

claims are true that it has these 60,000 farmers to support it, 

will have a massive base of customers from which to build. 

They can also get in now to non-board grains. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, shortly after the legislation was tabled, there 

was an announcement specifically in relation to the Global 

Transportation Hub and a new resident at the Global 

Transportation Hub, which will be Alliance traders or a 

partnership formed thereof. And they’re going to do what, Mr. 

Speaker? Because of the end of the monopoly, we’re going to 

make pasta on the prairies where we grow all the durum — first 

time for a very, very long time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’ll be . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 

member on the backbench is saying, well did you see that 

coming? Well all of their questions last week were, why haven’t 

you reacted to a deal that hasn’t happened yet, Mr. Speaker. If the 

member has access to the amazing Kreskin, send him over. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a fundamental question about 

the competence of this government. It’s been known for a long 

time, but at least from May last year, that the Wheat Board and the 

single desk were in jeopardy. It was changed; that happened. What 

advice did the Premier have? Would he table that for the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

There are many questions, as the Premier has said here about this 

particular deal. There’s questions about head office jobs but more 

importantly there are questions about what happens to all the jobs 

in rural Saskatchewan. So my question to the Premier is: when it 

looks like this deal will be more beneficial to Winnipeg and to 

Calgary, what will he be doing to defend Saskatchewan’s 

interests? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — While the Wheat Board had its monopoly in 

Western Canada, Mr. Speaker, while it was by that monopoly 

preventing important value-added projects for board grains, Mr. 

Speaker, there were takeovers that occurred. The Wheat Pool 

became a publicly traded company under the watch of the NDP. 

That particular publicly traded company did what? They took over 

other grain companies, and they did that, Mr. Speaker, amazingly, 

while the monopoly of the Wheat Board existed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member ends his question with, what are you 

going to do to protect the interests of the province? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we will not follow their example. Because in October of 

2010, they released their plan for potash. You remember the 

takeover 15 months ago, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] . . . And they 

say this: “The plan for potash the NDP released, which lays out, in 

no uncertain terms, demands and conditions to be placed on any 

foreign corporation ultimately given the right to mine in the 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

province.” In other words, Mr. Speaker, they gave up on the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. They gave up on 

Saskatchewan’s interest. That’s not going to happen on this side of 

the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Sale of Television Network 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2010 this 

government sold off the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network for $350,000 to a company called Bluepoint 

Investment. This was despite the physical assets and film and 

video library being valued at close to $4 million. Now that we 

hear, now we hear that Bluepoint is flipping the company to 

Rogers Communications for about $3 million, a far cry from the 

350,000 the government accepted when they sold off SCN 

[Saskatchewan Communications Network]. 

 

Bluepoint seems to be maximizing profits for its owners. I 

wonder why in 2010 the government didn’t maximize profits 

for its shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan. To the 

minister: in light of Rogers’s recent bid to buy SCN for $3 

million, does he think the people of Saskatchewan got a fair 

price for their public broadcaster when it was sold off for only 

$350,000? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — We thank the member for her 

question, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, two of the more 

important challenges facing the film industry and television 

industry were access to capital to fund production and adapting 

to the new digital technology. We helped resolve both of these 

issues through the sale of SCN to Bluepoint Investment. In their 

agreement, Bluepoint committed to continue direct investment 

in Saskatchewan productions, but they also committed to 

provide future funding to promote digital production in our 

province so Saskatchewan filmmakers and video artists can 

reach world audiences through the new electronic media. 

 

Now I actually had the opportunity to meet with Bluepoint and 

Rogers Communications late last year, and I learned that these 

two companies have signed an affiliation agreement. Under the 

agreement, Rogers assumed responsibility for programming in 

January and has brought Citytv to Saskatchewan, a first for our 

province. In addition to bringing a major new company to our 

province and new viewing opportunities to Saskatchewan 

residents, the deal also provides opportunities for a national 

audience to see what we’re doing here in Saskatchewan. This is 

a major step forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, for the sale of, for the sale to be 

finalized, the CRTC [Canadian Radio-television and 

Telecommunications Commission] needs to approve the 

purchase of SCN by Rogers. One of the commitments which 

the minister spoke to, attached to SCN, is to spend 2.75 million 

on Saskatchewan productions — independent and digital. In 

fact the minister made that commitment in a June 2010 news 

release. I’d like to quote: 

 

Along with buying the assets there is also a commitment 

to buy new Saskatchewan programming content that will 

support the film industry and to develop digital content. 

This proposal is the best value for taxpayer dollars. 

 

To the minister: you sold off a Crown corporation at fire sale 

prices. Do you think it’s now the best value for Saskatchewan 

taxpayers to get our fill of American and downtown Toronto 

television on SCN — which was once the pride of the province, 

filled with Saskatchewan content? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the 

question. As we said before, there were important challenges 

facing Saskatchewan’s film and television industries, including 

access to capital and adapting to new digital technology. 

 

SCN’s sale to Bluepoint Investment helps resolve those issues 

and, as I mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, in their agreement 

Bluepoint committed to continue direct investment in 

Saskatchewan productions and to provide funding for digital 

transformation, key to Saskatchewan video and filmmakers 

reaching the worldwide audience that exists today. 

 

As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet 

with Bluepoint and the Rogers Communications people last 

year — it was in December, as I recall — and we learned that 

the new companies have in fact signed an affiliation agreement 

under which Rogers has assumed responsibility for 

programming. That took place in January, as viewers will 

know, and that has brought Citytv to Saskatchewan, a brand 

new viewing opportunity with a national company here in 

Saskatchewan. We think that’s good progress, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

mentioned Bluepoint’s commitment to purchasing local 

productions, but he didn’t mention that Rogers has been asked 

to be relieved of that commitment, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

cannot remain silent about Rogers’s request to relieve itself of 

this commitment to purchase Saskatchewan productions. The 

government made that commitment less than two years ago. 

That was what the sale was premised on, Mr. Speaker, or 

perhaps this was an empty promise. 

 

To the minister: will he finally stand up — really stand up — 

for Saskatchewan interests and not just say the right thing but 

do the right thing and ask the CRTC to maintain Bluepoint’s 

contractual commitment to local production for the new owner, 

Rogers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for her question. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

it’s a major step forward for Saskatchewan to draw a national 

company like Rogers Communications and the new viewing 

opportunities that they provide to Saskatchewan residents. We 

will certainly continue to have discussions with the company, 

and any commitments that have been made will need to be 

honoured, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Dementia Patients and Their Caregivers 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In last year’s budget, 

Mr. Speaker, health care spending accounted for about 42 per 

cent of the budget. So on the eve of another budget, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s no wonder that people are wondering what’s in 

store for health care. 

 

In Saskatchewan, there are over 18,000 people in the province 

who are currently living with Alzheimer’s disease or a related 

dementia. To put that in perspective, Mr. Speaker, that means 

for the populations of Yorkton or Swift Current, you’d need to 

add about 2,500 people in order to match the number of people 

in Saskatchewan living with dementia, and that number’s 

increasing. Every 24 hours, Mr. Speaker, 10 more people 

develop a form of dementia. My question to the minister: does 

he agree that the dementia epidemic in Saskatchewan is serious, 

that it requires attention, and will we see action in tomorrow’s 

budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the 

members opposite, and particularly that member, is waiting 

anxiously — one more sleep — until the Finance minister rises 

in his place and delivers another balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, something that we didn’t see under the NDP, but 

it was a certainly a balanced budget under this Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as far as particular programs such as Alzheimer’s 

and dementia, we know the impact that that has in our province. 

It’s a serious impact. I have met on a regular basis, annually for 

sure, with the Alzheimer’s Society to look at some of their 

proposals and what they would like to see done in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do know that to care for individuals suffering from 

dementia and Alzheimer’s takes special training, and many are 

in our long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. We try and supply 

the best facilities and staff that we can to take care of those 

individuals, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we worked very hard in 

our first year to make sure that we’ve got the proper 

complement — some 800 more nurses hired in the province, 

Mr. Speaker. It certainly wasn’t done under the previous 

government. Not to say that there isn’t more work to do, Mr. 

Speaker, but we will see in the upcoming budget as to how the 

Health budget rolls out. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those on the front 

lines have identified that support for caregivers, care workers, 

needs to be a priority. According to experts, when caregivers 

have the appropriate resources that they need, Mr. Speaker, on 

average they’re able to keep their loved ones out of long-term 

care facilities an average of 557 days longer than those who do 

not have the support. 

 

We know in the Throne Speech last fall, Mr. Speaker, when the 

Sask Party delivered their Throne Speech, there was no real 

mention of additional support for respite care for caregivers, or 

additional support for the Alzheimer’s Society’s First Link 

program. 

 

Now we know, Mr. Speaker, they’re certainly not bound to 

what is in their Throne Speech because we have seen them 

come forward and introduce three new politicians for the 

province, an expense that will cost millions and millions of 

extra dollars here in Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: the caregivers of those people that are helping 

individuals with Alzheimer’s do not want more politicians in 

the province; they want additional supports. My question to the 

minister: will there be additional supports for caregivers, for 

respite care, and for the First Link program of the Alzheimer’s 

Society? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

question, we’re working hard to make sure that proper facilities 

are there for people that they can age in place, like an Amicus, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re dead set against it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take no advice from that member or that 

party opposite, especially on following commitments, Mr. 

Speaker. In the last provincial election, those members had the 

nerve to promise $550 million of spending in health care — not 

1 cent for Alzheimer’s. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the supports that caregivers are 

asking for is to ensure that people can stay in their homes 

longer and not have the reliance on long-term care facilities in 

the same way. What it comes down to is common sense in 

spending as opposed to short-sighted decisions. 

 

Other governments in the country have recognized the 

importance of this, Mr. Speaker. In Manitoba, the provincial 

government has given $550,000 to the Alzheimer Society’s 

First Link program which supports people with dementia, their 

family members, and caregivers. British Columbia, Mr. 

Speaker, gave $1 million to the Alzheimer Society for this 

issue. Yet in Saskatchewan this government is giving just 

$50,000 per year for similar initiatives. It’s not even a drop in 

the bucket, Mr. Speaker, when we consider that for every 

individual that can stay out of a long-term care facility there’s 

an annual savings of about $75,000. 

 

My question to the minister: when will this government take 

this seriously and start catching up to other provinces and do 

what’s right for caregivers here in Saskatchewan? 

 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, year over year we’ve 

seen the budget in this province for health care continue to 

increase, dealing with many, many of the aspects and diseases 

that people suffer. Alzheimer’s is one of them, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we’ve strengthened home care in this province so 

people can live at their home longer, supported as long as 

possible. That’s why we’re repairing long-term care facilities so 

that if they can’t live in their home any longer, they have a 

proper facility to go into, replacing 13 across the province as 

well as one in Saskatoon, Amicus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re moving those steps forward as we move 

forward with the growing province, Mr. Speaker. But once 

again, Mr. Speaker, I find it ringing awfully hollow from those 

members opposite that could promise everything that they 

could imagine in health care in the last campaign, but they 

didn’t say one word about Alzheimer’s, and now he’s got the 

nerve to raise it here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Plans for Highways Ministry 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Maintaining our highways and roads is crucial in keeping our 

families safe. But the people who do the highway maintenance 

work are worried, Mr. Speaker. This Premier’s talk about 

austerity leaves these workers wondering what job cuts are in 

store in tomorrow’s budget. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because the 

Saskatchewan Party government hasn’t filled 95 positions in 

the last year, and it’s close to 200 positions that have been left 

unfilled in Highways over the last two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister assure this Assembly that he’ll 

stand up for his staff in tomorrow’s budget to ensure that there 

are no more cuts to Highways staff? Will he do that, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when this government took office a little over four years ago, 

we faced a massive infrastructure deficit in health care and 

education, but it was especially noticeable in highways, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the term of the last four years, while in the 

2007 election we promised $1.8 billion in highway spending, 

we actually exceeded that. We spent $2.2 billion on highways 

spending. Mr. Speaker, during the recent campaign, I was with 

our Premier when he announced our plans for this term. Mr. 

Speaker, again, $2.2 billion in the upcoming four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have no apologies to make for what we’ve 

done under Highways compared to the members opposite. We 

ramped up spending enormously, and as far as cuts or anything 

in tomorrow’s budget, Mr. Speaker, that member’s just going to 

have to wait one more night. The announcements will be made 

tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, last year this government left 

three fewer communities without maintenance shops or staff. 

Saskatchewan needs our staff to be working across the province 

to keep our roads as safe as possible for all of us, Mr. Speaker. 

Without a local maintenance shop or employees to do the job, 

there is more potential for dangerous roads that threaten our 

family and our industry. My question to the minister: which 

communities are on the chopping block for shutdowns of their 

maintenance centres in tomorrow’s budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

maybe the member opposite didn’t hear me. Over the last four 

years this government has increased highways spending. We 

have a massive infrastructure deficit, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done 

an awful lot of highways work. We recognize there’s an awful 

lot left to do. There’s no doubt about that, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite left behind some deplorable conditions in 

highways all over the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, highways are priority for this government. And 

the member opposite doesn’t seem to realize but, Mr. Speaker, 

the budget announcements will come tomorrow and he’s just 

going to have wait like everybody else to get that information. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

people of Saskatchewan didn’t vote for further cuts to our 

Highways staff. They didn’t vote for shutdown of service 

centres as they realized it could lead to dangerous road 

conditions, Mr. Speaker. They certainly didn’t vote to have 

more politicians, when the trade-off is services for 

Saskatchewan people such as safe roads for our families and 

industry, Mr. Speaker. That does not lead to responsible 

growth. 

 

There are many questions behind the motivations for this 

action. Is this the minister’s first step towards the privatization 

of highways maintenance in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The goal of this 

government as far as highways go, Mr. Speaker, is twofold 

really. First of all, we need to fix a lot of highways that were 

left in deplorable condition by the members opposite. Second, 

the economy is growing, Mr. Speaker. We have more 

population. We have more businesses moving to this province. 

The economy is as sound as it’s ever been. Mr. Speaker, that 

creates demands. That creates things that the members opposite 

never envisioned. That creates demands for things like 

bypasses. That creates demands for things like interchanges. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re working very hard to meet those demands. 

 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

As far as the member opposite worried about what’s going to 

happen under the Highways tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, he’s just 

going to have to wait for tomorrow’s budget. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, he speaks about $2.2 billion in 

highways spending. Where are the staff to maintain the road, 

Mr. Speaker? Two hundred people less in the Highways staff. 

But let me recap for the public. We’re advocating for safe roads 

for our family and for industry. That is responsible growth, Mr. 

Speaker. What the Sask Party’s advocating for, what are they 

advocating for? More politicians and fewer Highways workers, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Can the minister at least assure this House that the three new 

MLAs that he’s fighting for, that he’s lobbying for, can at least 

drive a snowplow unit or maintain a gravel truck or have some 

engineering skills to cover for the staff that he’s refusing to hire 

on? Will he do that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I don’t 

know where to start. That member was a former Highways 

minister, Mr. Speaker, and under his watch they did virtually 

nothing through 16 years. Mr. Speaker, in his long, rambling 

question, one of the points he made, Mr. Speaker, was he said 

that the members opposite were advocating for industry. That 

seems kind of ironic because I’ve never heard the members 

opposite ever advocate anything for industry or business in this 

province, ever. They chased businesses out of this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as far as his comment about the citizens in the election not 

voting for more MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], 

I’ll tell you what the citizens didn’t vote for, Mr. Speaker. They 

obviously voted for less NDP MLAs. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Carbon Capture Test Facility in Southeast Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise in your Assembly today to tell you and the 

citizens of this province about an important initiative being 

undertaken by our provincial government through SaskPower in 

co-operation and partnership with Hitachi. In fact, I’d like to 

pay particular attention and mention Mr. Fujitani who was 

present at the announcement this morning, as well as Tom 

Kishchuk, who runs Hitachi’s operations here in Saskatoon. 

 

This initiative, Mr. Speaker, that we announced this morning, 

highlights three key aspects that are noteworthy for citizens: 

first, the efforts of SaskPower to become a world leader in the 

field of clean coal electrical generation; second, our plans to put 

a sound foundation in place to support the province’s growing 

economy for years to come through SaskPower; and third, to 

reinforce the significance of partnerships between SaskPower 

and key private sector companies from across Canada and 

around the world. 

 

It was my honour to be in Saskatoon this morning to announce 

that SaskPower is partnering with Hitachi to construct a $60 

million carbon capture test facility adjacent to the Shand power 

station in southeast Saskatchewan. SaskPower and Hitachi will 

each contribute approximately $30 million, with SaskPower 

acting as the owner/operator of the facility. Construction will 

begin later this year or early in 2013 with a scheduled 

completion date of the summer of 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this major investment in carbon capture research 

technology will help to ensure that SaskPower can fulfill its 

mandate of providing reliable, affordable, and sustainable 

electricity to the province of Saskatchewan — the province of 

Saskatchewan which is going through record growth. Providing 

a test facility for these advanced technologies means 

Saskatchewan will remain a world leader when it comes to 

carbon capture. It also supports Hitachi’s substantial 

manufacturing capacity right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Joining with Hitachi on this test facility continues a 

long-standing partnership between SaskPower and Hitachi that 

dates back more than 40 years. In 1970, Hitachi supplied a 

steam turbine for SaskPower’s Queen Elizabeth power station 

in Saskatoon. This was the first Hitachi turbine ever installed in 

North America. 

 

SaskPower will be able to use the knowledge gained from this 

facility as the corporation proceeds with the development of the 

$1.24 billion Boundary dam integrated carbon capture and 

storage demonstration project in Estevan. Ensuring that carbon 

capture is a viable option for SaskPower is crucial to the people 

of this province. Over the next 20 years SaskPower must 

rebuild, replace, or acquire more than 3700 megawatts of 

generating capacity. That’s about the amount of generating 

capacity that’s in the system today. 

 

What we do know is that, under this government, coal-fired 

generation will be a vital component in meeting that challenge 

for the foreseeable decades. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do that 

by cleaning up coal. Mr. Speaker, today’s announcement is 

great news for our province’s already strong economy, and 

especially the communities in the Southeast. It will continue to 

position Saskatchewan as being home to world-class applied 

research and innovation and that this government, through 

SaskPower, has a bold plan to ensure that we continue with our 

growth agenda. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pleased to just 

offer a couple of comments on behalf of the official opposition. 

I thank the minister for providing the statement here today in 

advance of question period. 

 

Certainly I’d like to recognize the great work of Hitachi in 

Saskatchewan, that long history of manufacturing, of 

employment, and of technology that they’ve utilized both in our 

province and around the world. The minister referenced some 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

of that relationship and some of that history which does go back 

more than a few decades — 40 years or so — to the Queen 

Elizabeth power station and a steam turbine, but it’s continued 

since then and they’ve been very involved in power generation 

in this province and beyond our borders for many, many years, 

including the wind power projects over the past decade, 

certainly under New Democratic government. 

 

So I’d like to thank Hitachi for the role that they’re playing and 

that they’re fulfilling and as it relates to new technologies. As it 

relates to the important mandate of SaskPower that the 

minister’s entrusted of providing affordable, safe, reliable, 

environmentally sustainable, and responsible power to the 

people of the province, we are concerned with respect to plans 

or lacking plans on this front. But there’s certainly 

opportunities for questions as we move forward. There is a 

significant challenge for SaskPower in meeting these challenges 

and we need to make sure that there is a clear plan to be able to 

do so. 

 

As it relates to the carbon capture test facility, certainly we look 

forward to learning more about this project. It’s always nice for 

Saskatchewan to be able to showcase and take a lead role in 

advancing technologies. It’s been part of our history here in this 

province to do so, and it’s something that’s important for us to 

continue. We want to make sure that we’re analyzing the value 

for dollar on a project like this and making sure that it’s in the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. Certainly we’ll be doing 

that. 

 

As it relates to the clean coal project that was mentioned by the 

minister, this has potentially very significant benefits for 

Canada as a whole, certainly for Saskatchewan but really the 

world as a whole, and holds out some promise, some significant 

promise. What we would urge, and what we have urged all the 

way along, is that the burden of $1 billion for this test project 

on the backs of Saskatchewan utility ratepayers, families, and 

businesses is a heavy burden to carry. And it’s been 

disappointing to date to see the hundreds of millions of dollars 

bypass Saskatchewan into Alberta to drive technologies and 

projects there when realistically this is such an important 

project that’s not only important to Saskatchewan but to Canada 

as a whole. And we’d like to certainly see the federal 

government play a broader role in that project than they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s all the comments I have for now. Certainly 

we have important tasks before us here in Saskatchewan in 

providing affordable, safe, reliable, environmentally sustainable 

and responsible power to the people of the province, and we’ll 

be working hard to make sure that the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people are represented on that front. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the Opposition House Leader’s point 

of order? 

 

[14:30] 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 

question period in the exchange between the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place and the Minister of Health, the 

Minister of Health said something that he should know was not 

in fact true. 

 

In referring to NDP platform from the last campaign, he’d said 

that there was no discussion of Alzheimer’s in the platform. 

That is patently untrue, Mr. Speaker. And on page seven of that 

platform, it’s there for all to see. I’d ask for the Speaker to rule 

on that, please. 

 

The Speaker: — I will take that under advisement and take a 

look at Hansard and come back with a decision. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon after question period and a ministerial statement to 

start off our afternoon of adjourned debates on an issue that has 

a great amount of importance and relevance to all 

Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an important issue 

because it talks about our democratic system and it’s a piece of 

legislation that addresses how in fact we conduct elections, how 

we organize ourselves as a provincial government with respect 

to the electoral process and addresses a number of important 

issues. I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s also very important to have this 

discussion because it cuts to, it cuts to an issue that I think is 

also very important when we look at the record of a government 

and what they say publicly and then what they do once they’re 

in a position to do something out of their own self-interest. 

 

For those at home, the piece of legislation I’m speaking about is 

Bill No. 36, An Act to amend the Constituency Boundaries Act. 

The piece of legislation itself is not especially long. Bill No. 36 

is really just a one-page document, along with the title page of 

course, and then a couple pages of explanatory notes which 

explain the changes that are brought forward. So as it’s stated 

with Bill No. 36, the short title is “This Act may be cited as The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011” and it goes on 

to say it will be amended in this, “in the manner set forth in this 

Act”. 

 

Section 2 is amended and it says: 

 

Clause 2(k) is amended by adding “that is 18 years of 

age or older” after [the phrase] “total population of 

Saskatchewan”. 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

Subsection 3.2 is amended by adding “total” before 

“population”. 

 

[And section 12 is amended.] Clause 12.2(b) is amended 

by striking out “56” and substituting “59”. 

 

And then there’s another subsection, Mr. Speaker, that talks 

about how the population quotient is to be calculated in 

accordance with the following formula. And then also there’s a 

component, Mr. Speaker, that talks of the transitional 

commission to prepare reports based on amendments and it 

says: 

 

7 Notwithstanding any provision of The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, 1993, if a Constituency Boundaries 

Commission has been established pursuant to that Act 

before the coming into force of this Act, the Constituency 

Boundaries Commission shall prepare its interim and 

final reports based on the amendments made by this Act. 

 

And then section 8, coming into force on assent. 

 

So I give . . . I don’t normally read the actual piece of 

legislation when I’m in adjourned debate, but I wanted to read 

it this time, Mr. Speaker, because I think it’s a good lesson for 

all legislators and people in Saskatchewan as well. While the 

text of the piece of legislation may not be that extensive, while 

the changes, Mr. Speaker, put forward in this piece of 

legislation, Bill No. 36, may not seem that significant or having 

a huge impact on things just by the actual words, if you dig a 

little deeper I think it tells a very different story. 

 

So I’d like to talk about a couple of different aspects of this 

piece of legislation. The first is the change with respect to how 

the numbers that form a constituency would be calculated. To 

date, Mr. Speaker, the approach has been to use all people. 

What members opposite here are now suggesting with this 

amendment is that the calculation will be done based on people 

that are voting age, 18 years and older. 

 

I’ve had colleagues on my side of the House who had the 

opportunity to speak to this piece of legislation. They’ve 

identified a few concerns from our perspective with this 

approach that members opposite are seeking to take. The one 

component, Mr. Speaker, is that we as legislators, when we’re 

elected, we do so in order to represent the entire population of 

our constituency. And the concerns that we hear, Mr. Speaker, 

come from young and old. The 18 year age cut-off in no way is 

a cut-off of the issues that confront us as MLAs. 

 

I can think of different phone calls and case work and 

constituents that have come into the office, and many times it’s 

been someone who’s not 18 years of age or the issue that’s 

being brought forward by a concerned family member or a 

neighbour or a parent, a grandparent is affecting an individual 

who is a minor not yet eligible to vote. I can think of issues that 

deal with the school system. I can think of issues of protective 

services. I can think of any number of concerns. 

 

Here in the legislature, we often talk about the future 

generations. We talk about the need to keep in mind the best 

interest of generations to come. And, Mr. Speaker, I think by 

excluding these individuals who are under 18 from the 

calculation, I think it rules out on paper something that we 

should certainly not be doing in our own mindsets. And I think 

it’s important to show that we take the role of young people and 

the concerns of young people very seriously. It’s important that 

we take the priorities seriously. And we can do that, Mr. 

Speaker, by including them in the calculation for constituency 

populations, and I think that is a very important point to make. 

 

I’ve had other colleagues make this point, Mr. Speaker. We 

often are fortunate enough to have school groups come to the 

Assembly and, as all members have had — most members, 

perhaps maybe not some of the new members haven’t yet had 

the chance for a school group to come — but it honestly is one 

of the highlights of a session because it allows for that 

interaction with young people. And they are able to see what is 

a snapshot of what occurs in this building. We hope that the 

snapshot is encouraging most of the time. And I think it’s also 

important for the young people because it gives them a chance 

to understand who their elected representative is, that they’re a 

real person; if they have concerns, that they’re there to listen 

and they’re there to work for their constituents. 

 

And for myself, whether it’s school groups coming from 

Dundonald or Bishop Klein, I think of two school groups that 

regularly come, or St. Peter’s that has been here, wherever the 

group is coming from, Mr. Speaker, it’s always a highlight 

because it’s an opportunity to connect with those young people. 

 

And young people, while it would not always be indicated in 

voter turnout, young people are really engaged and concerned 

about the future of our province, of our country, and our 

democracy. And perhaps not every young person is getting 

involved in formalized political routes and campaigns as we 

might like, but I think the interest is there and many are 

choosing to get involved. I know members opposite can relate 

to this as well. Often when those school groups come to the 

Assembly, it’s often . . . Sometimes it’s a follow-up 

conversation from a door knocking experience at their house. 

And they’ll say, oh, I recognize you. I remember when you 

came to our house and we were on the driveway playing 

basketball and you talked to us. And to young people, this issue 

stands out for them, and they remember their interaction with 

an MLA. 

 

And so that’s why I think it’s so important that young people 

come here to the Assembly to get a bit of a snapshot of what 

occurs here and to, yes, see some of the tradition and some of 

the theatre that is involved with everything that we do here in 

the Assembly but also to understand the historical nature, the 

role of the Assembly, and how they are able to take on an active 

role should they choose to go down that path, whether it is 

simply knowing who their MLA is so that they can send an 

email if they have a concern or whether it’s actually getting 

involved in a political party, whatever political party that may 

be. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, by excluding those young people 

from the calculation that occurs with the setting of the 

populations for constituencies, I think that’s a step in the wrong 

direction. I think it’s better to incorporate those young people 

because it shows that we take their concerns, we take their 

views seriously, that we are in fact listening to them, that we 

are taking into account their priorities and, Mr. Speaker, that we 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

are doing our best to set up a system that is responsive to them. 

 

I think that’s especially the case, Mr. Speaker, in regions of the 

province or cities or towns where there isn’t a very large young 

population. To exclude those people from, all those young 

people from the calculation, I think that is a step in the wrong 

direction. I don’t think that is appropriate. And I think the 

statements that members will make, especially on the other side 

that, welcome to your Legislative Assembly, I think those 

comments really will lack meaning and lack a true reflection of 

what is going on in the Assembly if this legislation goes 

forward and is changed as it is suggested by members opposite, 

by the Sask Party government. 

 

The next component, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to talk 

about in this legislation, having spoken about some of my 

concerns with having the calculation for boundaries to be 

determined by those that are only 18 and over, and that, Mr. 

Speaker, has to do with an increase to the number of politicians 

in the Assembly, the number of MLAs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was elected to my second term in this 

last election, so I have not served as long as some members in 

the Assembly that go back to 1986 or go back to ’91 or 

whatever the year may be, 2003, whenever the election 

occurred. But I have been around now, Mr. Speaker, and gone 

through two elections as a candidate. And in between elections, 

for me, it’s always been a big priority to do a lot of door 

knocking over the summers. I always try to, over the summer, 

to do a very large chunk of my constituency so that I am in fact 

connecting with individuals, hearing from them, and making it 

known that I’m there to help if they have a concern or a 

problem. And I’m also hearing what their concerns and their 

priorities are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have not knocked on as many doors as some, but 

I have knocked on thousands and thousands of doorsteps, 

knocked on thousands of doors at thousands of doorsteps. I 

have never ever, Mr. Speaker, heard of a constituent saying, we 

need to increase the number of politicians in the legislature. 

I’ve never heard them say it about the number of civic 

councillors that may be in this city. I haven’t heard them talk 

about it as the number of members of parliament, and I most 

certainly have never heard them speak about it with respect to 

the number of politicians here in the provincial Assembly. I 

have never heard a constituent come to me and say, I think that 

we should increase the number of politicians in the Assembly; I 

think that is a smart idea. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, where our members opposite got this idea, it’s 

certainly not from the voters. And, Mr. Speaker, you never 

know who’s behind the doorstep. You don’t know if they’re a 

traditional NDP supporter, if they’re a traditional Conservative 

or Sask Party supporter, if they’re a traditional Liberal or Green 

Party, an independent. You never know who’s behind the door, 

Mr. Speaker, but whatever the political stripe of the individual 

at the door, I have never ever had them say to me, we should 

have more politicians in the Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, perhaps members opposite have had this 

experience, perhaps on coffee row in the towns of their 

constituencies or in the malls in their constituencies if they’re in 

an urban setting, wherever they’re coming into regular contact 

with voters — whether it’s at church, whether it’s at the ball 

diamond, the hockey rink — perhaps they’ve had people come 

up to them and say, we could increase, we ought to as a 

province, increase the number of politicians, the number of 

MLAs. But I don’t think so. It would a head scratcher to me. It 

would be a huge surprise to me, Mr. Speaker, if members 

opposite were having tons of people come up to them and say 

that they should increase the number of politicians. 

 

Now if members opposite have specific examples and specific 

stories of individuals coming up to them and if they would like 

to bring all these people to the legislature and fill the galleries, 

they’re entitled to do that, and I would find that interesting. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I kind of think it’s not going to happen because I 

don’t really think those people are out there. 

 

Perhaps members opposite have had this experience. But based 

on my experience and from talking with colleagues and, well, 

even having conversations with Sask Party members, this has 

never been something that’s been brought up. Because 

sometimes, while members — not members, but members of 

the public — while citizens out in Saskatchewan might think 

that we only go head-to-head in the Assembly in an adversarial 

nature, those that have had a bit more exposure to the Assembly 

do realize that from time to time members of the government 

and opposition will have a productive conversation, either 

behind the bar or at a reception, in the hallway, in the parking 

lot. These types of conversations take place. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in all my . . . And sometimes in these 

conversations, issues of importance are brought up because, 

while there is a role and it’s appropriate and necessary for ideas 

to be brought forward in legislation, sometimes when an idea’s 

percolating or an idea is sort of gaining steam, Mr. Speaker, 

getting some momentum, there’ll be discussions between 

members on both sides of the House saying, well, you know, I 

think we need to consider this. And sometimes there’ll be some 

discussions made between House leaders perhaps. There’ll be 

different opportunities for members opposite to convey and say, 

hey, according to my constituents, it’s really important that this 

happens. It’s really important that we have support on both 

sides of the House for this initiative because this initiative is 

really important for the well-being of the province. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had those conversations with 

members opposite. There hasn’t been a member opposite who’s 

come to me in the hallway, at a reception, behind the bar and 

said, you know what? The burning issue in my constituency 

that people really want are more MLAs. My constituents came 

to me overwhelmingly, especially during the last election, every 

doorstep I went to, they came to me and said, you know what? 

We need to add seats to the legislature. We need to increase the 

number of politicians in the province, and I think that should be 

something we should work together on. It’d be a real priority 

for Saskatchewan people. We should do this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m in no way, I’m in no way belittling, 

demeaning, or minimizing the importance and the significance 

and relevance of MLAs and the role that legislators play in the 

province. I think it is a noble calling. I think members on both 

sides of the House for the most part engage in the political 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

pursuits because they believe in what they’re doing. They want 

to make things better for their communities. They want to 

improve the situation for their constituents, for their families, 

for future generations. We have very different views on how 

that ought to occur. What is the best path for doing that? We 

have different views on politics. That’s a given, and that’s what 

makes our Westminster adversarial system strong and good.  

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that this is a priority, adding the 

number of politicians to the Assembly, and that there’s a 

groundswell of support and activity out in Saskatchewan — 

whether it’s in a big city, a medium-size city, a small town, a 

village, the farm, wherever it may be, out on the trapline — Mr. 

Speaker, to suggest that these people want more politicians and 

more MLAs added to the Assembly simply is not believable 

because I have never heard it, Mr. Speaker. I’ve never had a 

member opposite come to me and say, my constituents really 

want to increase the number of legislators in the province; we 

need to up the number of seats in the Assembly. I have never 

had that conversation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have never in my office received a phone call . . . Sometimes 

you get random calls from people, sometimes in your 

constituency, sometimes from another part of the province. 

They just want to pass on advice. They want to pass on a view. 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, those calls are supportive. 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, those calls are a bit more critical. 

That’s fine. That’s what being an elected person means. It 

means listening to both sides and taking whatever is said, 

whatever is written. But I have never had a person call me up, 

Mr. Speaker, and say that we ought to have more MLAs in the 

Assembly. 

 

So I feel I have made my point with respect to the fact that I 

don’t think anyone in the province is calling for more MLAs, 

more politicians in the Assembly. I simply don’t think it is the 

case. So my question is, if members opposite are coming 

forward with this piece of legislation, where is the idea coming 

from? What is the motivation for this idea? Why do they want 

to do this idea? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . And you would think also, Mr. Speaker, 

if it was something that they had been willing and something 

that they had wanted to be open about, wanted to be upfront 

with Saskatchewan people, they had opportunities to talk about 

it, Mr. Speaker. They had different chances to bring this up. 

They had different venues to do so. 

 

The one option, Mr. Speaker, I will think of is the Throne 

Speech in the fall. Well let’s back up one step. First of all, Mr. 

Speaker, they could have talked about this in the election. That 

was an opportunity for members opposite to talk about their 

desire and their willingness to increase the number of MLAs in 

the Assembly. That would have been one chance and one 

opportunity where members opposite could have said, you 

know what? They could have said, we’ve heard from a lot of 

Saskatchewan people. Our phones have been ringing off the 

hook. Our email inboxes are right full. Every time I go to coffee 

row, there is four or five individuals coming up to me and 

saying, we need to increase the number of MLAs; we need to 

increase the number of politicians in the House. If that’s what 

members opposite . . . If that’s what every Sask Party candidate 

and MLA had been hearing during the election, well then, Mr. 

Speaker, they could have put it in their platform. They could 

have talked about it. They could have said, we think this is a 

good idea.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I may not agree with the rationale, I may not 

agree with the need, but it would have been an opportunity. It 

would have been a chance for members opposite to clearly go 

on the record and to state that we think there should be more 

politicians in the Assembly, and we’re going to add more 

politicians to the legislature. We think Saskatchewan people, 

the province of Saskatchewan needs more elected 

representatives. That could have been their approach. That is 

what they could have said. That is what they could have done, 

if in fact Saskatchewan people were ringing their phones off the 

hook, were sending them tons of email, and were going to them 

at different venues in the community saying that this is a 

priority. 

 

Well they didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker, because no one was 

asking for it. They didn’t do that because no one has an interest 

in having more politicians added to the Assembly. They didn’t 

do that, Mr. Speaker, because Saskatchewan people have other 

priorities; they have other concerns.  

 

The one example that I gave today, Mr. Speaker, that I talked 

about in question period, was the increase in funding and the 

increase of importance that people in the public want this 

government to place on providing home care, respite care, and 

support through the Alzheimer’s societies for assisting those 

that are living with dementia or Alzheimer’s disease. There’s 

huge evidence, Mr. Speaker, that if we’re able to help people 

stay in their homes longer, if we’re able to provide that 

assistance, it allows individuals . . . Well if you provide 

supports, it allows families to keep people out of long-term care 

facilities, and we know that that is a huge savings. And we 

know for about each year that someone is able to be in the 

home and not in a long-term care facility, that’s a savings of 

about $75,000. 

 

Well members opposite may say, well in the grand scheme of 

things, you know, three more MLAs, that’s not a huge 

expenditure in the scheme of the provincial budget. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, if you take the amount for those MLAs each year, if 

you take that amount and extend it over a term, that’s millions 

and millions of dollars. That is a lot of money. 

 

So when you’re dealing with someone who needs a little bit of 

assistance, needs a bit of help to stay in, to keep their loved one 

in their home, they need a little bit of support, a bit of financial 

assistance or supports — it’s not up to me to say what kind of 

support that is — but to have the additional supports there, to 

them, Mr. Speaker, I would think it would seem rather bizarre 

that members opposite would choose to spend millions on more 

politicians and MLAs but not be willing to provide a little bit of 

support to allow a loved one to stay in their home a little bit 

longer. 

 

And it’s not only for the benefit of the family and for that 

person, Mr. Speaker. It actually makes good sense financially. 

There’s an economic argument for it because if we can keep 

individuals out of long-term care facilities, that reduces the 

burden. It keeps us out of the situations of having to pay 

additional amounts to have someone in a long-term care 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

facility. So it makes sense. And the example, Mr. Speaker, that 

I gave for additional supports for people with Alzheimer’s or 

individuals living with a form of dementia, families working 

through this, that’s one example. Every member in this 

Assembly when they think of their constituents or think of their 

own family situation can think of examples where it makes so 

much more sense to spend additional millions of dollars as 

opposed to increasing the number of MLAs in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, I’ve made a case here based on 

my views that it’s not appropriate to exclude those that are 

under 18 from the calculations for determining populations for 

constituencies. I don’t think that’s respectful to . . . or I don’t 

think it’s a wise approach. I don’t think it sends the correct and 

the proper signal to young people in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of adding more MLAs, I’m 

puzzled why members opposite haven’t been talking about this 

if this was such a priority or is a priority that Saskatchewan 

people have brought to their attention. And I’ve talked about 

the election. I’ve talked about how on doorsteps, on public 

venues — whether it’s at a rink or a ball diamond or coffee row 

— they’ve had many opportunities to say that individuals have 

come to them to discuss this idea. Well, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t 

in the election platform. It hasn’t been brought up with me by 

members opposite in any venue other than this piece of 

legislation. 

 

So I kind of doubt . . . And I think, you know, for any of the 

new members who are sitting on the backbenches who are 

figuring things out, so to speak, with respect to how their 

caucus works and how legislation comes forward, I think they 

need to start asking some questions, Mr. Speaker, and ask, 

where did this idea come from? Because they can go to 

whoever is the mastermind within cabinet or within the inner 

circle who has come up with this genius idea as they would see 

it, that we need to add more MLAs, more politicians to the 

Assembly, and I think some of those backbenchers need to ask 

some questions to those people and say, where did this idea 

come from? Are you serious? I have never, ever heard about 

this issue from a constituent. Because I think if they were 

upfront, if they were honest and open with the people that are 

really pushing this within the inner circle, I think it would be a 

conversation worth having among those members . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Moose Jaw, 

Moose Jaw North, says, you just can’t get used to growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about some of the numbers with respect 

to populations. And the member from Moose Jaw North is very 

eager to enter into debate. He often enters into debate during 

question period. And I really do hope that he makes his way 

into cabinet, Mr. Speaker, because it’s a shame that Moose Jaw 

hasn’t had a cabinet minister under the Sask Party government, 

and I know that the member from Moose Jaw North brings a 

tremendous amount to the table and would be a fine addition to 

cabinet. And perhaps with the shuffle coming up in the spring, I 

would be shocked, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Moose 

Jaw North didn’t make it into cabinet given his experience. But 

that’s a different speech for another day perhaps, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s look at . . . You know, there’s been additional people who 

have spoken about this idea, this need to add more people to the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, if we look at other provinces, there 

are constituencies where the elected provincial representatives 

represent more people than we currently do here in 

Saskatchewan now. Mr. Speaker, they somehow manage to 

represent their constituents and do the job. According to a 

StarPhoenix article from March 12th, 2012, it goes on to say: 

 

Saskatchewan has an average of 17,817 voters per riding, 

compared to 21,198 in neighbouring Manitoba. The 

difference is even greater when compared to Alberta, 

with 43,919 voters per riding, British Columbia with 

51,765, and Ontario, which has 120,110 voters per riding 

on average. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, members opposite, 

their argument that it is about, it’s about numbers, I just don’t 

buy it because there are other provincial legislatures, Mr. 

Speaker, provincial parliaments that are somehow managing at 

the same time as representing more people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I’ve talked about a number of issues of concern 

here, Mr. Speaker. I’ve talked about how the requirement at 18 

years of age for the calculations is not appropriate. In my view, 

I think it sends the wrong signal to Saskatchewan people, 

Saskatchewan young people especially. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about this notion of 18-year-olds 

being added to . . . This notion of adding three more MLAs — 

not eighteen more MLAs, three more MLAs to the Assembly 

— I don’t think there is a real appetite and a real desire among 

the Saskatchewan public for this to occur. I think this is 

something that a few members are pushing on the opposite side 

for whatever reason. I’ll allow voters to draw their own 

conclusions on that one. I think members on the backbenches, if 

they had a face-to-face conversation with some of those that are 

pushing it, would see, Mr. Speaker, that this isn’t an issue that 

Saskatchewan people want to talk about. 

 

It wasn’t in the election platform, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t in the 

Throne Speech, which was even an opportunity after the 

election to openly talk about this and to be clear and 

straightforward with all Saskatchewan people about what the 

government intends to do. They chose not to include it at that 

time. Mr. Speaker, I find that puzzling. I find that disturbing. I 

think members opposite, if they have an idea that they think is 

good, if they have an idea that they think has the public’s will 

behind it, they ought to be clear with Saskatchewan people and 

put it in the election platform, in the Throne Speech, as opposed 

to simply introducing it in the House here. 

 

We’ve been clear on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

not in favour of such changes. We think that this piece of 

legislation should be pulled back or, at the very minimum, there 

ought to be some proper consultations with Saskatchewan 

people about the need for more politicians in the Assembly. My 

hope, Mr. Speaker, is that some of the backbenchers over there, 

some of the newly elected, would have the courage to go talk to 

those that are pushing this and say this is something that should 

occur. Because, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what they’ve been 

hearing from their constituents, in my view. 

 

So those are my comments, Mr. Speaker, on this piece of 

legislation, Bill No. 36. I’ve enjoyed the opportunity to make a 

few remarks on this piece of legislation and at this time I would 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 26 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today to speak to this Bill, Bill No. 26, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. As indicated by his 

comments on March 5th in Hansard, the minister is attempting 

to repeal five statutes that are, in his words, “no longer 

necessary to retain on the books as these laws are obsolete or 

spent.” And the five Bills that are being repealed are The 

Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act, 

The Communications Network Corporation Act, The On-farm 

Quality Assurance Programs Act, The Soil Drifting Control 

Act, and The Special Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act is the 

fifth one. 

 

[15:00] 

 

With respect to the first one, he indicates that The Collective 

Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act, which was 

passed in 2005, was to exempt two collectively bargained 

agreements from section 33(3) of The Trade Union Act which 

restricted the length of their collective agreement. And in 2008 

the government enacted amendments to The Trade Union Act 

which repealed that subsection. So therefore the employers and 

the eight unions are now able to negotiate collective agreements 

for a term that he says is appropriate for the parties. So given 

the repeal of the subsection, there was no need for . . . the 

repeal of the subsection in The Trade Union Act, this Bill is no 

longer necessary. 

 

So in terms of that Bill, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t much comment 

at this point. So I don’t think that there’s any point in further 

commenting with that other than we know the type of 

legislation that the government has introduced in respect to 

trade unions, and are concerned about the human rights as 

articulated by the Court of Queen’s Bench in their judgment in 

the last couple of months about the Charter, the Charter 

compliance of some of these Bills. So we are certainly watching 

the actions of the government very closely in that regard, and 

we’ll be anxious to see the results of the appeal. It’s suspected 

by the pundits that the case will go all the way to the Supreme 

Court because it does codify and clarify, with the courts, the 

right to strike, which is an important right, Mr. Speaker, in our 

government and in our society and in our democracy as the 

right of the collectives. 

 

And we see sort of a backlash against those rights even with the 

demise of the single desk of the Canadian Wheat Board, which 

was a collective right of farmers to have their wheat marketed 

fairly and with advantage to . . . around the world by a 

marketing agent that had only their best interests at heart and 

not the interests of shareholders in some foreign company or 

country. Anyways that’s the extent of my comments on the first 

section of the Act. 

 

The second repealed Bill, if this Bill goes through, will be The 

Communications Network Corporation Act. My colleague from 

Saskatoon Riversdale has spoken earlier today on the somewhat 

reckless dismantling of the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, again something that was valued by Saskatchewan 

people and particularly by those in the film and production 

industry. And it’s disconcerting for sure to see that the 

government was so quick to sell it off when it was valued at $4 

million, and yet it was sold for $350,000 — so that’s less than 

10 per cent. I’ll tell you when I go shopping and I see 

something that’s marked down to 10 per cent of its original 

value, I know that that’s a heck of a deal, Mr. Speaker. And 

then if I’m able to turn around and sell it for $3 million, so 

increase my investment by . . . I don’t even know the math 

between $350,000 and $3 million, but I know it’s a darn good 

investment if I can sell it for that much. 

 

So all things considered, I’m not sure about the wisdom of the 

government in repealing this Act and in fact in destroying the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network as it did. But that 

water’s under the bridge and they’re forging ahead, and we will 

see what happens to the film industry in Saskatchewan as a 

result. Certainly we would like to see more investment in the 

film industry. 

 

We’re seeing investment in record paces in other areas that this 

government has attached itself to. And nearly every day goes by 

and there’s further announcements in other areas, so we’re 

looking to make sure that the arts and culture in Saskatchewan 

are also supported in the same way that other industries are. 

Cultural industries are an important part of the fabric of our 

nation and certainly of our province. And it would be prudent, I 

think, on the part of this government to keep that in mind 

because people come here for quality of life as well, and having 

a strong arts and culture component to society is important. 

 

The one Bill I would like to spend a little bit of time talking 

about is the repeal of The On-farm Quality Assurance 

Programs Act. 

 

The minister in his comments indicated that the Act came into 

effect in ’98 to provide a way for on-farm food safety programs 

to be recognized in Saskatchewan. And we all know what 

happens when quality assurance programs are not maintained 

well. We can have outbreaks of all sorts of bacteria and other 

types of harmful diseases on humans who are using the food 

that is produced, in these large industries particularly. And I 

think the listeriosis outbreak a few years ago was one that’s of 

note, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So these on-farm food safety programs are designed to enhance 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

safety and quality of agricultural products. What this Act did 

was it recognized producer organizations, and then they were 

able to designate delivery agents that would implement these 

on-farm quality assurance programs. 

 

Now what do we mean by on-farm? I guess the whole notion of 

farm these days brings to mind a number of different images, 

depending on who you are and what your background is. But I 

assume it was meant to deal with small farms and large farms, 

and those are very different considerations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister went on to refer to the services and the products or 

the programs that these agents were delivering were replaced by 

the Canadian Food Inspection Agency when it agreed to take on 

a role in on-farm food safety or, as he refers to it, OFFS. He’s 

indicating that the Act is no longer necessary because the CFIA, 

the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, has developed policies 

and protocol for national producer-led OFFS programs, and so 

that the fact the Bill has never been used on a provincial level is 

a sign that it isn’t necessary because these programs are now 

national in scope. So it makes sense I guess in that context to 

amend or call for the repeal. 

 

I guess one of the concerns I have though is the ability of the 

Canada Food Inspection Agency to do its job. And we’re 

hearing a number of reports about the upcoming federal budget 

which is of concern, Mr. Speaker, because the CFIA has 

received several cuts in the past, and it looks like they’re slated 

. . . I think one of the articles I read indicated that they may be 

cut up to over 200 jobs in the next budget. Now that’s certainly 

of grave concern to anyone who’s worried about the quality of 

their food because even though these national programs are in 

place with the national organizations related to beef and pork 

and all the other farm products, there’s still no oversight by the 

CFIA if they continue to cut as they have. There’s documents 

from the agency itself that said . . . This is a quote from the 

Vancouver Sun on March 4th, and it says, of this year, they 

“could be forced to cut more than 200 food safety workers 

when the federal budget is delivered” on . . . this year. 

 

So we’re worried that if they’re cutting all those inspection 

workers, 200 food safety workers, what does that mean for the 

ability to manage and observe the work of these national 

producer-led programs? It’s great that the producer-led 

programs are there and that they have a presence and that 

they’re guiding the nation and that there’s consistency across 

the nation. But the concern is, if there’s no one watching them, 

then where could breakdowns occur? And we certainly don’t 

want to see anything happen like we did in 2008 when the 

listeriosis outbreak killed 28 people. 

 

So funding, the article further goes on to say that funding is 

already so tight that the CFIA can hardly react to food 

contamination incidents, and they can only react after people 

are sick rather than detecting them before they happen. So 

there’s concerns about that, Mr. Speaker, and I guess, why not 

have a Saskatchewan flavour on this? Why not keep control of 

our on-farm food safety, particularly, I think in the larger 

context where things can go wrong quickly in the large hog 

barns and the other, the cattle feedlots, Mr. Speaker? So I guess 

I just question some concerns about deferring to the federal, the 

ability of the federal government when these cuts are coming, 

and whether or not we should keep more of a watch here 

provincially on those types of issues and ensure that quality 

assurance on farms is well looked after and managed 

appropriately. 

 

The next Bill that’s proposed to be repealed and the next Act 

that’s proposed to be repealed under this Act to repeal 

miscellaneous obsolete statutes is one called The Soil Drifting 

Control Act. And the minister’s comments in regards to that 

one just says, it’s an old piece of legislation. It came in force in 

1941 and gave rural municipalities an authority to pass a soil 

drifting bylaw. 

 

I wasn’t born then. I was born sometime after that. But I 

certainly remember as a child growing up — and this is well 

after the dirty thirties, Mr. Speaker; it was in the ’60s — but the 

idea of the Russian thistle. And that was kind of a big event in 

my childhood because every spring we would gather all the 

Russian thistle off the farm fences and have these wonderful 

bonfires. And I think quite a few people can remember those, 

growing up. But it was a sign of the effect of the ’30s, and of 

course Russian thistle was just one thing that would sort of 

cause problems for farmers because they were a terrible weed. 

But I also remember seeing soil drifting even when I was a kid, 

and so of course around the farm table there was always 

discussions on how to control that. 

 

A number of different methods have been tried; many, many 

different methods have been tried to prohibit soil drifting. My 

dad remembers times in the ’30s when they were setting the 

table for supper. They would have to turn the bowls over, and 

then as soon as the food was ready, blow them off, and then 

quickly eat their supper as fast as they can because they would 

be eating dirt as well. So I can only imagine what the lungs of 

those people looked like when those storms were going on — 

certainly was a problem in the ’30s. 

 

Different things that have been tried — summerfallow was one 

of the obvious ones, just to leave the till decompose naturally. 

We as kids had fun in the summerfallow too, because those 

were great for what we called lump fights. So the cousins and 

we’d get together, and then of course we’d go swimming in the 

creek afterwards, and it was all fun and games until somebody 

got hit in the eye with a lump. But anyways, so that was one 

method that certainly our family tried. 

 

Strip farming was another method that was used and of course 

the idea of shelterbelts, well known in Saskatchewan, and 

certainly with the work of the tree nursery in Indian Head. The 

ubiquitous caragana is everywhere, and of course again as kids 

we had lots of fun using the pods and making flowers with the 

leaves and all that. But it was certainly a serious program. And 

I can remember Stan Tallon’s farm just north of our farm where 

there was a hill that really was completely exposed and then a 

huge alkali pit below. 

 

I lived and grew up in the Palliser Triangle, Mr. Speaker, and 

that was an area that maybe in retrospect should never have 

been broken for farming, but it was. And there’s been good 

years and bad years, but it was certainly the heart of the dirty 

thirties, and indeed my dad will tell stories, as a young child, 

seeing cart after cart of farmers going by, leaving the farm. 

They just couldn’t make it. They were probably starving to 

death in some instances, and then getting relief from Eastern 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

Canada. That’s a long time ago, Mr. Speaker, but it still 

resonates in the memories of a lot of people, and certainly 

farmers have taken account of that and have continually 

improved the farming methods they use to improve the risk of 

soil drifting. 

 

Finally, you know, there are programs like the prairie farm 

rehabilitation association which introduced programs like the 

permanent cover program. And what that program did, Mr. 

Speaker, was help restore some of the lands that should never 

have been broken. So we had a number of farmers that were 

approached by PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration] and were encouraged to put the land under 

permanent cover. And certainly the work of Ducks Unlimited 

and other groups like that, and conservation easements, have 

helped restore lands that shouldn’t have been broken and 

restore them to natural cover, or I guess artificial cover at first, 

but to reclaim their natural cover. 

 

And those kinds of programs have been really important, not 

only in drifting areas, but in alkali areas. So farmers have 

shown a lot of ingenuity, and I think the thing to be worried 

about, I guess, when we’re getting rid of something like this is 

the belief that it will never happen again. 

 

And there are articles available that tell us about the changes 

and the climate changes that we’re experiencing right now, and 

the possibility of drastic weather is certainly a reality. We saw 

it in the flooding last year and, you know, the signs of perhaps 

some other extreme climate changes or extreme weather may 

impact farmers. So the notion of a long dry spell is not without 

reach, Mr. Speaker, and I think that these kinds of Acts should 

maybe be around to remind us that we need to be able to allow 

municipal governments to control situations, if and when they 

get out of hand again. 

 

There’s growing concerns about the implications of high-yield 

agricultural production when you couple it with soil degrading 

factors such as wind and water erosion. So I think these are 

things that I’m hoping the Ministry of Agriculture is looking for 

and being aware of so that we are ready to respond if and when 

the high-yield production causes soil drifting. 

 

[15:15] 

 

There’s different other things that can happen. There’s organic 

matter loss, there’s salinization, acidification, contamination. 

So these concerns are linked to the technological advances that 

have been made in agriculture. And I think it’s definitely 

something that we look to this government to keep an eye on to 

ensure that in the event of extreme weather. And it’s very hard 

to predict those things. We saw what happened last year with 

the flooding and the incredible plow wind that destroyed a large 

swath of forest in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Unfortunately those trees that were knocked down — and I 

would think there’s probably hundreds of thousands — because 

even in the one area that I’m familiar with there was tens of 

thousands of trees blown down and the companies that are now 

harvesting in the Prince Albert forest management area are not 

picking up those trees at all. It’s not productive for them. And 

it’s unfortunate that all those trees are being put to waste just 

because they can’t be retrieved and that we’re cutting down 

additional forest instead. 

 

So those are some of the things we need to look out with 

extreme weather. And I think the soil drifting concerns that 

were experienced when this Bill was passed in 1941 are 

concerns that continue. It’s just that the weather is different and 

certainly farming has changed considerably. 

 

So again farmers have done a lot of improvements on it and 

certainly farming has changed so that we see different 

techniques to deal with this. But in the end I think we have to 

be very concerned about serious climate change and weather 

change and how that’s going to impact farmers and the soil 

itself and the quality of the soil itself. There is a lot of 

organizations out there right now, Mr. Speaker, that are looking 

at preserving the quality of our soil, and it would be nice to see 

them assisted, along with their research and their education 

programs for farmers, with some support from this government. 

 

So that would be the fourth Bill that’s being proposed to be 

repealed under this Bill. And then the final one is a Bill called 

The Special Payment (Dependent Spouses) Act. And the 

minister indicated in his comments at the introduction of this 

Bill that it was acted in 1999 to give an ex gratia payment to 

widows whose workers’ compensation benefits were terminated 

due to remarriage before September 1st, 1985, and because of 

that limitation on application, there is no one who is applying 

for it anymore because the widow had to apply within a 

two-year period after the legislation. So obviously that time 

frame has passed, and this is one Act that makes sense under 

this Bill to be repealed. 

 

So I think those are the five pieces of legislation. I again 

commend the good people at the Ministry of Justice who are 

working hard to keep things up to date and nicely tuned up. So 

this is important work that they are doing. And again I’m not 

sure how the cuts are affecting the Department of Justice and 

the civil servants that are doing this kind of work. And if 

positions aren’t being filled like they aren’t being filled in the 

Highways ministry and where we hear other positions aren’t 

being filled, it certainly will limit the ability of these civil 

servants to keep an eye on the housekeeping items related to 

our bulk of legislation that this province is governed by. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know other colleagues of mine will 

want to comment on some of these, the repeal of these Bills, so 

I think I would like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment on Bill 

No. 26, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 24 — The 

Advocate for Children and Youth Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s good 

to rise today to join in the debate on Bill No. 24, The Advocate 

for Children and Youth Act. 

 

It’s sort of a historic piece in some ways, Mr. Speaker. Of 

course the Office of the Children’s Advocate has been with us 

for quite some time, or the advocate for children and youth, as 

is stated, but commonly known as the Children’s Advocate. 

 

The Children’s Advocate was brought into existence in 1994, 

but up until this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, has been 

combined under the authorizing legislation for the Ombudsman. 

The Ombudsman, of course, dating back to the early ’70s and 

the then Allan Blakeney NDP government’s bringing this in, 

the position of the Children’s Advocate as an independent 

officer being brought in in ’94 as a position to better advocate 

for children and youth by the then Romanow NDP government. 

 

So in some ways, it’s a fairly straightforward piece of 

legislation in that it’s enabling legislation. It gives the office its 

authority, establishes that in a new sense, separate and apart 

from the previous Ombudsman’s Act. 

 

On the part of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, we’ve sent this out 

for consultation through the community. And particularly of 

interest to the opposition was the observations about this 

legislation by the Ombudsman and by the Children’s Advocate. 

 

I’ve had the privilege to rise in the debate concerning Bill No. 

25, The Ombudsman Act, which of course is the 

re-establishment of the Ombudsman legislation, Bill No. 24, 

separating out the functions associated with the advocate for 

children and youth and providing stand-alone legislation to 

govern its duties as an independent officer. 

 

So in consultation with the Children’s Advocate and with the 

Ombudsman, we’ve got a number of things flagged with us. 

But on the whole, the response was positive to the changes, and 

again largely reflective of the fact that this isn’t exactly 

revolutionary. It takes the two functions which had been 

sheltered under one piece of legislation and attaches them to 

their own individual pieces of legislation. 

 

But one of the things that was interesting around . . . We’re 

happy to hear that the Children’s Advocate had an opportunity 

to provide input into the draft legislation, and so again that 

work being done from the start and not in a reactionary or 

retroactive kind of manner. We’re happy to see that the 

Children’s Advocate and the Ombudsman have been involved 

early on before the legislation hit the House, which is as it 

should be for independent officers of this Assembly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We’re interested to see that the Children’s 

Advocate had a number of points to make, one being the new 

legislation provides for modernization of language with 

recognition of youth as a distinct group from children and 

legislative standards that use gender neutral terms. Again that 

might seem a bit, a bit housekeeping in nature, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but that modernization is obviously important to keep 

the legislation and its intent not just current but clarified. 

 

The Children’s Advocate commented in a favourable way on 

the legislation providing clearer jurisdictional definitions to 

include the advocate’s authority over health agencies and 

entities, also the expansion of the mandate to become involved 

in advocacy and to conduct research into the rights of children 

and youth. I think of the work that the Children’s Advocate had 

done around the event such as the International Year of the 

Child, the different reports that past children’s advocates have 

been provided, and we look forward quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 

to the work that the current Children’s Advocate will do to 

ensuring that the child welfare review is appropriately dealt 

with and make sure that that important piece of public policy is 

made real and to have impact and positive force in people’s 

lives. 

 

We also look with a great interest to the comments that have 

been provided from the Children’s Advocate with the 

Conservative crime Bill federally, Bill C-10, and not so much 

on the cost of the Bill but on the effect of the Bill, which the 

Children’s Advocate saw as hurting not helping the situation as 

relates to young people and the criminal justice system. And 

again, it’s good to see that that is something is clearly protected 

in the mandate as differentiated from the Ombudsman in this 

individual piece of legislation. 

 

The legislation provides explicit permission for government 

ministries and agencies to share information voluntarily with 

the advocate to resolve complaints in a non-adversarial and 

timely manner. Again, Mr. Speaker, with information privacy 

coming ever further to the fore and the public’s consideration as 

to how they deal with government institutions, and with 

government entities themselves having some rightful concerns 

around whether or not they’re discharging their duties under 

pieces of legislation such as the HIPA or The Health 

Information Privacy Act. It’s good to have that specifically 

addressed in the legislation. 

 

We’re interested to see how this one works out. The Children’s 

Advocate has saluted the expanded rights for children and 

youth living in care or custody to be made aware of access and 

have privileged communications with the advocate. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, there are a lot of people that do a lot very difficult 

work working with youth in care, but it should never be 

forgotten that the actual youth in care have rights as human 

beings and that those must be not just addressed but be seen to 

be addressed. 

 

And certainly that’s one of the roles that I first came into 

contact with the Office of the Children’s Advocate in a formal 

way, working with children and youth in care and the folks 

representative of that network and the helpful role that the 

advocate can play to make sure that (a) people are doing their 

job, but first and foremost to provide another level of assurance 

and security that children are getting their due from the system 

and that they’re not being mistreated or abused, which again, 

Mr. Speaker, is when kids go into care, that’s the stated 

intention is to oftentimes bring to a halt abusive situations or 

inappropriate situations. 

 

So again we need to make sure that the corrections that are put 

forward by society do just that, that they live up to their 

potential and that these negative situations aren’t made worse or 

compounded. And we’ve got a lot of, a lot of sad examples of 

people in positions of trust that have abused that trust, Mr. 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

Deputy Speaker, and the terrible consequences that has had 

through generations for the children and the youth that were in 

those positions of trust on forward. And again if the work of the 

Children’s Advocate can guard against those kind of situations, 

we think that’s very important work indeed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So again striking that balance and making sure that rights are 

not just proclaimed but secured and gainsaid in the system, that 

comes back to things like the legislation that we have under 

question here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s, I think, at 

the heart of the legislation that had been previously housed in 

the Ombudsman Act that brought the Children’s Advocate into 

being. But to see that we’ve come this way from 1994 to 

present where there’s a clear need to have independent 

legislation for the Children’s Advocate, we think that is 

appropriate. 

 

One thing that’s flagged from the Children’s Advocate that 

remains to be seen how it works out is concerning the 

advocate’s jurisdiction around school boards. The advocate’s 

office rightly points out that that issue is complex and would 

affect a significant part of the education system. As such, it 

cannot be resolved within the time frame for drafting and 

introduction of the new Bill. Therefore, we have agreed to defer 

discussion of this issue until such a time as the government, our 

office, and members of the education community can be 

consulted. Again, Mr. Speaker, that is as it should be. But it 

certainly flags for the official opposition an issue that we’ll be 

watching as it goes forward to see how it is resolved, to see 

how it is handled by this government in conjunction with the 

Children’s Advocate office. 

 

[15:30] 

 

I guess in the second reading speech of the minister on 

December 14th of 2011, not too terribly long ago, it went 

through, much as I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rationale that 

has propelled this legislation forward, the time having come for 

an independent piece of legislation for the Children’s Advocate 

in the way that it has evolved from under the umbrella of the 

Ombudsman legislation and the need for it. 

 

Again in terms of stated principles for the Act — to help 

children receiving services from the government and publicly 

funded entities, to clarify the advocate’s power to address 

complaints related to publicly funded health entities, to allow 

the advocate to conduct research in the area of children’s rights, 

to allow government ministries and agencies to co-operate in 

sharing information with the advocate — again the goal there is 

to create a more welcoming environment for youth to bring 

forward their concerns. We hope that those stated goals are 

indeed facilitated by this legislation. 

 

And again in the second reading, it’s touched upon. The second 

reading speech from the minister, it’s touched upon the fact that 

the advocate’s office was created in ’94 but with the 

Ombudsman having responsibility for administration at the 

office of the advocate, the next step of evolution being in 2000 

with the Ombudsman’s oversight of the advocate’s office being 

removed from the legislation. And so this carries that through, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of that evolution. 

 

I guess at this point I will pretty much wrap up my remarks. I 

think I have other colleagues that are anxious to participate in 

debate on other items of legislation before the Assembly. So 

with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 24, The Advocate for Children and Youth Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 24, The Advocate for Children and Youth 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 25 — The 

Ombudsman Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to wade into the discussion about Bill No. 25, an Act 

respecting the Ombudsman. This is a sister piece of legislation 

to Bill No. 24 that my colleague from Regina Elphinstone just 

spoke to. 

 

Basically what it does, this is splitting apart the Ombudsman 

and the Children’s Advocate into two different statutes. Right 

now as it stands, The Ombudsman’s Act existed and the 

Children’s Advocate was an addition at one point in time. But 

both bodies, both entities have asked for the opportunity to have 

separate statutes outlining the work that they do and ensuring 

that they can fulfill their mandate more effectively. 

 

I think one of the — this seems perhaps like a smaller thing, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — but one of the things that this Bill does 

is it includes gender-neutral language, or it’s changed all the 

terms to ensure that they’re gender-neutral. 

 

I spoke about this a little bit with Bill No. 24 when I had the 

opportunity to do this. I know that language might seem like a 

small thing, or whether you use a he or a she, it doesn’t matter. 

But I know from my own experience — and there’s much 

literature out there about the messages that language sends to us 

— sort of the undercurrent message that’s sent when you would 

use the word him or he throughout a document. 

 

And my own experience actually, I used to be a reporter a very 

long time ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and when I started out as a 

reporter I was not a big fan of gender-neutral language. I 

thought, oh what’s the big deal? But actually I started to realize 

as I got a little bit older, and actually it was when I became a 

mom and I was a stay-at-home mom or an at-home mom, the 

interesting thing for me is I would . . . People would ask, well, 

Danielle, what do you do for work? And I would say, well I’m 

an at-home mom, and they’d say, oh you don’t work. Well 

anybody who’s ever been home with children — men or 

women — happens to know that the work that happens in the 

home, albeit unpaid, happens to be incredibly valuable and is 

work indeed, but we just don’t value or pay for that work, Mr. 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So that was sort of my first experience with starting to realize 

that the language that people use when they speak to us or 

about us sends us very clear messages about who we are and 

our importance as we go out into this world. So I very much 

appreciate the move to using gender-neutral language in Bill 24 

and Bill No. 25. And right now it’s Bill No. 25, An Act 

respecting the Ombudsman, to which I’m speaking, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So in terms of more substantive work, what does this piece of 

legislation do? Well for the Ombudsman it expands the 

definition of agency or government. So now the expansion of 

the definition of agency or government now includes a publicly 

funded health entity. And I know the Ombudsman believes that 

this will better able the office to fulfill an expanded role in the 

health field. So previously, health had been excluded from the 

Ombudsman’s Act, so I think this is a very good move, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The second thing that this Bill No. 25 does, it allows the 

Ombudsman to conduct investigations where requested by 

non-governmental organizations. So Ombudsman 

Saskatchewan now has the chance and the ability and the 

authority to conduct investigations under certain circumstances 

where they’ve actually . . . where their request has come in by a 

NGO [non-governmental organization]. So I know the 

Ombudsman also sees this as a very important piece to add to 

this statute. They want to be able to . . . They could do an 

investigation perhaps for a municipality or a rural government 

or a school board or community-based organization. For 

example, school boards right now still aren’t included under 

this legislation, but at the bare minimum, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there’s the opportunity now for the Ombudsman, when a 

request comes in, to be able to do an investigation. 

 

What is another substantive part of this legislation? Well it 

includes the expansion of privileged communication. So what 

does that mean? So: 

 

Privileged communication to Ombudsman Saskatchewan 

will now include letters written on behalf of persons in 

custody or confined to an institution. Those institutions 

that confine persons will now have to establish 

procedures that permit a restricted complainant to 

communicate with the Ombudsman and inform the 

person that they have a right to communicate with the 

Ombudsman. 

 

It won’t be easy to implement, I’m sure, and organizations will 

have to think about how they best implement this. But I think 

it’s absolutely imperative that, no matter where a person is, 

whether you’re in custody or happen to be confined to an 

institution, you should still have the opportunity to, when you 

feel aggrieved by government or that you feel like something 

has gone off the rails, that you still have the opportunity to state 

your case and state some of the problems without fear of being 

penalized, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I think that that’s a very 

good piece, that expansion of privileged communications. So 

that’s very positive. 

 

Another addition to this statute, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

ability to obtain information from government agencies on a 

voluntary basis. And I know both the Children’s Advocate and 

the Ombudsman have tried to work collaboratively or 

co-operate with government in terms of getting information, but 

there was no legislative authority in The Ombudsman Act 

before that’ll actually allow this process. So I think it’s always 

a benefit to the people of Saskatchewan when things are done 

co-operatively, when people are trying to resolve issues and not 

skirt things under the carpet or that people are working 

together, both the Ombudsman’s office and whatever 

department or ministry might be involved, that it’s much better 

to be co-operative than combative, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There’s one piece here that I know the Ombudsman did not 

request and was not a part of the Ombudsman’s hope for this 

Act. But another piece of it includes access to reports, includes 

. . . Pardon me. My lips again, as per usual, are not working 

very well here this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What it 

does, it excludes Ombudsman access to reports that are 

produced by health quality review councils. So this was not a 

request by the Ombudsman. And so one always asks, where did 

this request come from? Why was this put into the Act? And we 

don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I know that the 

Ombudsman . . . This wasn’t something coming directly from 

the Ombudsman’s office. I know that having more access for an 

agency that does some of the research and investigation that it 

does, having more access is better. 

 

So I know the Ombudsman doesn’t have any strong 

reservations about this but is wondering where this came from. 

So they want to make sure that health authorities realize that, 

while the Ombudsman is not entitled to obtain reports from 

health quality review councils or committees, that they are not 

prevented from supplying them if it would be helpful to the 

investigation to do so. So again this goes to the piece around 

the need to be co-operative in making sure that the body that 

does investigations has all the tools and information in front of 

it to be able to do a thorough investigation. 

 

So that in summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what Bill No. 25 is 

all about. It’s breaking the Children’s Advocate and 

Ombudsman into two different pieces, basically two different 

statutes, and I know both offices have asked for that. So I know 

that I have colleagues who are interested in speaking to this Bill 

and to other Bills as we go along here today, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So with that, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 25, The 

Ombudsman Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 27 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour and a privilege to enter into the debate on Bill No. 27, 

An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995. As a teacher on 

leave from the Saskatoon Public School Board, I take a 

particular interest in issues around education, and also as a 

parent and also as a taxpayer and most importantly as an MLA. 

And I find this one most interesting because of what is really in 

this Act, and while it seems relatively straightforward, there’s a 

lot of issues in this Act that we have a lot of questions. 

 

And of course, as the minister said in her remarks that, and I’ll 

quote. It was December 14th when she said right off the bat, “I 

rise today to move the second reading of Bill No. 27, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2011. To meet the Premier’s 

commitment for students to start the 2012-13 school year after 

the Labour Day long weekend . . .” And so that seems to be one 

of the main causes. 

 

But there’s other things in this Bill as well. But I do want to 

talk about that because we were all kind of caught off guard. 

And I just want to quote from the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] news, and this is posted October 27th. I’m not 

sure if it was actually October 27th. 

 

But during the campaign that we were all engaged in, all of a 

sudden there was an announcement — and I remember that 

morning in Saskatoon — by the Premier, saying that they were 

going to change the school year. And where did that come 

from? We had no idea. And in fact, it talks about, the headline 

here is, “School year pledge slammed by teachers, school 

boards.” And it goes on to talk about that, and I’ll quote, “The 

Saskatchewan Party’s promise to change the school year to start 

after the Labour Day long weekend is not sitting well with 

organizations that represent teachers and school boards.” 

 

Yes, they were caught off guard. They had no idea that this was 

coming. The election was just closing up. It was really closing 

up. Most of the major planks of the platforms had been 

announced, and all of a sudden this came out of, really, thin air. 

Where did this come from? But I do have to say what was 

interesting here. I do have to say I admire the Premier for at 

least putting this out in front of people. That’s a very good 

thing because people then could vote on it if it was an issue. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Or maybe it wasn’t an issue, as opposed to some of the other 

things we’re seeing coming forward like the three new 

politicians that’s going to cost millions of dollars over the 

course of years that was not put forward, was not put forward. 

And we don’t know why that wasn’t put forward. But yet this 

thing, as radical as it was, a real curveball coming out of thin 

air, nobody saw that coming. The Teachers’ Federation had no 

idea. The school board, provincial organization, had no idea. 

There was no advance warning. Everybody heard it on the news 

like everybody else, except for Tourism Saskatoon who had 

conducted a survey. 

 

And it’s kind of interesting because, as it goes on further down, 

it said . . . Well this is what the quote was. And I quote, “The 

party said if it wins the provincial election, it will introduce 

legislation mandating that classes cannot start until the Tuesday 

following Labour Day.” 

 

And it goes on to say: 

 

Party leader Brad Wall said the reason is primarily an 

economic one. He said a recent study by Tourism 

Saskatchewan showed a majority of tourism-related 

businesses are hurt by the traditional pre-Labour Day start 

to the school year. 

 

Fair enough. So how did that information come about? The 

information came about because the tourism organization had 

conducted an online survey in November ’10 to 2,113 

businesses and communities. Of that, 390 respondents 

completed at least one question; 335 finished the entire survey. 

So I would add that up quickly. That’s about 700. About 

one-third, 30 per cent of the people actually completed the 

survey, thought it was important enough to actually complete. 

Thirty per cent of the people took the time to complete an 

online survey sent out by Tourism Saskatchewan, and of that 

only 335, just about 15 per cent of the people actually 

completed the survey. And yet and of that, of that 15 per cent, a 

total of 60 per cent indicated the school year had either “some” 

or a “significant” impact on their operations. So 60 per cent of 

. . . That would be about 42. That’s 42. It’s 420. 

 

Anyways, here you have . . . Where is our math crew while 

we’re here? Where are they? Get them in here. Get them in 

here. That sounds like grade 5 math. A small number here, a 

small number is driving our educational policy, educational 

policy. And I’m wondering if this is going to be turned over to 

the folks over there to figure out this, but this really is amazing. 

But you know, I think it’s an interesting thing. And as I said 

earlier, as I said earlier, at least the Premier had the courage to 

say, this is what our platform is. And fair enough, and he said 

that it’s going to be an economic issue. And fair enough. That’s 

a good thing. 

 

But what we have here, it’s, you know, and then he goes on to 

say in this quote, the Premier, and I quote, he has “also heard 

from parents that starting school before Labour Day gets in the 

way of family time.” He goes on, and I quote, “It kind of ruins 

the last long weekend of the summer for families who might be 

travelling, vacationing or camping.” So this is an interesting 

issue, and I think that this is what’s driving this Bill that’s 

before us now, Bill No. 27, An Act to amend The Education 

Act. 

 

And it goes on and then actually CBC did their own poll. 

Ironically, this time they got 2,700 votes, not 700 votes in here, 

and actually 1,000 people thought it was a great idea. They 

liked the idea of a longer summer holiday. Two hundred and 

two people thought it was a bad idea; it was going to ruin the 

winter holiday. And then I guess those are the people who have 

patience and can plan ahead. And you know, they’ve had a 

good summer holiday. They know it’s coming down — this 

sounds like an Aesop’s fable to me, those who plan for winter. 

Or they maybe have already bought their winter holiday, I bet. I 

bet they’ve paid for their ticket to someplace south. 

 

And so then it goes on and then somebody says here, over 600 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

people say, it’s strange that this is suddenly a campaign issue. 

And you know, the election was the first part of November and 

this was done October, the end of October. Yes, it was kind of 

strange that this came out of nowhere and felt that this was 

really odd. 

 

And then the other one which I thought was very interesting, 

over 30 per cent said, this seems to be about helping the tourism 

industry, not helping families. And I think in many ways that’s 

true. Like who do you really care about? Who do you really 

care about? Do you care about the tourists, the tourism industry, 

which I think is a very important sector of our economy? A 

very important sector. But we’ve known that the impact, these 

school holidays have always had an impact in Saskatchewan. 

So this was not something new. 

 

So I thought this was an interesting, interesting thing that 

should be driving our education policy but, you know, I do 

want to relate one thing that I think is very interesting here, 

because as that group of people, over 800 people, thought this 

was being driven by tourism, I think there are some good 

reasons for starting after Labour Day. 

 

You know, many of us were in Chicago, I think in 2005 or ’06. 

It was the Midwest Legislative Conference down in Chicago. 

And I’m thinking, you know, as I look across the way, I’m not 

sure if anybody was in the room. Some of us were there and it 

was a very interesting time to be down in . . . and you know, 

when we go to these Midwest legislative conferences you never 

know where you pick up ideas. You know, we talked in the 

halls, we listened to the presenters, and they’re all very, very, 

very important. But one of the topics was talking about 

education and of course in the States they wrestle a lot with 

how to improve standards. United States used to be, used to be 

one of the leaders in the world in terms of education and it 

really . . . They took a lot of pride in that. 

 

And in fact, you know, myself when I started education in 

teachers college here at the University of Regina, we talked 

about the Sputnik effect, when Russians got their man or their 

first rocket into orbit and how Americans were terribly ashamed 

of that. And they made a special drive in the ’60s to turn that 

around, to turn around, because that was not going to happen 

again. 

 

And for people in North America, Americans and Canadians, it 

had a huge impact in our education system in the ’60s, in the 

’70s. There was a lot more emphasis put on education and how 

we could do things better here in our country, our provinces, 

and most particularly in our schools in preparing our youth for 

the next challenges. Because if you remember the changes that 

were happening in the ’50s and ’60s to the baby boomers, what 

was pre-World War II was not going to be the same thing as 

post-World War II. And if anything really epitomized that, it 

was the space race and the fact that Sputnik was up in space 

before the Americans. That really cast a shadow over things. 

 

So fast forward to 2005 in Chicago. And what did Chicago do? 

They instituted a program called first day. And they went to a 

system where they said all the kids have to be in school on the 

first day of school. And what was really interesting about this 

— and people who may have been on school boards can really 

appreciate that, or in school administration — is also this is a 

time they took the student counts. So the funds you got paid per 

student was on the first day. And so wouldn’t it be interesting if 

in Saskatchewan on the first Tuesday after Labour Day we said, 

your school board grants are based on the number of kids you 

have on Tuesday — not on 20 days later or three weeks later 

like they are now, but actually on that day. 

 

Now the reason they said that was because they believe — and 

what was driving this was not an economic reason for tourism 

or anything like that, but they believe and they have studies to 

prove — that kids who are on the first day of school perform 

better than kids who come on the fifth, the sixth, or the eighth 

day. So this is an interesting idea about changing the school 

day, the start of the school year to Tuesday, the first Tuesday 

after Labour Day because kids should be able to be there. But I 

think we’re only getting half steps here. I think it would be very 

interesting for us to say to school boards, your school grants 

now will be based on the kids that are in their school, in their 

desks on the first day. 

 

The reason Chicago did this . . . And it’s interesting because 

Chicago is the largest public school system in North America. 

The largest public school board is in Chicago. The population 

of Chicago is about 2.8 million, 2.9 million. And other large 

cities like Los Angeles, New York, Toronto have broken up 

their school systems so they’re much smaller, but for some 

reason Chicago Public Schools is one big, massive system. 

 

But it wasn’t performing very well, and what was happening 

was because of the poverty that was in Chicago — and we all 

know about the east side of Chicago and those issues — that 

kids were not attending school. And if there’s one thing that 

we’ve come to appreciate, that kids need to be in school. They 

need to have good teachers. They need to have good resources. 

There’s a whole list of things they need, but one of the things 

they need to be is they need to be in school. They can’t be 

truant. And what was happening in Chicago, the message was 

to many kids, don’t really come to school until we count you. 

It’s not important that you’re there for first day. But we know 

what happens. 

 

I’ve come from a very fortunate situation where we always 

valued school, so we would be there on the first day. We looked 

forward to the first day. We didn’t have the barriers that many 

kids have in terms of affordable housing, the family’s under a 

lot of stress, maybe moving into town for a variety of reasons, 

leaving different situations. And so this is important that 

Chicago had to change their system around and get better 

results. 

 

And what they did is the same sort of thing that Saskatchewan’s 

doing but for a different reason. It’s not an economic tourism 

reason, as valid as that is. They were saying, we want our kids 

to do better. It’s important that our kids do better. So they had 

this saying about making sure kids were in school, counted on 

the first day. 

 

And what we saw when we were at the Midwest Legislative 

Conference, what I really picked up was — and we were there I 

think it was about the first week or second week of August — 

that already the school system was operating so that they were 

making sure kids were ready on the first day. They were going 

out to the communities, telling families, where do your kids go 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

to school? They wanted to make sure the kids were in their 

seats on the first day of school. If there were any issues around 

health care — because in the States obviously it’s a little bit 

more complicated — all those issues had to be dealt with. Or if 

there was issues around housing, this was all dealt with. And it 

was just a big, big drive to make sure kids were in school 

because they would fit in. They felt like they belonged. They 

bonded with their teachers, and it was an amazing thing to see. 

 

And it was an amazing thing to watch as an outsider from 

Saskatchewan to watch Chicago TV. You know, you’re in a 

hotel room and you turn on the late night news, and there you 

would see Mayor Daley talking about get your kids to school 

on the first day of school. Or you might have some of the, you 

know, star basketball players from the Chicago Bulls talking 

about get your kids to school. Everybody was out making sure 

kids were going to be in school. Chicago was going to turn this 

around, and you know, I would love to know what the results of 

it, how it turned out. But to me it seemed like a really neat idea, 

and I’ve talked to many people about it. 

 

Of course and it’s a bit of a radical idea because the key is tying 

the money to first day. And if you do that, then all of a sudden 

you know you have people’s attention. If you do it just as a 

gimmick, then really it’s just another gimmick. But if you say, 

we’re really serious about it . . . This is when school grants are 

going to be based on. We want your kids in school. That’s 

where they belong for every day. And it was a huge, huge thing. 

 

Interestingly just as a bit of a footnote to this, the person who 

designed this system, now I don’t know his name off the top of 

my head, but he is Barack Obama’s Secretary for Education. Of 

course Barack Obama came out of Chicago, and I think actually 

Barack Obama was at that conference. He was passing through. 

At that time, he was just a senator in the US [United States] 

Congress. And who knew what would be happening to him 

three or four short years later? It was a phenomenal thing. But 

here this friend of Barack Obama was the youngest CEO of a 

public school board of that size, and of course it was the biggest 

in the United States. I think he was 36 at the time. And he came 

out of a background not of education but was actually a 

business, young business type of guy but really saw what was 

really important: how are we going to turn these systems 

around? 

 

[16:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at this Bill and I say, well the 

driving thing behind this is to implement a vision that the 

Premier had that kids would be in school on the first Tuesday 

after Labour Day, I think interesting idea, but maybe this could 

have even been better. You know, in terms of my idea, I think 

that we would have to do a lot of consulting because when you 

involve money, people get very upset. So I would not advocate 

going out there and doing this in much the same way as this 

government’s doing this. 

 

But I think it’s interesting because we do count on the 15th day 

or the 20th day. And I think that that’s unfortunate because I 

think every child matters, and I think that the reason we do 

things for education is about making sure for the children that 

they’re getting the best possible education possible. We have to 

understand of course that there may be implications for other 

sectors, i.e., tourism, and we have to respect that. We definitely 

have to respect that. But we have to really think about counting 

all children, all children. And all children matter, and they 

especially matter on the first day of school. And so I think this 

is really, really important. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, I agree. Even in boundaries. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Even as my colleague is saying. And you 

know, it is ironic that here we have this situation where you see 

another piece of legislation before where this government is 

dismissing 240, 250,000 children, throwing them out of the 

formula for the election figuring out constituency boundaries. I 

think if I were a young person, I’d be asking some questions. 

Don’t I matter much? You know, I think that, I think, you 

know, framing this around the driver of the tourism sector, and 

why? You know, I think that there’s too many instances where 

children and young people are not being counted, counted in, 

whether it’s the first day of school or whether it’s in the 

election, The Constituency Boundaries Act. 

 

So I think that this is a major issue, and I think that there is 

some opportunities. And of course this government likes to talk 

about how it consults with stakeholders, and this clearly was a 

case of really catching people off guard, off guard. Not even 

saying, they could have said we’re going to consult about, as 

part of a platform we’re going to take a look at the school year 

and the implication of that. 

 

And I will talk a little bit more about some of these sections of 

the Act as we drill down into the Act. And it may have looked 

like actually we were going to be talking about this Act 

regardless because some of the things when they talk about 

borrowing and talking to different groups, some of these 

conversations had started. But the one area that had not started 

was the one that the minister talks about right off the bat that 

drive home the promise of the Premier that schools would start 

on the first Tuesday after Labour Day and end before the last 

day of June. 

 

So this is a real, this is a real challenge. And I think that this is 

one that we have a lot of questions about. And I know that it’s 

quite a thick piece of legislation and one that really deserves a 

lot of commentary. And I know that each of us will have 

different things that we have to talk about, and there’s a few 

things that I wanted to talk about. And of course the issue 

around the school year was one part of it. 

 

But I just want to take a minute and review what the minister 

had said as she said that to meet — you know, as I said earlier, 

the number one issue clearly because she spoke of it first — is 

to meet the Premier’s commitment for students to start the 

2012-2000 school year after Labour Day long weekend. And 

the necessary amendments to this Act make that happen. And 

that means that students and their families can fully enjoy the 

last long weekend of the summer as they do in other provinces, 

including British Columbia, Manitoba, and Ontario. 

 

You know, and I just have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I 

saw that list of British Columbia, Manitoba, and Ontario, if 

they’re looking for good ideas from British Columbia, 

Manitoba, and Ontario, you could talk about rent control. It’s 

funny how this government loves to bring in other provinces to 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

suit their own needs. And I actually think in these other 

provinces, children count in the election Act. 

 

So here if you’re modelling yourself after British Columbia, 

Manitoba, Ontario, I got two other things you can talk about. 

Rent control, of which 80 per cent of Canadians enjoy some 

protection, some stability, and I think when we talk about 

families fully enjoying things, one of the things they could full 

enjoy, I know in my city and here in Regina, is a little stability 

in their rents. And I think as they’re preparing to go back to 

school, in many families I know in my riding and many other 

ridings say, well, I hope that we start out at this school. We 

hope we start out at this school, Princess Alex. But do I know 

I’m going to be finishing at Princess Alex because the rents are 

too high? So if she’s thinking about how good things happen in 

British Columbia, Manitoba, and Ontario, then I would ask her 

to think about rent control because, there you go, that’s another 

thing those three provinces have in common. 

 

And then the other one that they have in common that British 

Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario, is that youth under the ages of 18 

are also included in the formula for figuring out how many 

MLAs are needed or the constituency boundaries, how big they 

should be. That’s what they do in those provinces. So I think if 

she’s taking signals from those provinces . . . 

 

And I should say too that British Columbia particularly had the 

same challenge that Saskatchewan does in terms of a growing 

population. And when they wanted to know should they get 

more MLAs, the government of the day did not say, let’s have 

an election; bring it in after the election because the people will 

dislike it. What they did is they actually had a consultation 

about it beforehand. And it came back that, you know, what 

people wanted instead of more MLAs was they wanted more 

services because they’re growing. 

 

And if that to the people of British Columbia, which in fact 

MLAs represent by far more, a lot more people — I think the 

number is 55,000 that they represent, 55,000 people — as 

opposed to the 19,000 people here, but they do count their 

children. So if we’re looking for British Columbia and 

Manitoba and Ontario for other good ideas because they seem 

to bring them up to support this idea, I think that they should 

take a good look at that and see what they’re doing around 

there. 

 

And she also goes on to talk about, and I quote: 

 

I would like to stress that around school hours, holidays, 

vacations, and variations in the . . . school year, nothing 

has been finalized. We are listening and we are going to 

get input. The process of developing regulations will 

allow the opportunity to hear from all of the stakeholders. 

We envision that the regulations will still allow school 

divisions the flexibility to set their own school calendar 

. . . with teachers, parents, and the local community. 

 

And then she also goes on to talk about some additional 

changes and, I think further down somewhere and I’ll talk about 

this in the actual Bill, talks about setting the day when school 

starts. When it ends is currently in the Act. 

 

And while we think these things are relatively straightforward, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are major changes. They are pretty 

major changes, and I would encourage the minister to be as 

public as she can be in these consultations. Because I mean, on 

two levels, there’s the one level that (a) driving the change and 

is there a need for this. Has the public been saying this? 

 

And again we often ask questions about this government who 

will often come up with the solution and then create a 

consultation to prove the solution. We saw that last night in the 

degree-granting Bill where they talked about access for 

students, that students wanted more access to post-secondary 

services, particularly being able to get degrees. But we know, at 

least we did, maybe they were getting a different message on 

the doorstep that people wanted places where they could get 

degrees more than they wanted support through student 

housing, affordable tuition, those types of things. And that 

didn’t seem to register with the minister. 

 

What he was hearing from students was, we want more degrees. 

We want more access to degree institutions. It’s sort of like the 

MLA issue, you know. We heard and I suppose they heard that 

people — and I think, people hear all the time — we want 

better government. We want better government so we can 

provide better services whether it’s health care, education, or 

highways. Today we had questions about some 200 staff that’s 

not been replaced in the Department of Highways, and yet this 

is a government that made a big deal about safety four or five 

years ago in that January blizzard. And yet they’re not filling 

those spots. And families and people who were on the highways 

during the blizzards, what are they to think when they hear that 

there’s some 200 positions in the Department of Highways that 

we haven’t filled this past winter? 

 

We were sort of at the tail end of the blizzard, but if you were 

in the west side of the province you would know yesterday we 

had severe weather. Could we have used 200 more people? It 

looks like we got by that one all right, but I think many families 

would have some serious questions about we’re closing 

highway service units — three we know so far. Will there be 

more tomorrow? I don’t know. We’ll find out. We’ve not filled 

200 positions in the Department of Highways. 

 

So you know, I don’t think anybody on the doorstep when they 

meant we want better government didn’t mean that we wanted 

bigger government or more MLAs. It’s probably the last one, I 

think that this cost, by their own government estimates 700,000 

a year, and over a course of a term that’s — because they’re 

elected for four years — that’s close to 3 million. And then 

we’re locked in. We’re locked in for 10 years. So you are 

talking about millions and millions of dollars. The rolling clock 

is there. Is this the kind of thing that people were asking for 

when they asked for better services? 

 

And so my point, Mr. Speaker, is that when people ask for . . . 

When this government goes out and asks for consultations on a 

solution they have, I think they should go out and say, what are 

we really looking for in terms of how we can have a better 

education system here in Saskatchewan? Because they may 

have some different points of view. They may have some 

different points of view. 

 

I know for example, just before, in February, Mr. Speaker, I 

was at a new immigrant’s youth forum at the Broadway Theatre 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

in Saskatoon, Broadway Theatre in Saskatoon. And the 

questions came up, and it was actually interesting because both 

directors from the Saskatoon public and greater Saskatoon 

Catholic system were there. And the students wanted to know 

what’s going to happen to the February break. And of course 

neither director could give them a straight answer because 

we’re in this discussion about the school year that came out of 

nowhere last October. And so the directors really were at a loss 

for an answer that satisfied the students. 

 

But one of the directors did ask the students — there was 

probably a couple of hundred students there — they said, so 

what do you think? Do you like your February break? And what 

do you think they said? All their hands went up. They all like 

the February break. And so what do you think they would say? 

So I think what we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is that, you know, if 

you ask in a poll or you ask like that, you’re going to get kind 

of the answer you’re going to expect. But it’s this . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, but the one thing they didn’t say is they 

wanted more MLAs. They didn’t. And they also didn’t say . . . I 

did have an opportunity. I’m glad you brought that up. I’m glad 

they brought this up. 

 

Because you know what did come up? And I really do mean to 

bring this . . . What really did come up . . . I mean this is all . . . 

We didn’t go through the exercise of raising our hands and 

stuff. But what really came up was one young person came up, 

and there was us at the front of the room — myself, the two 

directors, and a variety of other people — and the question was 

directed at me: what about those robo-calls? They wanted to 

know about the robo-calls. And of course to us, to the young 

people, we’re all the same. We’re all politicians. The young 

person wanted to know, what about the robo-calls? And I had to 

say . . . Because I was at a loss of words because this was really 

a federal issue, not a provincial issue, and you want to stay 

relevant to what you’re supposed to be talking about. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So how could I get this back to what I’m supposed to be talking 

about? And so I had to say to the young person, you know, one 

of the issues that we’re going to be talking about in the 

legislature, one of the issues we’re going to be talking about is 

about how young people are taken into account by this 

government. And of course to them it was a bit of an abstract 

idea because they would prefer to be talking about how can 

they make sure they get their February break in. That’s what’s 

really important to them. So I tried to explain to them about The 

Constituency Boundaries Act and about how this is a new idea. 

Before, kids were taken into account, and they’re not taken to 

account any more. 

 

And so what I’m trying to say to these young people is make 

sure you count. Get out there and let people know that you have 

an opinion. Because what will happen to governments — and 

we see this in terms of the Bill before us — is that you have a 

lot of people who are making an assumption on your behalf. 

They assume that you want to come back to school after Labour 

Day, and fair enough. You know, I stated my opinion earlier, 

that actually I think in many ways it’s a good idea, but it should 

be based on the kids’ needs, not on an economic need. You 

need to take that into account. But I think there is a lot of good 

reasons for that. And so I think this is really important. I think 

this is really important. 

 

Now I think that this is a hugely critical issue and I think kids 

are going to . . . This is the kind of thing that cues kids into 

listening more carefully about the things that are happening in 

the world around them, and they are cued in to this thing. When 

you talk to them about school holidays, all of a sudden they get 

interested in that. And then they get a little more interested 

when they find out that they’re being discounted or not counted 

in the formula for how we figure out our constituencies. So I 

think this is important. 

 

But I think that there’s big chunks that . . . I should really move 

on, because I know many people do want to talk about this but 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m glad that I’m getting a 

response from the other side. Because I think, as I said, this is a 

very important issue to me from many points of view, not only 

as an MLA but also as a parent, but also as a teacher. 

 

Because I know, and as I said, and I’ll talk about the regulations 

here as we move on, but I do want to say just briefly that one of 

the things . . . There are so many parts here that, as more people 

will talk about this issue, the issue around regulations, the 

classification system, the rolling of the two boards into one. 

And this one I think is an interesting one, and I’d be interested 

. . . You know, sometimes we hear from ministers that they are 

streamlining and they’re making things easier and that’s why 

we want to have things put together. And so we have the 

Classification Board and the Certification Board into one. And 

now — and I just love this handle — it will now be called the 

Teacher Education Certification and Classification Board, the 

TECC Board. That’s quite a handful. That’s quite a handful. 

And so I’m really going to be interested to see how this plays 

out. And it also has an appeal process for those who want to 

appeal a certification decision of the ministry. 

 

And as a teacher, and especially one . . . I was certified in 1982 

and I have to say that I was certified just after the 1982 election, 

and so I’m not sure who . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . What’s 

that? I’m not sure who the minister was. I thought you were. 

I’m not sure who the minister of Education, maybe it was Pat 

Smith was the first minister of Education for the Grant Devine 

government. And so she signed my teacher’s licence, which for 

many teachers is a real pride in terms of getting your teacher’s 

licence. In fact, many people will say, you’re an educator, and I 

would say, no I’m a teacher. You need a licence to be a teacher. 

Anybody can be an educator, but to be a teacher you need to 

fulfill the whole requirements around the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation Act. And I guess it’s a professional 

designation and only certain people can call themselves 

teachers. 

 

And I can remember getting that. In fact actually the first one I 

got was a probationary one because you can apply for one if 

you haven’t finished your training officially but you think you 

will. But you can get one as a probationary thing so that you 

can go substitute for a while. And a lot of people go and 

substitute, and then you would get your full one, and then it was 

a standard A and a professional. So you would move up, it was 

essentially a class 4. And it takes . . . And it’s a lot of pride to 

get that. And when you do get one, you want to hold onto it and 

it’s a very meaningful thing. 

 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

And so I think this is an interesting thing that this is going to be 

merged into one. And there’s an appeal process. I didn’t realize 

there wasn’t one before because I kind of thought there was. 

Because of course the standard A and professional A, the 

difference between the two is that with the professional A you 

had an education degree, and the standard A you just had two 

years of teachers’ college or normal school. And so as people 

moved up, it was based on the amount of education you had. 

 

And of course this will be very interesting to see how this plays 

out because I know when we get into master’s programs, 

postgraduate diplomas, all of those things, there’s some real 

issues here. And so I’m looking forward to see how this plays 

out because I know as I went and got my PGD [postgraduate 

diploma] I went to class 5. And then when I got my master’s it 

was class 6, but some people would argue that that isn’t quite 

right, that there should’ve been more consideration, because 

master’s means more than a postgraduate diploma. I’m not sure 

about that. It was all a lot of work but very important work. 

 

So I’m looking forward to that. And I know for teachers this is 

a big deal because it also relates to their pay. And so this is not 

just a simple thing. But I think that teachers will have some 

interest in this and so how this proceeds. 

 

But I didn’t realize that there were issues around appeals, and if 

there was a problem with the appeal, I’m not sure — the appeal 

process. So that will be interesting. But I wanted to say that 

when these changes are made, it’s unclear why for many years 

in Saskatchewan we had two boards, and why did it work, and 

what’s broken, and who brought that forward? 

 

And in this case, you know, I’m not sure if this was put forward 

by LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, Directors 

and Superintendents] and the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] and SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association]. And if that was the case . . . And she does talk 

about, they were initiated in the fall of 2009, and so this will be 

very important to see what will come out of that. Because 

clearly these kind of conversations happen all the time, and 

again particularly as we see new immigrants or people from 

across Canada coming here. 

 

And that, I hope that this will actually speed up . . . You know, 

one of the complaints we often hear is that when people come 

to Saskatchewan and they have the training and the 

qualifications to teach in their home provinces or their 

countries, that in fact it’s not an easy transition to work in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And in fact, many of these people who come . . . And this is 

just one example. In many ways I’m kind of blue-skying here, 

because I’m not privy to the initial reasons here. But I can tell 

you the face of . . . And as I go back to that experience at the 

Broadway Theatre with this theatre full of young immigrants, 

clearly they could identify with teachers who may have come 

with them to this country who can speak their home language or 

can be a good transition back and forth. So I’m hoping that 

some of this is that discussion, and the more that we can 

accommodate the recent immigrants would be wonderful. 

 

So the other issues that we talked about is the Copyright Act. 

That’s an interesting piece and we’ll be looking forward to that. 

The other one that I just want to touch on before I get into some 

other remarks is the whole issue around the ability to borrow. 

And I know that we have raised this issue at many times and 

that in fact we issued a press release about this. But our leader 

talked about this, and I just want to quote what he had to say 

about this. And he talked about, this is about borrowing money. 

This is about borrowing money. 

 

Schools, school boards have to do an awful lot and — as we’re 

getting into — and we have experienced for many years now 

the idea that we have to update our facilities, build new schools. 

And we have to build new schools in new places because the 

demographics are changing. We’re seeing population shifts 

from across the province. And I just want to read what he said, 

because I think this is really important. He talks about, we have 

a great deal of difficulty with . . . relates to the method that the 

Finance minister and the Premier used for accounting before the 

finances of the province. Particularly the legislation eliminates 

the ability of the process we’ve had for many, many years, for 

school boards and school divisions — whatever the title we’re 

going to use here — can borrow money. And they talked about 

how they eliminated the use of the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board’s borrowing rules and how that was done, which we 

basically use as the interest rates of the province, which we 

know we have good financial standing for borrowing in this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, clearly we have some of the best, 

or the lowest rates in Canada. 

 

My colleague goes on and says, what this legislation does is for 

building new schools or for building facilities or purchasing 

equipment within the school system. This Bill pushes that 

borrowing out to the commercial lenders, which are higher cost. 

And so we know that given the amount of money that the whole 

school system as a whole needs to borrow, this is going to 

involve millions of dollars in extra money that’s going to be 

required to do the same thing that’s being done now. And we 

haven’t had an explanation from the minister. 

 

And we saw clearly that this was happening in Regina where 

they had to go out and borrow money for working on three new 

schools. And clearly that’s an issue, because we want to make 

sure that there are no extra costs involved, that if we can do this 

as efficiently, efficiently — and even to borrow a term from 

this government — in a lean manner, how can this possibly fit 

into this lean philosophy of this government when you’re 

forcing other levels of government to . . . or other forms, to 

borrow money at a higher rate? Now they may have done that 

before. They may have it in small ways but here you really are 

making a much bigger deal about it and I think this is really not 

appropriate. And we haven’t heard from the minister a 

reasonable explanation about why this should be done and why 

this is a new thing that must be done. 

 

And I’m not sure if the school boards have been advocating for 

this. Has it been their position that, yes, we would like to 

borrow money at a higher rate and spend more money that 

way? I don’t know. Maybe it’s the same people who, they’ve 

been knocking on doors and finding out that they need to spend 

money, waste money on three more politicians. I don’t know. 

So I think this is a real challenge, and so we have some real 

issues there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I could take some time to go through the notes 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

here. And this is very important because we know right off the 

bat it talks about . . . talking about the school day and the school 

year and how they’re going to do this. And this is just based on, 

as I said, an online poll by Saskatchewan Tourism, which about 

700 — and maybe my math is out there — 700, about 30 per 

cent of people taking that poll, saying this is a good idea. And 

all of a sudden we find ourselves with some things changed. 

 

And so then it talks about different things that have been 

eliminated, that technology supported revolving fund, the 

educational councils. You know, one of the things about this is 

that quite often, and we’ll see into some of the legislation that 

we see actual good legislation that’s just not been used for 

many years in particular, and all of a sudden then they cut it. 

And we think, so why weren’t we doing that? Why weren’t we? 

Why weren’t we utilizing these educational councils? Why is it 

that the minister did not use this and now feels that it’s the time 

to actually cut it and go back and take a look and say, isn’t there 

something more that we should be doing? 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now the one that I really wanted to talk about particularly was 

the operation of schools, section 14 of the new Act. And this is 

section — the title is operation of schools and focuses on the 

school year — section 163. And this is what the old or the 

existing provision is: school year divided into two terms ending 

December 31st, June 30th. Two semesters could be January 

31st, June 30th. It goes through that. School year consists of 

200 days, and there you go. And so now they’re repealing that. 

 

And it’s quite extensive actually, and it’s an interesting read 

because I know this is important. And I don’t know, you know, 

when we have things in regulation, the wording, the access is 

more difficult than finding it in legislation. Now some may say, 

no, you can get the regulations. They’re pretty easy. And often 

they are. But the problem is, they’re not quite as easily 

accessible as a piece of legislation, and everybody knows that 

you follow this. And so this is an important piece that I think is 

before us. 

 

And what we’ll have instead, that section 163 is repealed and 

substituted with the new wording, and 163, the new section, 

defines instructional day and requires the boards of education 

and the conseil scolaire to start the school year after Labour 

Day. Topic areas will now be covered off in regulations. No 

change in authority except the number of days in the school 

year. It just has to say the first instructional day is the first day 

after Labour Day. And so that’s very, that’ll be interesting and 

we’ll see how that plays out. 

 

But the one that I wanted to get into was the sections 164 to 

167. And the explanation here, the explanation is 164 to 167 are 

repealed. Details in the sections will be shifted to regulations. 

So that’s it. That’s all it says. And so a lot, you know, you have 

four sections here that are moved to regulations, and that means 

that in many ways that will be up to either the minister or 

cabinet to define. And we just hope that there will be some 

public scrutiny about that, because when you lose that, 

sometimes these things can, even though they are gazetted and 

there is some ability, it’s not quite the same as being in 

legislation. Because, you know, you can do regulations in the 

middle of the summer. You can do them when people are 

maybe on holidays. You could do them just prior to the last 

long weekend in September, end of the summer, and people 

aren’t really paying attention. 

 

But these, these are really important, that we could be allowing 

this to go over. Because some of these are pretty fundamental. 

And, you know, for us, the public education system is a pretty 

basic component of who we think we are and what makes up 

the Saskatchewan culture, the Saskatchewan society. Because, 

you know, we value our schools. We really believe in our 

schools, and in many ways they define who we are both in 

Saskatchewan and throughout Canada, around the world, 

because we’ve educated so many people. And yet some of these 

things . . . So our education Act has served us well, has served 

us well. 

 

And so when we take some of these things out of the Act and 

into regulation, I’m not sure why, and so we need to have that 

discussion. Is it just, is this part of the lean process that makes 

things just a little easier to do? I’m not sure. But I’ll go through 

these different provisions because I think that they’re important 

to have on record that they’re no longer going to be part of the 

Act. They’re being repealed and they’re going to be moved 

over to regulations. So: 

 

School hours 

164(1) Subject to subsections (2) to (4.1), the program of 

instruction in schools is to be conducted between 9:00 

a.m. and 12:00 noon and between 1:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. 

on each school day. 

 

(2) On receipt of a request from the board of education or 

conseil scolaire, the minister may authorize the board of 

education or the conseil scolaire to conduct classes or 

other educational activities during periods of each school 

day other than the periods mentioned in subsection (1). 

 

Now I know, for example, in Saskatoon and in many high 

schools actually start before 9:00 — 8:25, 8:45 the bells would 

ring. I know when I was still teaching, our lunch time was 

11:45 to 12:30. So you can accommodate local adaptations and 

that’s quite okay. So it seemed to work okay, so I’m not sure 

why you need to take that out. And of course it goes on: 

 

(3) A board of education or conseil scolaire may alter or 

shorten the school hours prescribed by subsection (1) by 

not more than 30 minutes, but may not lengthen the 

school hours. 

 

(4) With the approval of the minister, a board of 

education or the conseil scolaire may alter, but not 

shorten or lengthen, by more than 30 minutes the school 

hours prescribed by subsection (1). 

 

So the idea is that you would essentially have about, I think it’s 

about five and a half hours of instruction time in a day, and you 

can’t lengthen it by more than half an hour. You could start 

earlier but you have to finish earlier, or you could work within 

that. So I think it would be interesting why, you know, I mean, 

you have something as straightforward as that. And I’ll go on to 

section 4.1: 

 

With the approval of the minister, a board of education or 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

the conseil scolaire may lengthen by up to 30 minutes the 

school hours set out in subsection (1), provided that the 

total hours in the school year, exclusive of the recess 

hours prescribed in subsections (5) and (6), do not exceed 

five times the number of school days in the school year 

determined in accordance with subsection 163(2). 

 

So I don’t know. I mean, like what worries me about this when 

we move this into regulation, that if you have government that’s 

taking stuff out of legislation into regulations, that you really 

give them a free hand and there’s no public accountability. Now 

they may argue that there is. They will always be able to see the 

regulations in the Gazette, but this kind of thing, if this 

becomes a habit, then we may see stuff like labour standards 

coming out of legislation into regulation and they would say, 

hey trust me. 

 

But if you end up for some reason, and I . . . You know, Mr. 

Speaker, I have to be honest. I’m not sure I’m seeing reason, 

but if we sat down we’d probably think of several reasons why 

parents may be unhappy about this. If all of a sudden they find 

their kids going to school eight hours a day because of some 

regulation, I think there’s a problem. Here in this gave people, 

particularly families who have a lot of concern, a lot of care for 

their children. And we know one of the big debates in rural 

Saskatchewan is how many hours our children are on a bus, 

then how many hours are they in their classes. That’s a big, 

that’s a big issue. That’s a huge issue. And so I’m not sure why 

this has to be taken out of the Act and moved into the 

regulation. And of course the explanation is weak; it has just 

shifted to regulations, and the minister really doesn’t address it 

in her remarks. 

 

Now the other one that I want to talk about, and I think this is 

one that I feel very strongly about, is each school day must 

include a recess period of 15 minutes, or recess periods 

amounting to 15 minutes in the morning and in the afternoon, 

or a recess period or periods amounting to 30 minutes. So you 

could have two 15-minute recess breaks, or one of 30 minutes, 

or I think this is where high schools do it, where they have 

5-minute breaks in-between and would add up to about 30 

minutes. And I think this is critical. And you know, I mean, and 

for a whole host of reasons, people need a break. They need 

time to travel between classes. 

 

But I think that as a teacher we see that sometimes you might 

get a principal or a staff who say, you know what, kids are 

misbehaving out on the playground. Let’s just get rid of recess. 

In fact in many ways I would argue, and I have argued in staffs, 

that we need recess. Kids need to know how to socialize, how 

to get along together. The idea that you make a school day all 

one big class is very hard on children. And so when I see this 

kind of thing happen, the flags go up because I think that 

there’s been a lot of good writers about this. And I think of one 

in particular, Ken Dryden. Many of us remember Ken Dryden, 

the famous Montreal goalie who went on to the Toronto Maple 

Leafs, talks about the importance — did I lose somebody? — 

that talks about the importance of play, talks about the 

importance of creativity, the importance of imagination. 

 

And kids, if we interfere too much in their lives and think that, 

you know, adults know best, this is what you’re going to do 

during recess or we’re going to take your recess away from 

you, I think that’s a real problem. And so I have some real 

issues with that. And so I think that this is a real problem. And 

I’ll just go on to continue to say . . . I’ll close out this section, 

notwithstanding (5) where a board of education or the conseil 

scolarie passes a resolution, pupils in any or all schools in the 

school division or francophone education area, as set out in the 

resolution of the board of education or the conseil scolarie, may 

be allowed recess periods other than those set out in (5). And 

I’m going to be, I guess I could say I’d be interested if those 

are, but this is not going to happen because they’re going to be 

going into regulations. 

 

And so what I worry about in many ways — and I know this is 

a concern for parents, it’s a concern for teachers, and I think if 

you had a group full of kids, they’d stick up their hands and say 

yeah, too — because what we would do in schools that meant 

so much to the educational experience is all those 

extracurricular activities and how do you coordinate across the 

province. How do you coordinate those football games, those 

volleyball games, those debates, those plays, just even playing 

touch football or dodge ball at recess — all of those things that 

make school the kind of place the kids like to be?  

 

When you start changing these things, some of these 

fundamental things of what we call school — and I don’t know, 

maybe they do this in BC [British Columbia], Manitoba, or 

Ontario; I don’t know — but I would like to know why, why 

this is going into regulation? Why isn’t it good enough to leave 

it alone? Because I know this is the kind of government that — 

you noticed last night we were talking about a policy void — 

they like to do things and like to get things sort of squirrelled 

away. And I think there’s some real issues here. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that I will be having questions. I 

know I’ll have questions on this part here. And as somebody 

who’s worked, you know, both as a parent and as a teacher, I’ve 

seen the benefits of the socialization of schools. But what 

you’ve got to do is you’ve got to allow kids to be kids, and 

they’ve got to be safe. We’ve got to worry about those issues 

around bullying and all of that. Parents and supervisors have a 

huge role to play to make sure the playground is safe. 

 

But just to say let’s get rid of it could be a dilemma. I’m not 

saying that this is saying that, but I am saying that some of 

those things that leave us to have some questions: why are you 

taking this out of the Act? It was good enough in the Act. Now 

you’re taking it out, and particularly in a period of time when 

you’re cutting back in the public service. Will this become a 

priority for them to think about this in the Ministry of 

Education or will they be busy doing other things and this will 

be one of the things that will be put off? 

 

Now the other one that’s interesting and again this is section 

165(1), holidays, the following days are school holidays: 

 

(a) Saturdays and Sundays; [that’s a good thing] 

 

(b) Family Day; Good Friday; Canada Day; Labour 

Day; Thanksgiving Day and Remembrance Day; 

 

(c) the birthday or day appointed for the celebration of 

the birth of the reigning Sovereign; and 

 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

(d) any day proclaimed as a holiday by the Governor 

General, the Lieutenant Governor, the mayor of the 

city, town or village or the reeve of the rural 

municipality in which a school is situated. 

 

(2) A board of education or the conseil scolaire may 

declare any other days not exceeding one day at a time to 

be holidays for school purposes. 

 

(3) Notwithstanding subsection (1), one or more 

Saturdays may be declared to be school days by 

resolution of the board of education or the conseil 

scolaire. 

 

And I think I have some questions about, you know, here we 

have the Premier saying on one hand he values Labour Day 

weekend as a main issue, main plank that he wants to talk about 

in the election but yet is now taking it out of the Act and going 

to put it into regulations. And I’m not sure why that needs to 

happen; I don’t know why that’s happening. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And again the explanation is that details in these sections will 

be shifted to regulations, and again the same concern I’ve had 

before around the idea that a lot of stuff can happen in 

regulations without any public scrutiny. It can be both for good 

or bad pressures. This is why we have legislation to withstand 

some of that pressure, and it’s hard sometimes too . . . I mean 

we’re seeing that again, you know, in terms of the three new 

politicians legislation. And we’re going to see that, 

unfortunately, but I hope that that doesn’t even make it much 

further. So I have some concerns about that. 

 

And this one here — vacations — and I’m not sure how 

students and families . . . This was in legislation, now it’s going 

to be taken out. It’ll be in regulations, if it makes it into 

regulations. It doesn’t say actually, and I’m not even sure, Mr. 

Speaker, if it says it’s going to be in regulations, I don’t know 

how it will be addressed in regulations. But: 

 

(1) The following vacation periods are to be observed: 

 

(a) a Christmas vacation, which is to commence not 

later than December 23 and end not earlier than 

January 2, both days inclusive; 

 

(b) a spring vacation, which is to be the five days 

following Easter Sunday [and I think we’ve always 

appreciated that;] 

 

(c) a summer vacation that is at least six consecutive 

weeks from the last school day in one school year to 

the first school day in the following school year that 

ends no later than the first Monday . . . 

 

Now see here we would, we might’ve had an amendment here 

but, you know, the idea that summer vacation’s now going to be 

part of a regulation, not part of the legislation, I think that’s an 

issue. And then it goes on to talk about subsection (2) 

“Notwithstanding clause 1(a), a board of education or the 

conseil scolaire may extend the Christmas vacation.” 

 

Now I think if I was in that Broadway Theatre and asking a 

group of young people: what do you think about that? They 

probably would like to see, shall extend the Christmas vacation 

period. They all, everybody loves that idea. But I know this is 

something that we wrestle with, but I think that it’s important 

that it is in the Act. And why we’re taking it out of the Act, like 

I say, is an issue.  

 

I think that I am suspicious because there are reasons why we 

have things in legislation — to protect them, to make sure they 

stand the test of time, and that they stand the test of scrutiny 

here in the legislature and in the stakeholders . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, the question is how, did they consult 

about this? I’m not sure. Are people saying, hey get this out of, 

get it out of the legislation? We want it to be more flexible? 

 

And I think that as you plan, I know in our family and many 

other families we kind of like the idea of knowing when school 

holidays are and they’re not going to be kind of up in the air. 

Now we know one thing for sure, there won’t be school before 

the first Tuesday after Labour Day. That’s a for sure. We know 

it’s got to be done by the end of June, but everything in 

between is kind of up in the air. The times of the day we hope 

will stay the same, but now it’s moving into regulation. So I 

think that it’s going to be interesting to see if, why they’re 

moving it into regulation and whether that regulation is just by 

order of minister or is it by order of cabinet? Because there’s 

two different ways that can happen too. If it’s order by minister, 

again it may not be quite as transparent. 

 

And of course this is something that this government 

campaigned on for many campaigns. I think we all like to think 

we’re being transparent and accountable, but this government 

made a big deal about it in 2007 and 2011. They made a big 

deal and in fact they make a big deal about keeping their 

campaign promises. They make a really big deal about that and 

they’re going to take a lot of pride in it. But as I said earlier, 

we’ve raised many times that where did this thing come from? 

Where did it come from on October 27th? Why did this drive 

this forward? 

 

So these four sections, like many . . . You know, and this is 

quite a lengthy explanatory note, but it’s interesting that when 

you actually go to look for the explanation, you just get two 

lines: “Section 164 to 167 are repealed. Details in these sections 

will be shifted to regulations.” It doesn’t talk about the 

transition, doesn’t talk about will they be in regulations. Are we 

seeing the regulations? How will that happen? And I think this 

is a bit of an issue, and so I’m concerned about this. 

 

I know that many people around the province are wondering 

with bated breath what’s going to happen to our schools? Are 

they going to be the same kind of schools that we’ve always 

had a lot of faith, a lot of belief in that we could send our kids 

to? Or are things going to be up in the air? Is it going to be 

much more political, where you can have somebody in a 

campaign, just a week before the people go to vote, say we’re 

going to start after Labour Day, and have no idea, and the major 

stakeholders have no idea that this was coming down this way? 

 

You know, you might have said it in a way, we want to consult 

about this. We want to talk about the new school year because 

we think this is an important issue. And he would have had, I 



March 20, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

think, a lot of interest as we . . . And when I talked about the 

CBC poll, a lot of people registered their concerns, but many 

thought it was a good idea. And as I have said, Mr. Speaker, 

that for many reasons, I think there is a lot of merit in it. But as 

I said that, in many ways, it’s a half-baked idea, and the reasons 

for doing it are not very strong because of . . . 

 

I would have really enjoyed or really appreciated and thought, 

if they would’ve said, this is about kids doing better in school, 

this would have been a very interesting idea. And we’re going 

to do as much as we can to get kids in school on the first day 

because it’s a lot easier to do it after Labour Day because you 

have kids who, families that are vulnerable, that are dealing 

with rent, dealing with all sorts of issues; maybe parents in 

terms of, again, tourism or whatever, coming back from work, 

and they’re not coming back to work till after Labour Day. So 

in a lot of ways this makes some sense. 

 

But I think it should have been framed around the idea that 

we’re doing this for children. We want our children to achieve 

and to learn in our schools because we believe in our schools. 

And what makes our schools work so well. It’s not just the 

instructional time, it’s not just the first day — even though 

those things count for an awful lot — it’s about having great 

teachers. It’s about having the resources and having a school 

that has the proper functioning heat in it, sometimes, you know, 

all those issues, and not being too long in a school bus — all 

those things. There’s a lot of, a whole lot of pressures on a 

school and a school system that make it really special. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I value my time that I’ve taught in 

schools. I’ve taught 18 years, seven years in a rural school and 

it was a fantastic time. It was up in the Meadow Lake School 

Division. And I learned a lot about the pressures that schools 

face in terms of time and what it means for a school year. And 

kids love to come back to school. But I think that we need to 

send a strong signal that school’s about kids and that we care 

about kids. That’s our number one priority and that their 

learning is really, really critical. 

 

And we know that how we deal with the instructional day, how 

we deal with the school year, are really pivotal and they’re 

pivotal in the sense of stability, predictability and stability. You 

know, these are things that really matter to families and they 

can get behind their local schools when they know what the 

school year’s all about and what the school day is all about. 

And their kids aren’t coming home too tired, but they’re 

coming home thrilled with being in an education setting that’s 

helping them get their literacy tools, learning their math, all of 

those things. And I think this piece of legislation has really, 

really missed the boat on this and it’s really unfortunate. 

 

And I can, as many others have talked about in terms of, you 

know, when you do legislation, one of the big challenges we 

have is making sure that we anticipate what the consequences 

are of the legislative changes. And sometimes we don’t like to 

hear what those consequences may be. 

 

And we’ve talked about the unintended consequences, but it 

should give us second thought and that’s why we trust the civil 

servants to tell us, if you do this, this is what may happen, and 

this is also what may happen. And of course it’s then up to the 

politicians then to decide if they want to bear that risk because 

ultimately we’re elected to take responsibility for any of the 

changes that we bring forward. It’s not up to, you know, at the 

end of the day, we can’t say, let’s do a redo on this and if we 

were, that would be not a good thing because there’s just too 

many people, as we say, there’s about 250,000 people in our 

province that are 18 and younger, so that means in our school 

system there’s probably a couple of hundred thousand students 

who . . . This has a huge impact. 

 

And so when we do it for the simple reason of extending a 

holiday, that may be a good idea. I, like anybody else, value 

holidays. Everybody needs a good holiday every once in a 

while. But I think that we’ve got to do it for the right reasons. 

And that’s why we’ve always looked at Saskatchewan schools 

as a real leader in terms of producing results for kids — and not 

just for the wealthy children, not just for those who are in the 

affluent brackets, but also those who find themselves in 

vulnerable circumstances. 

 

We’ve done an awful lot in terms of leadership around 

community schools, both in terms of the urban milieu of Regina 

and Saskatoon, but right across this province. And we’ve really 

seen some really innovative way to engage students, to make 

them part of their learning. But what we haven’t done is we 

haven’t really messed with some of the fundamental structures 

of the school year or the school day. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that we will have some questions 

about this, and I hope that there’s an appropriate amount of 

time that we can go through this. I know many of my 

colleagues will have some questions on this. Many will want to 

talk more about the financial aspect of this Bill; they will want 

to talk about the copyright aspect of this — all of those things. 

 

But I wanted to forward my couple of ideas, particularly around 

what I saw in Chicago around first day and the impact it had on 

Chicago learning, and how important that is when you have 

such a huge school system that it was really important to think 

outside the box. And I think, and as a teacher and a parent and 

an MLA, I think it’s very important that we do think outside the 

box. 

 

But when we do that, we’d better, when we come to the 

Chamber, the floor of the Chamber, when we bring legislation, 

we better make sure that we have all our i’s dotted and all our 

t’s crossed. Otherwise we could end in doing some things, some 

of those unintended consequences that I think have huge, huge 

impacts. 

 

You know, when I talked briefly about Ken Dryden, the value 

of play, what it means for children, and how it means an awful 

lot to be in a school and being able to have young people 

around the same age, developing those friendships, it’s huge. 

So if we’re talking about monkeying around with recess, I have 

an issue with that. But now I won’t be able to, because that will 

be in regulations. I won’t have the same ability to make 

comment on that. 

 

And so when we see these kind of changes, it’s a huge worry 

for me. And I think that when you have commentators making 

remarks about these kind of things and talking about what are 

the basic components of a happy, healthy school, one of them is 

what happens during the school day. And whether you’re 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2012 

playing basketball, playing football, playing marbles, or playing 

dodge ball or just hanging out with your friends, what happens 

at the school is a big, big issue. 

 

And so when we started this train down the tracks, as the 

minister did right off the bat about saying this Bill is all about 

delivering the Premier’s promise to start school after Labour 

Day, I think there’s a lot here that we need to talk about. So 

with this, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on this 

Bill. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 27, The Education Amendment Act, 2011. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the House Leader on his feet? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 655 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 655 

  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 655 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 655 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 656 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 656 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 656 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 656 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 656 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 656 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 657 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 657 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 657 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 2012 International Day of the Francophonie 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 657 

 Keeping Students Free from Tobacco 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 658 

 Unions of Regina Christmas Dinner 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 658 

 Delisle and District Fire Department’s 100th Anniversary 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 658 

 Saskatoon Citizens of the Year 

  Tochor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 658 

 Estevan Citizen Honoured by Agricultural Graduates Association 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 659 

 Focus on Women Trade Show and Sale 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 659 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Takeover of Grain Marketing Company 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 659 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 659 

 Sale of Television Network 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 661 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 661 

 Support for Dementia Patients and Their Caregivers 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 662 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 662 

 Plans for Highways Ministry 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 663 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 663 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Carbon Capture Test Facility in Southeast Saskatchewan 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 664 

POINT OF ORDER 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 665 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 665 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 665 

 Bill No. 26 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 670 

 Bill No. 24 — The Advocate for Children and Youth Act 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 673 

  



 

 Bill No. 25 — The Ombudsman Act, 2011 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 674 

 Bill No. 27 — The Education Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 676 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 




