




















































Hansard: December 05, 2012


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 55 NO. 24A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 5, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Hon. Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Hon. Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2389 

 December 5, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s a pleasure 

to introduce some special guests that have joined us in your 

gallery. Tillie Aessie, president of the Saskatchewan Council of 

the Catholic Women’s League of Canada, has joined us, and 

she is accompanied by Margaret Schwab who’s on the 

provincial council of the CWLC [Catholic Women’s League of 

Canada]. I have a chance to meet with them a little bit later on 

this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Catholic Women’s League have been very 

much involved in the issue of affordable housing in the 

province of Saskatchewan, strong boosters of Habitat for 

Humanity, and I know we’ll be discussing those and other 

issues. Also later this year they will host the annual convention 

here in Regina, I believe in August. We want to wish them well 

in that endeavour and welcome them both to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am requesting leave for 

an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has asked for 

a leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I have the honour 

of introducing some very important guests today who are 

working hard on an important issue in our province, violence 

against women. Joining us today from the File Hills Qu’Appelle 

Tribal Council, Qu’Appelle Haven Safe Shelter, along with 

tribal council partners and community change makers, are Lois 

Isnana, Miranda Kahnapace, Sarah Abbott — and she is the 

recipient of the 2012 Saskatchewan Lieutenant Governor’s Arts 

Award for her documentary on This Time Last Winter. And 

Dory Ochoo, who was the first man to complete the I Am a 

Kind Man program. And with them is the executive director, 

Pat Faulconbridge who is with the Status of Women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these committed community members are here 

today for us to officially recognize their success in reducing 

violence against women through the engagement of men and 

boys in community violence prevention strategies. Through the 

use of the violence prevention model called I Am a Kind Man, 

shelter staff are engaging with men and boys in community 

action initiatives through the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal 

Council First Nation communities. The I Am a Kind Man 

model is based on cultural values and principles and encourages 

Aboriginal youth and men to speak out against violence towards 

women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that my ministry has provided funding 

to support the Qu’Appelle Haven Shelter for National Day of 

Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women, the 

event to be held in Fort Qu’Appelle tomorrow. This event is in 

the honour and memory of all women who have lost their lives 

to violence. The board of directors and the staff of the 

Qu’Appelle Haven Safe Shelter will be commemorating that 

day with a prayer, with a ceremony, and a feast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

outstanding citizens to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister on behalf of the official opposition to 

welcome these very important guests to their legislature. 

Certainly the work that’s being done with the File Hills 

Qu’Appelle Tribal Council through the Qu’Appelle Haven 

House, and certainly the work that is joined by the very 

powerful filmmaking, story telling of Sarah Abbott — it’s good 

to see you here — and it’s very important work. But I want to 

say a special word of encouragement to Mr. Ochoo, again in 

terms of being that kind man. When we’re fighting that violence 

against women, when we’re taking that stand in terms of 

violence against women, obviously we men have a huge 

responsibility in that. So it’s good to see somebody that’s taking 

that responsibility, working with women to put an end to this 

very terrible problem that we face as a province. So I just want 

to say congratulations, keep up that good work, keep showing 

us that good way forward, both to Mr. Ochoo and to the women 

that are here today. Ēkosi. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Request leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Coronation Park has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce a group of friends and musicians sitting in your 

gallery. To begin with, I’d like to introduce a good friend of 

mine, Bob Vancise. And Bob and I, we go back an awful long 

way. We worked together at Paul Dojack Youth Centre and we 

were partners together at the Venue nightclub, one of the first 

live music clubs in the city. Bob’s presently teaching at 

Winston Knoll Collegiate. And with them today are the other 

five boys up there, a Regina band called Fly Points. And this 



2390 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

band also includes two of Bob’s sons, Billy Vancise — can you 

give a wave, Billy? — and Robby Vancise. Billy plays lead 

guitar. Robby plays drums. 

 

The band is truly a family affair as Bob is their manager and the 

wife, Pam, is the photographer and web designer. They’re 

joined by three other members of the band: Danny Goertz, lead 

vocals and guitar; Julien Johnson, keyboards; and Graeme 

Watson on bass. 

 

The band has had several sold-out shows in Regina and earning 

accolades from the music community, musicians, and 

supporters alike. They have been working in the studio with 

well-known Regina producer, singer/songwriter Jason Plumb. 

And with help of SaskMusic, the band plans to attend several 

music conferences to promote the new album that will be 

released in March. And we’re all looking forward to it. A 

further note. Billy Vancise and Julien Johnson just accepted 

positions as junior engineers with the Ministry of the Economy. 

 

We’re eagerly looking forward to hearing more from Fly 

Points. I’d like all members to please join me in welcoming 

Bob and Fly Points to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to join with the member opposite and 

welcome friend and former colleague Bob Vancise to the 

Assembly today, along with up-and-coming band Fly Points. I 

had the chance to meet with these young musicians briefly, 

enjoyed hearing about their experiences and exploits in music, 

and certainly know that they’re gaining many accolades. I look 

forward to tracking them into the future. I also enjoyed hearing 

about their careers in engineering and in business, and wish 

them well on all fronts. So it’s a pleasure to welcome Bob 

Vancise and Fly Points to their Assembly here today. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members, I’d like to introduce two individuals who 

are not strangers to this Assembly. That’s Donna Ziegler who is 

the director of cancer control and Donna Pasiechnik who is the 

manager of tobacco control, media and government relations, 

both of course with the Saskatchewan division of the Canadian 

Cancer Society. We know the important work that the society 

does in advocacy and raising awareness and cancer prevention, 

and I’m very pleased that these individuals have joined us in the 

Assembly today. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Donna and Donna to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to join with the member opposite in 

welcoming our two guests from the Canadian Cancer Society, 

Donna Ziegler and Donna Pasiechnik. I had the opportunity to 

meet with them several months ago when I first became 

Minister of Health, and I look forward to building on that 

working relationship for however long I have the privilege of 

being the Health minister. And so I ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to take this opportunity to 

introduce to you, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Dr. Wendy 

Shaw. She just completed her Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy]. Dr. 

Shaw is the wife of our Sergeant-at-Arms, Scooter Shaw, and 

with his peg leg it’s good to have a doctor in the House. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to present a petition today on cellphone coverage for the 

Northwest. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Undertake, as soon as possible, to ensure SaskTel delivers 

cell service to the Canoe Lake First Nation along with the 

adjoining communities of Cole Bay and Jans Bay; 

Buffalo River First Nation, also known as Dillon, and the 

neighbouring communities of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill; English River First Nation, also known as 

Patuanak, and the hamlet of Patuanak; and Birch Narrows 

First Nation along with the community of Turnor Lake, 

including all the neighbouring communities in each of 

these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are all 

from throughout the Northwest. And in this petition in 

particular have people signing in from Cole Bay. 

 

And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to our provincial 

finances. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada, in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Canora, Carnduff, Wakaw, Vanscoy, Swift Current, and Maple 

Creek. 

 

I so submit. 

 

 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Rural Physician Recognized 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

the House today to congratulate a Saskatchewan physician, Dr. 

Werner Oberholzer, on receiving the 2011-12 Canadian 

Certified Physician Executive Certificate. 

 

The CCPE [Canadian Certified Physician Executive] is the first 

Canadian certification program to recognize physicians for their 

exemplary performance as leaders. Physicians awarded the 

CCPE have demonstrated that they have the leadership 

capabilities, knowledge, and skills needed for successful 

performance and, more important, to direct, influence, and 

orchestrate change in Canada's complex health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Oberholzer started practising in 1999 in 

Radville, after emigrating from South Africa with his wife, Dr. 

Nelleke Helms, who is also a family physician. They have been 

serving the Radville area for the past 13 years providing 24-7 

care with their family practice, nursing home, hospital care, and 

emergency room services. 

 

Dr. Oberholzer realized that sustainable health care would need 

a team-based care and infrastructure base. So based on this 

understanding, he and his wife designed the Rural-West 

Primary Care Team. Working out of three centres, Radville, 

Bengough, and Pangman, he and his team provide care to 

nearly 7,000 patients. 

 

Dr. Oberholzer was also named Physician of the Year by the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association in 2009, and recently 

received the Saskatchewan Health Care Excellence Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Dr. 

Oberholzer and his wife, Dr. Nelleke Helms, for all their 

outstanding work. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Athletes Against Bullying Alliance 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While sports 

can provide a lot of learning, it’s fair to say that bullying often 

occurs. Athletes themselves have influence in our communities 

and ideally sports can have positive and powerful impacts on 

youth and our communities. 

 

One organization here in Regina is focusing on athletics as a 

way to eliminate bullying in sports and our communities. Local 

leaders Amanda Flahr, John Tokar, and Brandon Brooks have 

joined together to create the Athletes Against Bullying Alliance, 

a network of current and former athletes that are working 

towards the elimination of bullying by using athletes as 

influential role models and mentors. Their hope is to instill a 

zero-tolerance culture towards bullying to ensure youth are safe 

and protected on our sports fields, in our locker rooms, as well 

as in our schools and communities. 

 

The beauty of this program, Mr. Speaker, is that it supports all 

ages through mentorship. The idea is building role models and 

mentors for each age group, building positive relationships 

between students and athletes from elementary school, high 

school, university, college, junior sport, and professional sport 

to build safe communities for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Athletes Against Bullying 

Alliance for their work and leadership, building healthier, safer, 

stronger communities for all in Saskatchewan and drawing 

upon what is best in sport. Please join me in thanking these 

individuals and this organization. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Saskatoon Girls’ Soccer Team 

Wins National Championship 

 

Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

season the U-18 [under 18] Eastside Vortex girls’ soccer team 

did a lot of things no previous Saskatchewan soccer team has 

done. Their national championship, earned earlier this fall in 

Nova Scotia, is a Saskatchewan first. This Saskatoon team also 

went undefeated in the tournament. Coach Blair Hindmarsh 

admitted before the tournament that this was the best all-around 

team he has coached in his 17-year history, and now Coach 

Hindmarsh can proudly say he leads the best team in the 

country. 

 

The Vortex started out with a 2-2 draw against BC [British 

Columbia]. Then they put to rest ghosts of past nationals by 

handily defeating Quebec in a match. After that, the biggest 

obstacles being out of the way, they took care of business, 

rattling off wins against Manitoba and PEI [Prince Edward 

Island]. 

 

This tight-knit group grew in confidence and played better as 

the week went on. Through a torrential downpour, it was the 

golden right foot of Erica Hindmarsh, a constituent of 

Saskatoon Greystone, in the 16th minute of the final against 

Alberta that sealed the national championship. Mr. Speaker, that 

pivotal goal was her seventh of the tournament and also gave 

her a third Golden Boot Award as top scorer. 

 

It takes a team to accomplish something like this. I’ll ask all 

members of the Assembly to join me in recognizing this special 

group of young women and their coaches, managers, and 

families, for their hard-earned gold medal and title — Canadian 

champions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Prairie Women on Snowmobiles 

Support Breast Cancer Awareness 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Prairie 

Women on Snowmobiles is a non-profit organization that 

combines their focus on breast cancer awareness with their love 

of snowmobiling. They use snowmobiling as a way to fundraise 

money for breast cancer research. Each year they have an 

annual mission that consists of a group of 10 volunteer 



2392 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

snowmobilers that’ll travel 1800 kilometres across 

Saskatchewan in eight days. One such volunteer is Diana 

Desjarlais of Buffalo Narrows. 

 

What’s wonderful about this organization, Mr. Speaker, is that 

these women, along with Diana, are seeking new ways to gain 

support for breast cancer, and have a lot of success in doing 

this. This organization donates 100 per cent of all they raise to 

the Breast Cancer Foundation. Last year alone, Mr. Speaker, 

they raised over $180,000, bringing their total amount of money 

raised to $1.8 million. Breast cancer is something that affects 

each of us — a sister, wife, daughter, friend, niece, or having 

the illness yourself. It robs us of so many important women in 

our lives, and there’s still no cure. 

 

The Prairie Women on Snowmobiles and Dee Dee are asking 

for any kind of support people can donate to the 2013 mission 

which will take place on February 1st to the 8th. All donations 

are appreciated. And if you’d like to go for a ride with the 

women in the places they go, to show solidarity, all efforts 

would be appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of Dee Dee and her commitment 

to do her part. And I ask all members of the Assembly to 

applaud this organization and Dee Dee Desjarlais of Buffalo 

Narrows as well. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Nipawin Volleyball Team Wins Provincial Championship 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. L.P. Miller high 

school in Nipawin was host to a 4A provincial boys’ volleyball 

playoffs the weekend of the 24th and the 25th. The top 10 4A 

teams from around the province came out to compete against 

each other for top spot. 

 

The first game saw Nipawin taking on defending provincial 

champions, Oxbow. Nipawin came out on the losing side of this 

game as well as their next game against Shaunavon. The 

Nipawin Bears rallied and came back to earn a spot in the final 

gold medal game, once again coming up against Oxbow. 

Nipawin won the first set, lost the second, regrouped and came 

back to win the third set and the gold medal. 

 

A volleyball gold medal has not been won by the Nipawin 

Bears since 1976. Nipawin Bears coach Dave Christiansen was 

part of that 1976 team as well as his 2012 team. Dave began 

coaching this group of boys when they were in grade 7 and 8, 

and they have developed into a championship team. With most 

of the team returning next year, they have a great chance at 

defending their title and once again bringing gold home in 

2013. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing these special young men. They have proved what 

all members in this Assembly know to be true: the best athletes 

in Saskatchewan hail from Carrot River Valley. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

Safe Shelter Works to End Violence Against Women 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise today to recognize the efforts of an outstanding group of 

people in our province who are working hard to end violence 

against women. Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is the International Day 

of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women, and 

events will be held across the world, including at the Treaty 

Four Governance Tipi in Fort Qu’Appelle. That event is 

organized by the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council’s 

Qu’Appelle Haven Safe Shelter and will focus on engaging men 

and boys in community violence prevention strategies and 

programs. 

 

Representatives from the safe shelter were introduced to this 

Assembly a few moments ago, and we certainly thank them for 

their valuable work in this very important area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, men and boys have an important role to play in 

this area. The I Am a Kind Man program, based on cultural 

values and principles, encourages Aboriginal men and youth to 

speak out against violence against women. The staff at the safe 

shelter are trained as trainers for this program and are using this 

model to engage with men and boys who in turn have become 

change makers in this community. 

 

I encourage all members of this House to show their 

appreciation of the efforts of the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal 

Council and the staff at the Qu’Appelle Haven Safe Shelter. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Increasing Market Access for Agri-food Products 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers produce some of the best 

agri-food products in the world. Our government is committed 

to increasing market access for these products. Earlier today, 

the Minister of Agriculture announced nearly $84,000 in 

provincial funding to the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership to increase market access for ag products. 

 

STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] used this 

funding to bring in 40 international buyers earlier this summer 

to meet with Saskatchewan businesses and exporters. Funding 

of this program was provided through the Ministry of 

Agriculture’s international market development program. 

 

Canadian Western Agribition also recently received nearly 

$56,000 in funding under this program to create an incoming 

buyers program, and from all reports it was a resounding 

success at this year’s show. The international market 

development program has also helped other groups and 

businesses access new international market opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Saskatchewan plan for growth, our 

government set a goal of increasing our international agri-food 

exports from a record high of $10 billion in 2011 to $15 billion 

by 2020. Through partnering with organizations like STEP and 

Agribition, our government is confident that we will be able to 

meet this goal. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2393 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Asbestos in Public Buildings 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s now been over 

one month since I introduced an amendment to The Public 

Health Act: Bill 604, the asbestos right to know Act. This is a 

common piece sense of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that would 

create a mandatory registry of public buildings with asbestos 

owned by a ministry, Crown corporation, health authority, or 

school division. 

 

As I’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Sask Party 

government for taking steps in the direction of the bill, but 

before the fall sitting ends, they have a chance to do the right 

thing and pass this legislation. 

 

To the minister: will his government create a mandatory and 

comprehensive registry of buildings with asbestos by passing 

Bill 604? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question and appreciate the opportunity to provide an update. 

Since the bill was introduced, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the 

House that we have voluntarily provided a website. We have 

provided a listing on that website of all government-owned 

buildings and listed whether there’s asbestos on those. We have 

contacted a number of other entities who have added their 

information to it. We are working with other entities around the 

province to find out what information is available and what 

information will have to be compiled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not able to make a determination whether 

this would become a mandatory website or not, but we want to 

ensure that we capture all of the information that’s available. 

We know that one of the health regions not only provided a list, 

but their list was in website format that had links to what was 

actually found in the individual buildings. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we will continue with that process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, I compliment the 

government on taking certain steps in the right direction on this 

piece of legislation, and the news from one health region is 

encouraging. I also spoke with a school division recently, Mr. 

Speaker, that hadn’t been contacted about this piece of 

legislation. 

 

The important component here is that it needs to be mandatory 

and it needs to be enshrined within legislation. Without that, 

Mr. Speaker, the website could come down at the whim of any 

minister in the future. It’s important to have it in legislation. It’s 

also important, Mr. Speaker, to have it comprehensive, and 

that’s where the mandatory aspect would deliver that aspect. 

 

Earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, the opposition co-operated on 

passing a piece of legislation in short order. It was the bill with 

respect to RESPs [registered education savings plan]. We did 

that because it was the right thing to do. I believe this 

legislation is also the right thing to do and, by mutual 

agreement, we could pass it in short order. 

 

My question to the minister: why will the Sask Party 

government at this time not pass Bill 604? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we had indicated earlier 

that we wanted to adopt and use best practices. We’ve asked the 

ministry officials to canvass other jurisdictions and that process 

is under way. 

 

Since that time, I’ve met with the late Mr. Willems’s family. 

I’ve met with his father. I’ve met with his sister. I’ve indicated 

to them, and I can certainly share with the members of the 

legislature, that we would like very much to do something in 

recognition of the contribution that Mr. Willems has made. This 

was an individual that was a tireless advocate and was a sincere 

believer in wanting to make our province safe. We want to do 

the best that we can by providing asbestos safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the regulations that we have in place right 

now are, requirement to identify and label asbestos-containing 

materials, to maintain installed materials to prevent fibre 

release, to notify occupational health and safety of high-risk 

asbestos processes, and have an asbestos control plan to prevent 

worker contact with asbestos. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 

do those things as we go forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the minister has 

met with members of Howard’s family. And I want to say that 

Howard’s family are 100 per cent determined and have the 

conviction that this change needs to be within legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. Anything less of that does not provide the mandatory 

and comprehensive requirement that people in Saskatchewan 

deserve. 

 

Other groups are also very supportive of this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. Today we’re joined by representatives from the 

Canadian Cancer Society who are lending their support to this 

piece of legislation. So my question to the minister: will he 

listen to people in the community, people like the Canadian 

Cancer Society who recognize the good work that the Sask 

Party government has done on this, but realize and believe that 

they must go further and pass Bill 604 in order to ensure that 

there is a comprehensive and mandatory asbestos registry of 

public buildings here in Saskatchewan? Will he do that today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will work 

with the officials within the ministry to try and determine what 

best practices are and what the best way is of making the public 



2394 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

aware of where the risks are and are not. 

 

We received information that was unexpectedly good from the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. Maybe that’s the type of 

information that we will want to have from other entities as 

well. I can advise the member opposite we have contacted all 

school divisions. Letters have gone to all school divisions. 

We’d like to give them a reasonable opportunity to ascertain 

what information they have and in what format that information 

can be provided. At that point in time, we will be able to look 

and determine what is best practice and what information can be 

properly put on websites and how the information is to be there. 

 

I can advise, Mr. Speaker, that the best practices now are to 

make the assumption that asbestos exists when you undertake 

construction, especially in a building that was constructed prior 

to 1980. We urge people to take every step careful that they 

possibly can and, Mr. Speaker, also that they should be 

contacting OH & S [occupational health and safety] if they have 

any questions with regard to construction, demolition, or 

otherwise. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Changes to Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party tabled their massive overhauling labour 

bill with only hours remaining of the fall session. People are 

concerned about upsetting the balance between workers and the 

employers, and on first glance there are many things that do 

upset that balance. Just as the minister leaked to his paid 

audience friends that the eight-hour workday is now over for 

some people. Now with only a week’s notice, workers could 

lose the eight-hour workday and have to change their lives to 

work 10-hour shifts. This could have serious implications for 

those with child care needs or other family responsibilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why has the Sask Party upset the work/life 

balance for potentially every worker in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will 

know full well from the information that was provided 

yesterday that, under our current legislation, you have the 

option of obtaining a permit to work either four 10’s or five 8’s. 

Mr. Speaker, that system has been in place in our province for 

many years. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a difficult thing to 

understand: four 10’s, five 8’s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have indicated as well that there are 

approximately, approximately 900 businesses that have 

obtained permits. In the history of the province, there has never 

been one of the permits that has been denied. So, Mr. Speaker, 

we are simply recognizing the reality of what is taking place 

under our current legislation and our current regulatory regime. 

There really is no change to it other than less paperwork, which 

is always a good thing. Mr. Speaker, we value and we respect 

the work that is done by our workers in our province. 

 

[14:00] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Protecting vulnerable workers and giving them 

the opportunity to share in the wealth of Saskatchewan’s 

economy is an important role for government. And we were 

pleased yesterday to see that the government touted change for 

the minimum wage in their news release. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

change is not in the bill. The officials say it’s in the regulations. 

When we first called for the indexation of the minimum wage 

back in 2007, we called for it be legislated. 

 

The minister said he’s open to amendments to the bill. Will the 

minister amend the legislation and put the indexation of 

minimum wage into the labour legislation itself? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there is a long history in 

our existing legislation that the minimum wage is in fact in 

regulation. The reason it’s in regulation is so that government 

can be responsible and nimble enough to change it as is 

required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we indicated yesterday that the minimum wage 

would be indexed. We indicated what it would be a 

combination of: the consumer price index and the average 

hourly wage. Mr. Speaker, we intend to include that as part of 

the regulations that are there. We intend to retain the flexibility 

that government has had in the past because in the past we have 

raised it over 26 per cent since we were in government, well in 

excess of what the consumer price index is. And we want to 

keep that flexibility in case we wish to raise it even more, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

change to the labour law to remove co-workers from their union 

wasn’t asked for anybody who is in a union. At best it creates 

confusion and bureaucracy. At worst it creates divisions in the 

workplace. Mr. Speaker, no one voted for changing the 

structure of workplaces and making it more onerous for 

employees and employers. Why would the Sask Party introduce 

legislation that creates confusion, more bureaucracy, and 

divisions in our workplaces? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we had two situations that 

arose during the last number of years. The first one was people 

that handled or had access to confidential information. These 

were people that were preparing mandate letters, developing 

budget documentation. These people were sometimes in scope. 

How unfair is it to that person to expect them to make a 

determination how they are to vote when they know the 

employer’s bottom line and know how the budget process is, 

and how the mandate is to be there? It is incredibly awkward 

for that individual and even more awkward for that individual 

to discuss it with their co-workers. 

 

We think the appropriate course of action is to have those 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

people removed from being in-scope, so they are not in an 

awkward position with their workers. 

 

We also think, Mr. Speaker, that the other area is people that are 

in a supervisory position; if you were in the position of hiring, 

firing, doing performance evaluations, determining wage or 

salaries, disciplining somebody, that it is inappropriate for you 

to be in the same collective bargaining group as the people that 

you’re disciplining. How do you go to a meeting with them? 

How do you vote? How do you determine who’s going to be on 

the executive of the local? Mr. Speaker, it just makes sense. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Conditions in Personal Care Homes 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Personal care homes 

in Saskatchewan provide a vital role in providing a home for 

some of our province’s most vulnerable people, whether they be 

seniors or individuals living with a disability. Many of us can 

think of a loved one, a grandparent, an aunt and uncle, or a 

sibling who live in personal care homes. These residents 

deserve the best possible care, Mr. Speaker, and families 

deserve the peace of mind knowing that their loved ones are 

being well cared for. 

 

Sadly the Provincial Auditor’s report has some concerning 

findings about the absence of proper oversight by the Ministry 

of Health. On page 298, the auditor states: “During April 1, 

2011 to August 31, 2012, the Ministry of Health did not have 

fully effective processes to regulate personal care homes in 

accordance with The Personal Care Homes Act.” 

 

To the minister: why has the Ministry of Health failed to 

provide proper oversight of personal care homes here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we certainly accept the recommendations of the 

Provincial Auditor to have more effective processes to regulate 

the personal care homes that we have in this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we are actively addressing them. We appreciate the 

work that the auditor has done in this regards, Mr. Speaker, and 

we are working on a plan that will improve tracking of 

deficiencies and inspections, improve risk assessment 

processes, and allow for public reporting of inspection results, 

Mr. Speaker. And so I can tell the House that we are working to 

address the concerns that were raised and the recommendations 

that were raised by the auditor in this regard. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Residents who live in 

care homes deserve the best possible care. In the situation of 

seniors, these are the individuals, Mr. Speaker, who have built 

our province. And I’m sure most care home operators do a good 

job, Mr. Speaker, but we did, in the auditor’s report, see her 

write extensively about the issue of high-risk homes: situations, 

Mr. Speaker, where the seniors and people living with 

disabilities aren’t receiving the proper type of care. 

 

She pointed out, Mr. Speaker, the auditor, that in many of these 

situations, there are not frequent enough inspections of 

facilities, especially after problems have been identified. Mr. 

Speaker, if I had a loved one living in a high-risk home, I would 

want relentless inspections, not inspections with large gaps in 

between. 

 

To the minister: he mentioned briefly about some of the steps 

that the ministry will be taking. Will one of those steps, Mr. 

Speaker, be to have more frequent inspections, especially at the 

high-risk homes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

I want to thank the member for his question. And I hope 

perhaps in his follow-up question he’ll be able to identify 

relentless for me because I’d certainly be interested in his 

position on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this regard though we certainly take the 

auditor’s recommendations very seriously. We want to make 

sure that we are tracking deficiencies and inspections when 

they’re not taking place, Mr. Speaker, improve our risk 

assessment process so that we are following up in a more timely 

fashion with those that have been identified as being high-risk. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we take the care of our seniors . . . 

whether they be in government-owned, long-term care facilities 

or in private personal care homes, Mr. Speaker. In fact that’s 

why this government introduced measures to help with the costs 

of seniors who are in personal care homes with the seniors’ 

personal care home benefit, Mr. Speaker. And we certainly will 

be following up with the auditor’s recommendations in this 

regard. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The auditor pointed 

out in her report that in certain circumstances with certain care 

homes there have been instances where problems have been 

identified and there has not been corrective action. Some of 

these examples of unsafe or unhealthy practices, Mr. Speaker, 

include the absence of hand soap, water temperature being too 

hot, medications not being properly recorded, and fire exits 

being blocked. 

 

It’s unsettling, Mr. Speaker, to think that these problems would 

be identified and then not corrected. Part of the problem has to 

do with the absence or the poor frequency of follow-up visits 

once problems are identified. On page 302 the auditor states, 

“We saw only one instance where an unannounced inspection 

took place after problems were identified.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there are problems like blocked fire exits, if 

there are problems like having an absence of hand soap, Mr. 

Speaker, why is the ministry not performing more unexpected 

inspections in order to ensure that seniors and people with 

disabilities are living in the conditions that they deserve? 

 



2396 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for his question. And certainly we want to make sure 

that when seniors are living in care, whether that be through a 

publicly owned and operated long-term care facility or, in these 

cases, personal care homes that are privately owned and 

operated, Mr. Speaker, we want to be able to reassure citizens, 

seniors in this province as well as their children and their 

families that they are living in safe living conditions, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why we are, as I said in my first answer, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re taking the recommendations of the auditor 

very seriously in this regard. 

 

We are working on a plan to improve our tracking of 

deficiencies and inspections. And, Mr. Speaker, we will be 

identifying in terms of inspections how we’ll move forward, 

whether or not we’ll be moving towards a more spot inspection 

and deviating away from what is currently done through the 

annual inspection process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the annual 

inspections are certainly important, as too are the spot 

inspections as the minister just suggested. And I’m pleased that 

the ministry is looking at this as one possible course of action. 

My question to the minister: on behalf of the families who have 

residents in care homes, when can they expect a decision with 

respect to when there may be unannounced inspections 

occurring so that they know that the ministry is taking the 

proper and the necessary steps with respect to having care 

homes properly inspected and regulated? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to thank the member for his question, certainly because we 

have formally received tabling of the auditor’s report just in the 

last day. We’ll be taking more time than just 24 hours to make 

that determination. But I can tell the member that we’re 

working, the ministry’s working hard with, in conjunction with 

the auditor’s office to address these, Mr. Speaker. And we will, 

we will be bringing forward our formal comments and changes 

that will be a result of the auditor’s report in the appropriate 

time frame, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can think of a 

number of instances in my constituency office, Mr. Speaker, 

when I’ve been approached by people who are considering care 

options for their loved ones. And I’m sure most MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] in the Assembly can 

relate to that situation.  

 

Family members want to know, Mr. Speaker, that when they are 

making a decision with their loved one that their loved one is 

going to a safe and healthy spot. And part of that, Mr. Speaker, 

is having information available to them with respect to the 

safety and the standards in facilities. One of the auditor’s 

suggestions, Mr. Speaker, is to provide an online report with 

respect to the inspections so that individuals who are concerned, 

Mr. Speaker, can get the information that they need. 

 

Earlier in the remarks, Mr. Speaker, the minister said that he is 

considering the possibility of reporting this information out 

publicly. Apparently that’s one decision that they were able to 

make within 24 hours, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 

minister: when can families expect to have online the reports 

from the inspections so they can have all the information 

available as they make the important decisions with their loved 

ones? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, well first of all I said that 

that was one of the recommendations that we are considering. 

We haven’t made a decision on it. So for the member to now, I 

think, change the words that I’ve just said in the House, Mr. 

Speaker, I would thank him not to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but I will say this: that when it comes to seniors in 

this province, I think that it is fair to say that no government in 

the recent history of this province has done more to improve the 

conditions of seniors in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 

seniors’ income plan, which was addressed once in 16 years and 

then never again by the previous government, Mr. Speaker, and 

we have tripled that benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have introduced the personal care home 

benefit for seniors, specifically that the member is addressing, 

for those that are living in privately owned and operated 

personal care homes, Mr. Speaker, giving them a benefit of up 

to $4,400 per year, something that was never available under 

the NDP [New Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for those seniors in this province that rely on government 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, the record of the 

members opposite is shameful — 1,200 beds lost in long-term 

care over their government, Mr. Speaker. We’re building 13 

new ones in this province and moving forward on this important 

issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Orphan Oil Wells 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, smart growth in our oil sector 

would ensure a balance between getting a return for the people 

of Saskatchewan for our resources but also making sure we 

have good protections for the environment. And that’s what the 

auditor calls for in her report yesterday. But what she found was 

that this government isn’t balanced. 

 

The Ministry of Economy is just selling our oil. It also has to 

ensure oil wells, when finished production, are properly cleaned 

up. Mr. Speaker, the auditor found hundreds of orphaned oil 

wells with no one cleaning them up, leaving a huge 

environmental and financial liability for the province. Why has 

the Sask Party failed to balance the growth of the oil industry 

with proper environmental stewardship? 

 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2397 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 

opportunity to update the House on the progress on the 

orphaned well file, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite would 

well know that there were no orphan wells that were cleaned up 

under the former government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, 46 

orphan wells. We know that number. Mr. Speaker, about a year 

ago, two years ago, Mr. Speaker, the first orphaned well was 

actually cleaned up in Saskatchewan. Since that time, 17 orphan 

wells have been cleaned up, Mr. Speaker. In this coming winter, 

Mr. Speaker, another 17 wells should be done by spring. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is an ongoing process. It’s something that we 

will continue to work towards, ensuring that we have the 

appropriate funds coming in from industry funding the program. 

And this program, Mr. Speaker, will continue to chip away at 

that 46. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the auditor says that 

potentially more than 700 wells are orphaned in the province. In 

the last two years only 10 wells have been cleaned up. In the 

auditor’s words, “The rate of this progress is inadequate and 

suggests the ministry has not assigned sufficient staff with the 

necessary skills to carry out its programs.” That’s because, Mr. 

Speaker, the auditor found this government assigned only one 

person to identify and verify orphaned wells. When I asked in 

committee this past spring about these wells, the minister said 

that his ministry has no time frame for their cleanup. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Economy won’t step up to do 

the work, will anyone on that side of the House ensure oil wells 

are cleaned up like the auditor recommends? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

references the 700 number. That number, Mr. Speaker, is a 

number of potential wells. They aren’t orphaned today but, Mr. 

Speaker, with a substantial number of reaches, presumptions, 

Mr. Speaker, conceivably in the future of Saskatchewan that 

could happen. But, Mr. Speaker, there are 46 wells today. In the 

past 70 years, Mr. Speaker, since oil was drilled in the ’40s, gas 

in the ’30s, there has accumulated a number of 46. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we collect funds from the industry. Those 

funds are utilized to reclaim wells: 17 to this point; another 17, 

Mr. Speaker, before spring. This, Mr. Speaker, is a responsible 

program. The auditor has audited it. She says that the program 

is following legislation. It’s being appropriately rolled out. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to ensure that we have the high 

standards in Saskatchewan that the people of Saskatchewan 

expect for their industry and certainly their oil industry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the number of orphaned wells in 

the province continues to grow but the cleanup has not been a 

priority for the province. And that means the environmental and 

fiscal liability is growing. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the cleanup of 

these wells is financed from levies charged to licensees. The 

auditor says the levies are based on the amount of cleanup work 

planned, but because so little cleanup has been happening, the 

ministry has collected fewer levies. And this has led to another 

unfunded liability that this government is hiding from its books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now the cleanup is another future cost for our 

children because the Sask Party won’t get the job done. It’s 

clear that the Sask Party does not prioritize smart growth. To 

the minister: when will Saskatchewan see an increase in the 

number of cleanups that’s greater than the increasing number of 

orphaned oil wells? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s question, I 

think she wasn’t listening to my first two answers because it 

just isn’t true. The number of orphan wells today are less than 

they were a year ago. And, Mr. Speaker, it started in 2008 that, 

Mr. Speaker, the first levies were collected from industry. The 

first wells were first . . . went from orphan to being cleaned up, 

Mr. Speaker, in 2010. Since that time, 17. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there is 17 wells less today than there were just two years ago, 

and certainly less than there was under the former NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a system where we collect levies 

off industry, Mr. Speaker, and those levies are utilized to clean 

up wells — another 17 by spring. And, Mr. Speaker, we also 

have a system, that when new wells are transferred from one 

company to another, if they do not have the appropriate 

resources to clean them up in some future time, there is money 

set aside, Mr. Speaker. That is the process so that those wells 

are not a liability. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a responsible system. We recognize 

that the auditor has made some recommendations. We have 

responded to them and we expect . . . 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Crown Corporation Partnerships 

Facilitate Utility Installation 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know 

one of the greatest challenges facing our province today is 

dealing with the pressing need for infrastructure. Our economy 

has challenged all levels of government and our Crown 

corporations to find ways to keep up with that demand. 

 

SaskPower has made 37,800 new connections since 2007. 

SaskEnergy has made 30,000 new connections. SaskTel has 

made more than 32,000 new connections. This is roughly 



2398 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

equivalent to connecting an entire city the size of Moose Jaw, 

so the demand is huge. 

 

Whether it’s power production, natural gas distribution, or 

telephone service, our commercial Crowns are focused on a 

common goal. That is providing the best possible service where 

it’s needed, in the shortest possible time. 

 

I rise today to inform the House of a new and innovative 

approach to servicing new subdivisions that will result in a 

more timely and cost-effective service to customers. Until now 

each utility Crown has worked independently with land 

developers to install underground services for new houses. 

 

As you can appreciate, having each company show up 

individually to install gas, electrical, and phone lines can be a 

cumbersome, time-consuming and costly process, particularly 

with the level of demands that we are now experiencing. So 

SaskPower, SaskTel, and SaskEnergy are trying something new 

and innovative. It’s a coordinated approach that allows all the 

Crown utility services to be installed in a timely manner and in 

a single trench. 

 

SaskPower, SaskTel, and SaskEnergy are working with two of 

the province’s cable television providers and Shaw and Access 

Communications to develop an integrated approach to the 

design of utility services for new subdivisions. The new turnkey 

approach will result in a more effective process for the 

installation of all of these services. With this model, the design 

of utility services from the new subdivisions will become the 

responsibility of the developers. They will secure qualified 

contractors to install the services, and the Crowns both approve 

the projects and inspect the results to make sure that they meet 

the proper standards. Upon completion, the Crowns own, 

operate, and maintain the lines. 

 

There have been two projects undertaken to prove the concept: 

one in Regina in The Creeks subdivision and one in Rosewood 

subdivision of Saskatoon. The results have been very, very 

promising, Mr. Speaker. Because of the success today, this 

option is being made available to all developers in the 2013 

construction season. This is a winning combination for all 

concerned. The developers gain control over the timing and the 

coordination of the installation. Having all the shallow utility 

services in one trench saves space and allows for a more 

organized development. And the new process provides 

increased opportunity for the private sector to deliver 

engineering and constructive services. 

 

This new turnkey process is just one more example of our 

Crowns adapting to growth. By responding to the challenges of 

growth with innovative ideas, our Crowns continue to move this 

province forward in a thriving economy. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 

to congratulate our Crown corporations on working together as 

they make sure that they provide the utilities for new 

subdivisions that work in Saskatchewan. And we know that 

there’s been co-operation between the Crowns in many different 

ways, but clearly the minister’s identifying today another new 

way that they’ve worked together. 

 

Unfortunately, one of the Crowns is not listed. We have 

SaskPower and SaskEnergy and SaskTel working together. But 

it’s quite clear that the work that they’re doing relies on the 

other Crown corporation ISC, which keeps track of all of this 

information. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 

government and the Minister of Crown Investments that all of 

the Crowns can work together to provide very good services. 

And don’t forget the important Crown, ISC. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman for the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report that it has considered 

certain supplementary estimates and to present its second 

report. I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the chairman of the 

Economy Committee: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairman of the 

Human Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report that it has considered 

certain supplementary estimates and to present its second 

report. I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the chairman of the 

Standing Committee on Human Services: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairman of the 

Crown and Central Agencies Committee. 

 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2399 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies to report it has considered certain estimates and to 

present its second report. I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the chairman of the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report that it has considered certain supplementary 

estimates and to present its third report. I move: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the chairman of the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 115 to 182. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 115 to 182. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — I call the committee to order, and I recognize the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. Mr. Chair, I move no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2013, the sum of 108,744,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on the account of certain charges and the 

expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending 

March 31, 2013, the sum of $108,744,000 be granted to 

the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

[14:30] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. Mr. Chair, I move no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2013, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

on March 31, 2014, the sum of $50,000,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 

no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2013, which to the extent that they remain unexpended 

for the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year 

ending on March 31, 2014, the sum of $50,000,000 be 

granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



2400 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 

move that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — That’s carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Committee of Finance has agreed to certain resolutions, has 

instructed me to report the same, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read a first and 

second time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 87 — The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

by leave of the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 87, The 

Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 87, The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 2) be now introduced 

and read for the first time. Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

by leave of the Assembly and under rule 72(2), I move that the 

bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It has been moved by the Minister of 

Finance that Bill No. 87, The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

be now read a second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 

reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Her Honour is here for Royal Assent. Please 

all rise. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 14:40 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following bills.] 

 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly at its present session has passed a bill which in the 

name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to which 

bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this bill. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the name of the bill is as follows: 

 

Bill No. 66 - The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 

Education Savings (SAGES) Act 

 

Her Honour: — And now I assent to this bill, excuse me. 

Thank you. 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2401 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 87 - The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

 

to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 

 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:42.] 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise today to give second reading to Bill 85, The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act. As you know, on May 2nd, 

2012, we issued a call for submissions in response to a 

consultation paper on renewal of labour legislation in the 

province. The Ministry of Labour Relations and Workplace 

Safety received over 3,800 submissions from stakeholders 

across the province. Consultations played an integral role in the 

development of the new legislation by giving stakeholders a 

voice in the process. And those consultations will continue. We 

will shortly be sending letters to stakeholders asking them to 

share their opinions and concerns about our legislation. Our 

goal is to determine if there are any unintended consequences. 

We also invite the public to contact us and provide us their 

comments on the bill. 

 

I wish to thank each individual and organization in the province 

who took the time to provide feedback on this pivotal piece of 

legislation. Their voices were heard, and we will continue to 

listen. In particular I wish to commend each member of the 

minister’s advisory committee for their commitment and 

dedication. The members of the committee are: Steve McLellan, 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce; Larry Hubich 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour; His Worship Michael 

Fougere, Saskatchewan Construction Association, who’s now 

since resigned; Tom Graham, Canadian Union of Public 

Employees; Lee Knafelc, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; 

Bob Bymoen, Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union; 

Bernie Young, Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations; Kelly Miner, Saskatchewan Union of Nurses; 

Gary Mearns, Federated Co-operatives Ltd.; Murray Wall, 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; Ken Ricketts, Agricultural 

Manufacturers of Canada; Wendy Sol, Communications, 

Energy and Paperworkers Union; Alan Thomarat, Canadian 

Home Builders’ Association; Terry Parker, Saskatchewan 

Provincial Building and Construction Trades Council; Karen 

Low, Merit Contractors Association; Chuck Rudder, 

Saskatchewan Provincial Building & Construction Trades 

Council; Darren McKee, Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association; Hugh Wagner, Grain Services Union; and finally, 

Greg Trew, Claymore Consulting. These members and their 

insight were invaluable in the creation of this legislation. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act provides greater clarity and 

consistency than the 12 pieces of legislation it is replacing. 

Reading any one of these Acts would invariably make reference 

to one if not several of the others. Consolidating them into one 

Act allows for greater ease of use and greater consistency. 

 

The new consolidated Act will improve Saskatchewan’s labour 

laws to better protect workers, make Saskatchewan a better 

place to live and raise a family, and to increase accountability. 

The new Act will provide greater protection for Saskatchewan’s 

workers through changes such as the introduction of summary 

offence tickets which will allow occupational health officers the 

ability to issue financial penalties for non-compliance with 

health and safety laws. It also increases the fines for a violation 

up to $500,000 for an individual and up to $1.5 million for an 

organization. 

 

There are provisions that deal with the designation of a prime 

contractor, which will ensure that on some construction sites 

with multiple contractors one contractor has overall 

responsibility for the entire construction site. We believe that 

these actions will help to bring our injury rate down and provide 

greater protection to the workers who drive our economy. 

 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act will make Saskatchewan a 

better place to live and raise a family through changes such as 

the indexation of the minimum wage, which ensure that 

low-income earners get to share in the growth of our economy.  

 

The creation of two additional unpaid leaves, one for organ 

donation and one for leave to attend a citizenship ceremony, 

reflect the changes occurring in Saskatchewan workplaces. 

Reducing the qualifying time for other leaves such as maternity 

leaves and adoption leaves from 20 weeks to 13 weeks also 

helps make Saskatchewan’s labour legislation more 

family-friendly.  

 

We are creating flexibility by allowing for the provision of four 

10-hour shifts while maintaining the 40-hour work week. Both 

Alberta and British Columbia currently allow for 12-hour shifts.  

 

The Act will also increase accountability, with unions being 

required to provide audited financial statements and the results 

of votes to their members. Union members deserve to see what 

their union dues are being used for. 

 

We are clarifying who will be considered management to 

ensure that people who conduct supervisory duties are not 

included in the same bargaining unit as the people that they 

supervise. 

 

We are also removing the legislative authority for unions to fine 

members, which is consistent with other Canadian jurisdictions. 

 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act also contains . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — . . . Common sense changes such as 



2402 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

allowing for a decertification of a union that has been inactive 

for three years and removing from legislation the ability for the 

ministry to grant a special permit for people with disabilities to 

be paid a lower wage. 

 

The Act also stipulates that no two people can be paid a 

different wage on any prohibited ground found in The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. There is a common sense 

approach to ensure that our legislation is always consistent and 

up to date with The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 

 

I should note that The Public Service Essential Services Act is 

not included in the new legislation. Our government remains 

committed to the principle of protecting essential public 

services, like health care and highway safety, in the event of a 

strike. We will await the direction of the court before deciding 

on our next steps in this regard. Once we have clear direction, 

we will proceed through an amendment to include essential 

services in The Saskatchewan Employment Act. 

 

In summary the new Saskatchewan Employment Act clearly 

defines the rights and responsibilities of employees, employers, 

and unions. It improves Saskatchewan labour laws to better 

protect workers. It makes Saskatchewan a better place to live 

and raise a family, and it increases accountability. The new 

employment Act will help our province continue to grow and 

ensure that everyone benefits from that growth.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 85, 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand to respond to the introduction of this particular 

bill, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition. I think what’s 

really important, Mr. Speaker, is that this bill certainly is a bill 

that is going to require a lot of study. It is going to require a lot 

of time to dissect and digest what the bill is all about. 

 

People in Saskatchewan should know that this is a fairly hefty 

package in terms of information, and obviously one of the 

things that we want to do within the opposition is to really go 

out and consult with the different groups and talk to them about 

what part of the bill, what part of the Act that they have any 

concerns with or that they want to see some enhancements on, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the purpose of the consultation that we in 

the New Democratic caucus always speak about and always 

encourage the government to do. 

 

Before I get into my brief comments about this particular bill, 

Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is I want to 

commend one of my colleagues, a dear friend of mine, the 

member from Saskatoon Centre. It was absolutely amazing, Mr. 

Speaker, that when we did travel throughout Saskatchewan, on 

the few occasions that I went to some of the public hearings on 

this particular bill, on this matter, that it was absolutely 

phenomenal in terms of the many people and organizations that 

showed up. And one particular meeting that I did attend was in 

Saskatoon. And there was the member from Saskatoon Centre, 

organized and sitting with a number of working people and 

really, really facilitating a great amount of discussion and 

valuing some of the opinions that people had in that audience. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the member from Saskatoon 

Centre trotted throughout the entire province. I think Swift 

Current was one particular community, Yorkton, La Ronge. The 

list kind of went on and on as to the number of communities 

that he did attend. And it’s absolutely amazing, Mr. Speaker, to 

see that kind of commitment. And the minister wouldn’t do it. 

The minister wouldn’t do the consultation that was necessary on 

this particular bill. 

 

But certainly I want to point out that the NDP caucus did. Why 

is it important that he did reach out and consult with the 

different groups and allowed the people to come forward to 

express their opinion on this bill, Mr. Speaker? Because it’s 

important for us to have labour peace. It’s important for us to 

have labour involvement, and it’s important for us, as an 

opposition to make sure that we have the due respect to at least 

consult with the impacted or affected groups on any legislation 

that they’re involved with or may be part of. 

 

So I think what’s really important is the first step, Mr. Speaker, 

was to go out and consult with the groups that this bill impacts. 

That minister in that particular government didn’t undertake 

any of those measures but the member from Saskatoon Centre, 

who I commend profoundly today for making that time and 

taking the effort or making the effort to leave the comforts of 

his home on a late evening to go travel somewhere to hear some 

of the concerns from not just the public, but certainly from 

some of the impacted groups associated with this bill. I think 

that as long as you continue to do that, to show people the due 

process and to afford them the respect to at least consult with 

them, I think that goes a long ways with many, many of the 

people out there that were worried about this particular bill and 

were concerned about what this government might do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important as well is 

that we’ve seen a cross-section of people from Saskatchewan 

attend these public hearings. And these public hearings, as I 

mentioned, were very well run. There was a good sound system. 

There was a good process to Chair the meeting. And as I 

mentioned, there was a number of meetings and a number of 

Saskatchewan centres, and at every single meeting, the member 

from Saskatoon Centre was there to work with the people and to 

hear their concerns. And I think that is very, very indicative of 

his commitment to this file and certainly his role as critic to this 

government and this particular bill. 

 

I think it’s important that if you are going to speak to an 

impacted or affected group, at the very least have the courtesy 

to consult with them and consult with the Saskatchewan public 

to get this thing right. And, Mr. Speaker, the one point that I 

would want to raise on this file when it came to leadership, 

when it came to community consultation, when it came to 

taking the time and making the extra effort to go out and hear 

people and to consult with the people and learn from people as 

well and to also educate his own caucus, Mr. Speaker, there is 

nobody else in this Assembly that can give credit to that 

particular title as a champion of that process as my colleague 

and friend from Saskatoon Centre. Because, Mr. Speaker, this is 

a really, really important part of what the government is trying 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2403 

to do, a really, really important part of what the opposition 

wants to do and to dissect this bill thoroughly. 

 

And the first order of business that we always speak about is to 

ensure that the consultation happened. And no question from 

our perspective as the official opposition, the lead person in this 

file is the member from Saskatoon Centre. And he served his 

caucus and this cause very, very well. So, Mr. Speaker, I think 

we should afford our member a good round of applause for his 

great work because it’s something that we always want to see 

happen and something that we want to encourage. 

 

With that being said, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that we 

will seek his leadership as we go down the process of dealing 

with this particular bill. It’s going to take some time to dissect 

all the information. It’s a fairly hefty bill. And that’s what we’re 

worried about, as we’ve heard in some of these hearings that 

there’s a lot of points that we want to look at. There’s a lot of 

issues that we want to raise. I notice the minister today in QP, 

or question period, really was just trying to trivialize some of 

the concerns we had and to try and mock some of the issues of a 

work week. 

 

What’s happening, Mr. Speaker, is quite frankly this is a labour 

bill that has been developed over a number of years. It’s over 

100 years of development, and I think the Sask Party took 

something like 90 days. The Sask Party took something like 90 

days to go through the process and try and find some advice 

from their own sources, Mr. Speaker. There was no public 

participation as I mentioned. And that is critically another flaw 

on how the Sask Party has dealt with the unions and the 

organized labour people in the province is that they have quite 

frankly not taken the effort and the time — 90 days to revisit 

and revise 100 years of labour development, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

really a sham. And that whole process that the Saskatchewan 

Party undertook is quite frankly very disrespectful to the many, 

many people that have worked for many, many years in trying 

to strengthen the labour movement and make it an integral part 

of a successful economy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we think that because it’s something that 

people didn’t vote for because nobody out there in the province 

told the Saskatchewan Party to go after the unions or told them 

to go after essential services, to do all these other things, and 

now we see this particular Act put in place. And again, it’s not 

something that they put out there in their platform because, Mr. 

Speaker, people out there know that the Saskatchewan Party 

nowadays is full of surprises, you know. Now we’re seeing a 

deficit, and now we’re seeing debt being piled onto 

Saskatchewan people. We’re seeing the economy start to falter, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s not something that the Saskatchewan 

New Democratic Party want, and we certainly don’t want to see 

a war happen with our organized unions and working people 

and the middle class people that built this province and 

certainly continue building the economy and building their 

respective communities overall. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the other issue I want to raise on this 

particular bill is because it’s so big, because of the size of the 

bill, I think what they may have taken is taken a page from the 

Harper Conservatives out of Ottawa by making a bill so big and 

so complex that they’re hoping to do some changes in some Act 

or some rule or regulation that would be counterproductive and 

would not strike a proper balance between our economy and 

certainly our workers. And that’s one of the reasons why we 

need to take the time. And I think the unions as well, Mr. 

Speaker, are going to take the time. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Here we are two or three weeks before Christmas and only a 

couple of days left in the Assembly, and the minister and the 

government unveil this at this time. And it’s by design, Mr. 

Speaker. It is by design that the last two days of this fall sitting, 

where we have today and tomorrow left, that they unveil this 

massive bill that impacts and involves the organized labour of 

the province. 

 

Now the organized labour folks are pretty sharp folks. They 

worked all these years, and they are very, very careful on how 

they approach this particular government. And one of the 

reasons I think why that the Saskatchewan Party’s done this is 

they know that Saskatchewan people are busy shopping. It’s the 

Christmas season. You know people are busy. They’re not 

paying attention to what this government is doing. And as they 

unveil some of these bills and some of the rules and regulations 

that might be hiding in these bills, it is our job as an opposition 

to go through that and to find weaknesses and find problems 

that might be created by the Saskatchewan Party to upset that 

balance between building a solid economy and making sure we 

engage our organized people as much as we can and to the 

extent we can and should. 

 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we point out to 

people, we know why this time frame and at this juncture of the 

legislative timetable that the Saskatchewan Party brought this 

forward with two sitting days left in the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. And we also know that the auditor came out several 

days ago, so it doesn’t give the opposition a lot of time to go 

after the Saskatchewan Party because obviously the information 

is just flowing. And that’s why it’s important from our 

perspective, as described by our opposition critic, is that we 

must as an opposition caucus take the time to look through the 

bills, take the time to look through the procedures, take the time 

to look at the rules and regulation, consult with people on our 

own, sit down with the organized labour leaders and talking 

about a number of issues and anything that they see as red flags. 

 

And that I think is a very important part of the leadership 

provided by the member from Saskatoon Centre to his own 

caucus. And his message has been very clear. His message has 

been very clear to all of us. Let us see what is in the bill to 

ensure that we know, we all know what it contains. And 

secondly is to take the time to consult with different groups of 

people that are impacted so we know how they feel about this 

particular bill, and keep a very, very close eye on the member or 

the Minister of Labour and the Saskatchewan Party government 

because the trust, as far as organized labour is concerned, is 

simply not there when it comes to this government’s track 

record, Mr. Speaker. They have in a sense created much more 

hardship than people in Saskatchewan know towards organized 

labour, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s important that we, as an opposition caucus, since 

we’re ready to recognize the leadership of the member from 

Saskatoon Centre, that we also take the advice accordingly and 



2404 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

really watch carefully how the bill unfolds, to understand the 

bill thoroughly enough and to make sure there’s nothing hidden 

in the rules or regulations and to be wary of his argument 

saying that the devil’s in the details. Be careful how we proceed 

with this. We need to be very, very thorough in looking at this 

particular bill because if it turns out that it’s hurting the middle 

class people, the middle class working people that could be hard 

hit by this particular bill, then we need to know that. 

 

We need to absolutely be sure before the opposition goes 

gunning for the government on some of the potential changes 

that might hurt middle class working people, Mr. Speaker. 

Changing to four 10-hour shifts instead of five 8-hour shifts, 

what impact does that have on things like childcare? Looking at 

changing to an overtime bank instead of getting overtime pay, 

how is the response on that particular issue? These are some of 

the things that may not work for a lot of employees or workers. 

 

And this is the important perspective that we take, Mr. Speaker, 

as the opposition, is that we ensure, we ensure that we consult 

with these groups to see if there is any glaring omissions or any 

burning problems that the bill may present to any particular part 

of our working economy or working people. And this is 

something that we ought to take the time to do, as the message 

was delivered by the opposition labour critic. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what you want to do in this? When we talk 

about the smart work that the NDP are trying to build, quite 

clearly I think we recognize the value of environmental 

protection. We recognize the value of the Crown protection. We 

recognize the importance of attracting investment, Mr. Speaker. 

We think that’s something that’s obviously got to be very, very 

integral to any successful economy. But we also know that 

organized labour and having a good labour force is also just as 

important as all the other aspects of our smart growth strategy 

under the NDP banner. 

 

And that smart growth plan really looks and focuses on the 

middle class people to ensure that we don’t put any 

impediments in front of them, and this labour bill may do so. 

We don’t know. We’re going to find that out as time goes on 

because quite frankly the amount of time that they have allowed 

us to look at this particular bill is very constrained. The last two 

days, the last two sitting days of a session. We get it today 

which leaves us with one more question period left. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the 90 days that they took to go around and 

do some of their consultations that they speak about, Mr. 

Speaker, to deal with 100 years of labour legislation, all these 

issues, Mr. Speaker, just quite frankly point to us that there was 

no consultation. There was no respect. And simply the 

Saskatchewan Party is going to continue their particular attack 

on the working people’s values. 

 

And they may try and hide some of those attacks within this 

bill, and we’re going to work very hard to uncover them. And 

when we uncover them, Mr. Speaker, this opposition, being led 

by this Labour critic from Saskatoon Centre, is going to be well 

prepared to be able to say, not only are we aware of these 

problems in the bill but we consulted, and here’s what working 

people have to say on these changes. And then we’re going to 

of course formulate a plan, strategy and certainly attack the 

government on some of the problems that they may be creating 

with this particular bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that’s important to note 

is that when you look at labour in general, the track record I 

spoke about earlier that the Sask Party has with the labour 

people is very, very poor, very poor. You look at the number of 

things that they’ve done: essential services which has now been 

struck down by the courts saying that this Saskatchewan Party 

had no right to do that. And now they’re going to continue. 

Now they’re going to fight the courts, the Saskatchewan Party 

is. And how much is that going to cost? How much is the cost 

going to be? And then you look at the other aspect, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that they have decimated some of our civil 

servant numbers and that there’s nobody speaking up for the 

people that have lost their jobs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you look at all these actions and activities by 

the Saskatchewan Party, and they’re hoping, they’re hoping that 

the bill itself may come across as being moderate, Mr. Speaker. 

We within the NDP simply don’t trust the Sask Party. And 

that’s why it’s important, as our critic pointed out, and his direct 

instructions to his entire caucus is take the time to understand 

the bill, consult with some of the impacted and the changes that 

may have been negative or positive with different groups out 

there, and take the three or four months that it takes to really 

understand the bill. And I think all our members of the caucus 

have agreed to do that, which is something really, really 

important for the Saskatchewan Party caucus to follow the 

leadership of our particular critic because there’s some very, 

very good advice on that front. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, we need to also point out that the 

organized labour groups, the people that have really helped over 

the years to not only control the deficit in the early years when 

we were paying something like $900 million a year in interest 

alone, the organized labour groups, the people that had worked 

for the government, that provided services, they held the line 

many, many times on their own needs, whether it’ll be a 

financial request or it may have been other requests. They 

simply understood that Saskatchewan was in dire straits 

financially and they had to show co-operation. They had to 

show co-operation, and they had to show sacrifice, Mr. Speaker, 

and they absolutely did. 

 

Now what happens is after all those years, as things were 

getting better and the Sask Party took over, they turn around 

and they not only disregarded some of that commitment and 

dedication and sacrifice by our organized workers, Mr. Speaker. 

They turn around and fired a lot of those workers as a thanks 

back to them. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a crying shame. 

 

And that’s why people within the organized labour movement 

simply don’t trust the Saskatchewan Party. It’s not just about 

essential services that has been struck down by the court. It’s 

about their brothers and sisters that have been fired by this 

government. It’s about their brothers and sisters that have been 

totally disregarded. And now, Mr. Speaker, they have this bill 

that they’ve touted is going to be anti-union and yet we haven’t 

even . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2405 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to ask leave to 

introduce a guest. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The Leader of the 

Opposition has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re pleased 

this afternoon to have Mr. Gay Patrick join us. And Mr. Patrick 

is a long-time person with interest in the public affairs of this 

province, but especially in the development of mining policy 

and taxation policy over many decades. And we know that the 

advice that he provided as it relates to the potash industry has 

been part of the success of our province. So I would ask all 

members to greet Mr. Patrick and acknowledge his presence 

here today. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the 

Minister of the Economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With 

leave for the introduction of guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — The Minister of the 

Economy has asked for leave for introduction of guests. Is it the 

pleasure of this Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — Carried. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 

like to join with the member, the Leader of the Opposition 

opposite, to as well welcome Gay Patrick to the Legislative 

Assembly. I’ve got to know Gay very well over the years. He 

ably and very capably represents the potash industry to the 

people of Saskatchewan, to the Government of Saskatchewan, 

and to everyone in the province. He has played an instrumental 

role in making sure that the interests of the potash industry are 

well known to the people of Saskatchewan. And we would want 

to, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, welcome him 

here to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Tochor): — I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I think what’s really important, as I was speaking about earlier, 

is the fact that the labour movement and the people that, the 

civil servants that worked for many, many years over that 

period that Saskatchewan was having great difficultly 

financially, that we need to recognize their contribution. And 

we need to recognize the fact that they’ve held the line on many 

of the things that their membership base wanted. 

 

And in the process of undertaking all that sacrifice and all that 

time, that sometimes membership can become impatient with 

the process. And, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve found, that there 

was great leadership provided at the membership level, but also 

the leaders that they selected. I think a lot of the leaders realized 

what was at stake when Saskatchewan was having such a 

financial difficulty. And they’ve certainly done their part. 

 

So the point I want to make is that a lot of the working people 

in our province, the middle-class, working men and women that 

are part of a union, the organized labour folks, the people that 

provide services, whether it’s SGEU [Saskatchewan 

Government and General Employees’ Union], Mr. Speaker, or 

the Public Service Alliance of Canada, all these different 

organizations, Mr. Speaker, have people that have worked to 

provide services to the many, many people in our province and 

we should never, ever, ever forget their contribution, nor should 

we ever, ever forget their sacrifice, Mr. Speaker. At the time 

when Saskatchewan needed them, they certainly provided and 

proved their value and provided leadership. 

 

And I think that’s something that we want to add, Mr. Speaker, 

as a point that after the Saskatchewan Party came into power, 

they turned around and totally disregarded our organized labour 

folks simply for the fact that they thought it was politically 

expedient to do so. And in a heartbeat they threw many of our 

union brothers and sisters under the bus. And that’s one of the 

reasons why they simply don’t trust the Saskatchewan Party 

because of essential services law they put in place, the fact that 

they fired many of their brothers and sisters. And now this 

labour bill comes along, and, Mr. Speaker, we have to find out 

exactly what kind of detail that the Saskatchewan Party might 

try and hide in this particular bill. And the advice that we got 

from our critic was to go through it, be thorough, and make sure 

that you consult with people. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go back quickly to the word 

consult, because consult is really, really a word that a lot of 

organizations and people use in a negative way. And I noticed 

that the Government of Saskatchewan like to say consult. And, 

Mr. Speaker, consult does not necessarily mean that the people 

that you’re consulting with agree to what you’re doing. So 

that’s the critical point that I would make, is that I could simply 

say to a number of my colleagues, I consulted with them on this 

issue, and not say anything. And the impression I would give 

people is that I consulted with them and they all are in 

agreement. There’s a significant difference between what we 

call a consultation and the whole premise of agreeing to the 

recommendations behind that consultation. And on both fronts 

the Saskatchewan party has failed miserably. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the importance that the pillars, if 

you will, the pillars of our discussion with organized labour, 

when we condemn this government for their non-consultation, 

we turn around, we’ve done our own public consultation. And 

when you have those public consultations, there’s a number of 

guiding principles that ought to be present in all the MLAs that 



2406 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

are attending these meetings when they sit down with folks. 

And again, as directed and instructed by our critic, the MLAs in 

the Saskatchewan New Democratic caucus really ensured that 

they were there with a number of principles in mind. 

 

One such principle is the importance of public consultation. We 

fundamentally believe in that process, Mr. Speaker. The second 

one is ensuring a balanced working environment. The third one 

was the danger of losing strong workplace legislation. Fourth 

one was positive changes that’ll work for working people. Fifth 

one was taking care of the most vulnerable workers. Number 

six was improving unions and collective bargaining rights. And 

finally, which is really important to all the people of 

Saskatchewan, is strengthening the economy to workplace 

safety and training. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those seven values or seven pillars or seven 

principles are really, really essential in anything that we had in 

our hearts and minds when we approached the organized labour 

groups and their leaders, Mr. Speaker. So again I take my hat 

off to the member from Saskatoon Centre. He’s done a 

tremendous job on behalf of the opposition caucus and going 

out to nine communities, I believe, nine centres where they had 

over 700 people show up. And that’s very, very impressive, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think his effort to consult with groups and 

people certainly were noticed. And from my perspective as the 

Deputy Leader of the current opposition caucus, NDP caucus, I 

was very, very proud of the member from Saskatoon Centre on 

his dedication, his commitment to making sure we got this 

right. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend him on that and to point 

out that there is some issues that we heard of and that we 

learned of during those very, very important public consultation 

discussions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, when you see a government 

meddling in the middle-class sector, meddling in some of the 

organized labour groups, meddling in how the courts perceive 

as none of their particular business on some fronts like the 

essential services, then you begin to wonder, what is the agenda 

of the Saskatchewan Party? And that is, when it comes to our 

organized labour groups that’s the big question mark. What is 

their agenda? So far they’ve struck out on the essential services 

bill. The court said, you guys don’t have things figured out; 

we’re striking that Act out completely. And now these guys 

want to go to the Supreme Court of Canada to fight against the 

working people. And that’s a crying shame. And above all else 

it’s a waste of public resources — taxpayers’ dollars — simply 

to push their ideology that seems to trump common sense every 

time the Saskatchewan Party undertakes any initiative. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are getting awfully 

tired, and tired fast of some of the antics of the Sask Party. So, 

Mr. Speaker, it is some of these things that are really, really 

important that I continue to point out. 

 

And groups and organizations that are out there, whether it’s 

Bill 5 or whether it’s the malicious hiring, I mean firing, of 

many of these people that were hired for a very good purpose 

and for a very good cause and with great commitment to their 

job, these guys turn around and fired a whole whack of civil 

servants, Mr. Speaker. A whole whack of civil servants, and at a 

great cost to the province of Saskatchewan. And that was the 

second strike, Mr. Speaker, the second strike against the 

working people. 

 

And now they’re here for the third fight, which is this particular 

bill. But as we’ve indicated, it’s important that we take the time 

to understand the bill to see where the Saskatchewan Party’s 

going and to point out to people, that is why organized labour 

and the working men and women, the middle-class men and 

women of this province, simply don’t trust the Saskatchewan 

Party because they’re meddling in some of their workplace 

issues. They’re meddling in some of the other matters that 

would create some uncomfortableness by many of our working 

men and women. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the role of government. They 

didn’t run on that particular aspect in the last election. They 

shouldn’t be meddling in some of this particular business. They 

should be really pushing to ensure we have a balanced approach 

towards the economic building of our province to make sure we 

have social progress. As our former premier used to say, in 

order for us to justify the economic success to our people is to 

make sure that everybody shares in that benefit, shares in the 

economy, and shares in the wealth of our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think you look at the whole . . . [inaudible] 

. . . of 90 days. Ninety days is what the Saskatchewan Party 

undertook to review, to review what the labour Act was all 

about. Ninety days to review the legislation that took over 100 

years to develop. And that’s exactly the style of the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, is they take 90 days, 90 days 

to look at this labour legislation to see what they can do to try 

and meddle once again. 

 

So what we had to do as opposition is to see how they may have 

strategically hidden a rule or regulation somewhere within this 

massive bill that really counters what the organized labour and 

the public service people would not want to see happen in a 

negative way. And that’s why it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that 

we follow up and follow through with some very good, very 

good consultation, but above all else take the time to understand 

this bill very, very clearly. 

 

Now as I indicated, some of the other bills and some of the 

other discussion I had is that obviously you look at what’s in 

the bill and what’s not in the bill. That’s really, really 

important. Like today, the minister talked about the choice 

people have is they can have a ten-hour, four-day week or a 

five-day, eight-hour week. Well it’s not as simple as that, Mr. 

Speaker. He wants to talk about that particular issue. It’s not as 

simple as that. There are other complicating issues, and these 

issues are being hidden in the rules and regulations of some of 

the Acts that are part of this bill. 

 

So it’s all in there, and it’s all massive. And what we have to do 

is begin to take it apart, as I know that the organized labour 

leaders are doing now. They’ll take this apart. They’ll look for 

things, and I’m sure they’ll find ways that the Saskatchewan 

Party’s trying to fool organized labour and to try and sneak one 

in. And this is the important part and important advice that we 

got from our critic is to make sure we take the time to 

understand this bill. 

 

So what’s not in the bill, Mr. Speaker, is just as important as 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2407 

what’s in the bill. And that’s why when we get up and speak at 

these bills after they’ve been introduced, we ask the public, we 

ask the public, please join us. And it’s very easy to access the 

information on this bill through the website, very easy. You can 

contact your opposition MLA or you can contact the critic 

himself. It’s very easy for many of the public members to go 

through the bill to see what the Saskatchewan Party is trying to 

do to really, really work at the expense of some of our working 

men and women, the people that serve our public. And that’s 

something that I think everyone should actually assume some 

responsibility for, by at least understanding what the bill is all 

about. 

 

So once you reach out and you encourage people to participate 

in dissecting the bill, obviously we want their information as 

well. As the case with every other bill, having information 

come to us as opposition is really, really important. And we will 

raise these concerns and we will fight and we will speak up for 

those people that have been downtrodden over time. And we’ll 

speak for those folks that are afraid to speak back to this 

particular government. And we will speak up for those folks 

that have had a great injustice done to them, to ensure that 

Saskatchewan continues to remain a province where people can 

speak up and speak out against their government, in case their 

government does things that will hurt or harm them or their 

families. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the role of the opposition. And we 

relish that role. We relish that role to be able to go after the 

Sask Party when they do things that hurt any specific sector of 

our province, or go after any group of our province, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s not the role of government. They shouldn’t be 

doing that. And we’ll stand up for those organizations that 

might want to try and do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again we would really encourage people to 

look at the bill. Look at the details, be very, very wary of what 

they might try and sneak through this particular omnibus bill. 

And there’s 186 pages, as the critic said. And that’s a lot of 

pages, so we have to go through this whole document page by 

page by page. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we encourage people to do 

that. It’s important we take our critic’s advice. It’s important we 

do, at first blush, what we think is problematic with the bill. 

And, Mr. Speaker, given the history of the Saskatchewan Party 

on essential services, on firing hundreds of civil servants, Mr. 

Speaker, and now this particular bill, is simply, the trust is not 

there whatsoever. The trust is not there in any way, shape, or 

form that the Saskatchewan Party would really protect the 

interests of the public service of this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s something that they have learned from and 

something that they’re going to continue fighting, fighting back 

with this particular government on. And, Mr. Speaker, they can 

certainly count on the opposition, the part of that team that 

fights against the Saskatchewan Party any day of the week. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is that we 

have our entire caucus that is going to look at this bill. We have 

the entire caucus that are going to participate in this bill. We 

would encourage other groups and organizations that are out 

there, but the biggest and the greatest ally, Mr. Speaker, is the 

actual public service themselves. 

We would encourage them to participate in our discussions and 

to give us some advice as well, and to not sit back and hope that 

the Sask Party does anything bad, but to really take a proactive 

position and to come to the Assembly, to take a proactive 

position to come and educate the MLAs, and to take a proactive 

position to making sure that the public understands what kind of 

hidden agenda that the Sask Party may have when it comes to 

this particular bill. Because rest assured, there are hidden things 

within rules and regulations that we will uncover, that people of 

Saskatchewan, I think, would be quite surprised that this has 

happened. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a bit more time to look at the bill. 

The unfortunate part of how the Saskatchewan Party does 

business, Mr. Speaker — and we kind of laugh about this in 

opposition — a good example, one of the biggest bills that they 

want to put as their flagship bills, they introduced it a day 

before the session ends in the fall. One day we have to look at 

this bill.  

 

So our critic, in his wise advice to us all, his very wise counsel 

saying, even though it’s only a day before the session ends, we 

don’t jump to conclusions. He simply said, let us look through 

the bill itself. Let’s make sure we get this right. Be calm. Be 

steady. Be rational. Be patient. That’s the advice of our critic, 

Mr. Speaker. But some of us in the caucus here just absolutely, 

we laugh at the way that the Saskatchewan Party does their 

business. One day left before the end of the session, and they 

bring out a big 186-page labour reform bill. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we sit here and say, isn’t that interesting. What are they hiding? 

 

So that’s one of the things that we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is 

take the time, is take the time to go through that bill. And we 

will, we will take the time to go through that bill, Mr. Speaker, 

because their attack on the civil servants has been relentless. 

We’ve seen evidence of that over the last five years. And I’m 

sorry, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t believe. We don’t believe for 

one second that the Saskatchewan Party has got the public 

service people’s interests at heart, Mr. Speaker, not at all. So the 

trust isn’t there and, Mr. Speaker, the confidence is not there 

from our opposition that the Saskatchewan Party knows what 

they’re doing when they deal with our working men and women 

of our great province. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP smart growth plan, as I’ve 

indicated time and time again, there are three principles. To 

ensure that we protect the environment, and that’s really, really 

important. To continue embracing the role of corporations, of 

companies, of businesses small and large who come and help us 

build the economy. That part goes without saying; that’s always 

been part of the NDP plan and platform. And that’s why we 

were successful in building the economy before we lost the 

election in 2007. 

 

But the third component is to ensure that we have a highly 

organized, highly skilled, and highly paid civil service. That’s 

what’s really important — the workforce. Because if you don’t 

do the three principles, or the three pillars, Mr. Speaker, then 

you’re going to weaken the economy somehow. 

 

And there’s no question in our mind that if you look next door 



2408 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

to Alberta, that there are people still being called to Alberta to 

work at jobs where the money is good. And how is 

Saskatchewan going to compete, the Saskatchewan public 

service individual going to compete to stay here in 

Saskatchewan and to work here when they can get twice the pay 

in Alberta? 

 

And that is a fundamental issue, I think is really important to 

the public out there, is that you’ve got to be careful. You’ve got 

to be careful how you respond and respect the public servants of 

Saskatchewan. Because if you continue going to war with them 

and isolate them, you’re going to see less and less of their 

support and commitment and numbers in our province. And in 

the long run, nobody wants to see that and nobody wants to see 

that particular pain occur. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that’s important as 

well is that the ongoing process from here, the government talks 

about consultation. This is after the fact. They didn’t consult 

before. And what really, really upset us here on this side, and I 

know that the critic from our caucus, the member from 

Saskatoon Centre, was very upset when he asked the minister 

during committee, what is the cost attached to some of this 

process that you have undertaken? And the minister said, it’s 

not going to cost us anything. It’s not going to cost us anything. 

Not a thing, was the word. And then here today, or a couple of 

days ago in the Assembly, he said, oh, it’s going to cost us over 

a half a million. 

 

Now where did that come from, Mr. Speaker? Where did half a 

million dollars come from? And why would he say in 

committee there was no cost at one time, then turn around and 

six months later there’s a half a million dollar cost to that? Well 

you know what I think happened, Mr. Speaker, is that he was on 

a committee and he wanted to show the public of Saskatchewan 

that this wasn’t going to cost no money. So he got credit from 

the Saskatchewan people on that front. And then he turns 

around six months later saying, well it’s a half a million dollars. 

 

And what I think the cost is intended to do is to be viewed by 

the Saskatchewan taxpayer as what the public service cost us to 

deal with their issue. Again it’s another subtle attack on the 

public servants and, Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely not fair. 

 

So one thing that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

minister, if he doesn’t know what this process is going to cost, 

and then six months later he comes in at — what is it? — half a 

million more than he expected, then how could we have 

confidence that he knows what he’s doing on this particular 

file? And how could we have confidence that he’s not trying to 

sneak a few rules and regulations that will upset the balance 

between a good working and healthy environment for many of 

our men and women of our province and our young people, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And that’s one of the reasons why we simply don’t trust the 

Saskatchewan Party to get this file right. And we never will 

trust the Saskatchewan Party to try and figure how you ensure 

labour peace and to ensure that the balance is maintained for the 

good of all Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. These guys 

have failed miserably on it, and we’ll never trust them. And, 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of other groups of people will never trust 

them as well. 

So I think it’s important that we continue to send that message 

to motivate the public servant people to ensure that they’re part 

of the process and look through this bill diligently, to be very 

vigil in some of the work that they’re doing and to share that 

information with the opposition. Share the information with us 

because there’s so much information. It’s a 186-page book. It’s 

a huge bill. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to go through that bill 

with a fine-tooth comb. 

 

And any bit of help, any bit of help from any of the groups out 

there that may have a song in their heart or may have a huge 

issue with this particular bill that they would be able come 

forward to us and share the information, and to a point where 

we’d even encourage them to come to the Assembly and visit us 

and share the information. And we would take the message to 

the people and to the press and to this particular government 

through question period and really hammer home some of the 

things that they are trying to do through some of their rules and 

regulations that would hurt people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think northern Saskatchewan people in 

general, as you look at some of the communities that I 

represent, you know, there’s many times in the morning when I 

wake up in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I go and have coffee, get my 

granddaughter ready for school. I see the teachers drive by. And 

before that I see the Highways truck drive by as they’re clearing 

the roads. And teachers often prepare for their daily classes with 

my grandchild, and you see the town maintenance crews 

clearing up the driveways as well, and you see the 

administrative team arriving at the town office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly my point. These are the men and 

women that make Saskatchewan so vibrant. These are the men 

and women that serve their public, that serve their people. And 

these are the men and women that really, really try to make a 

difference in all our communities. And, Mr. Speaker, I have a 

tremendous amount of respect because these guys are probably 

up at 5 in the morning, 6 in the morning, and they work very, 

very hard. I’m talking about people like the Highways workers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what the Saskatchewan Party done was they 

simply fired a whole bunch of civil servants, Mr. Speaker, and 

now they want to hire three more politicians. And wouldn’t it 

be great, wouldn’t it be great, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The Carrot River MLA is chirping from his 

seat again. This is the same guy that was bragging about the 

budget a couple of years being so great. It’s probably the 

greatest budget in the universe. The only thing that’s greater 

than the budget in the universe is the debt that that member and 

the rest of the members are going to leave the people of 

Saskatchewan, that it’s almost embarrassing to say today that 

Saskatchewan’s Sask Party’s put Saskatchewan half a billion 

dollars in debt, according to the Provincial Auditor, this year 

alone. And they’ve added $1 billion to the debt. So I don’t 

know where the member from Carrot River’s getting off 

chirping from his chair that this budget is balanced. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that I would highly 

recommend, I would highly recommend that the backbench get 

a backbone and start asking questions about this bill, that the 

backbench start getting involved with their government instead 

of being just patted on the forehead saying, just keep voting yay 

or nay. Don’t ask any questions, and you’ll be happy here for 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2409 

the next four years. They got one year done, Mr. Speaker. You 

got three more years to sit there and get your head patted like 

good little MLAs. Don’t ask any questions. Continue talking 

about a balanced budget, and don’t go beyond that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a crying shame to see that kind of 

treatment to the backbench of the Saskatchewan Party because 

they’ve got three more years, three more years to sit there doing 

that. And three more years is . . . I don’t know how many days 

that is. It’s got to be at least 1,080 days, 1,080 days, they’ve got 

to sit there and they’ve got to be able to have their little head 

patted and to make sure they don’t get upset, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I don’t know about them, but when we were in government, 

the NDP backbenchers had a huge role. They spoke on every 

issue. They were well-informed. They were respected, Mr. 

Speaker. They were told exactly what was going to happen on 

the budget. And the caucus itself was given a total opportunity 

to argue with any budgets that we presented and to make sure 

that all their issues were heard. 

 

Now all we see, Mr. Speaker, is a small cluster of conservatives 

in the front here that are basically running the show. The 

opposition backbench just continues to sit over there, and every 

now and then they have somebody chirp up, like the member 

from Carrot River saying, this is the best budget in the universe. 

And that’s exactly, Mr. Speaker, the problem that they have 

over there is that their team is not strong because they have not 

advised nor involved nor respected their backbench. And you 

ask any of the backbenchers any details of this particular bill, I 

bet you 90 per cent of them wouldn’t have a clue what’s in this 

bill, Mr. Speaker, and how it’s going to impact their 

constituents. And that’s a crying shame, Mr. Speaker, because 

that’s exactly what you should be doing here. You should be 

well-advised, well-informed instead of getting a song sheet and 

singing from that song sheet for the next four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve got to stand up because if you’re going to 

do that for the next 1,080 days — go ahead and sit there — in 

the meantime, the people of Saskatchewan will suffer, and the 

people of your constituency will suffer. And working men and 

women in your constituency will continue to suffer — people 

that plow our roads, people that educate our kids, people that 

maintain our communities, people that provide health care 

coverage. The list grows and grows and grows as to how the 

public service people of Saskatchewan ought to be respected, 

Mr. Speaker. They ought to be consulted, and they ought to be 

an integral part of everyday thinking that this government does. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, instead they have gone to war with them. 

They’ve pushed through essential services ready to go all the 

way to the Supreme Court of Canada if they have to, according 

to the minister. And they have fired many people that have put 

years and years of service to this province, and they have 

sacrificed as I said at the outset. And these guys simply just 

fired them on the spot, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now they bring in this bill. Now they bring in this bill which 

half the backbench . . . And I’m sure the member from Carrot 

River hasn’t even read the bill, you know, and then he chirps 

from his chair. And the problem is, Mr. Speaker, is that he will 

be given a note: these are the four or five lines you say on this 

bill. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would highly recommend that that member 

. . . the mistake that he made in saying this is the best budget in 

the universe. You know, amongst New Democratic circles here, 

Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly, we look at that statement, and 

we keep bringing it back up. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because he 

didn’t know, he didn’t know they were $2 billion off their 

projection. He wasn’t told. He wasn’t told. So he got up and he 

said, this is the best budget in the universe. And then the people 

here and the media and people that knew what was going on 

said, hold it there, Mr. MLA from Carrot River. You guys are 

just a little off your mark on projection for potash, just a little 

on the outside, $2 billion, you know. 

 

And so my point is that I know the member from Carrot River 

is a pretty sharp guy. You know, he’s . . . Well he’s sharp, not 

pretty. But he’s an intelligent guy, you know, and he knows 

whether he’s right in his heart and mind or whether he’s been 

not informed. And, Mr. Speaker, my point is he wasn’t 

informed. So what he was told in a caucus meeting . . . 

Somebody probably came to the caucus meeting and said, all 

you guys here, all you backbench MLAs, here’s the message, 

and you guys just keep saying that. You just cheerlead. Don’t 

do anything else. And of course the member from Carrot River 

went along and said, this is the best budget in the universe, and 

a day later we find out they’re $2 billion, $2 billion off their 

projected revenues from potash. Well how did he feel the next 

day, Mr. Speaker? I bet he was grumpy in his morning coffee. 

And yet we continue to hear him spout some odd number from 

somewhere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, if I was an umpire and I’d seen this $2 billion 

miss, I’d say, just a little outside. And then of course he’d say, 

well this is the best budget in the universe. If that’s your best 

budget in the universe, my goodness, we’re in for a tough three 

more years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now they’re getting better, Mr. Speaker. Now they’re getting 

better. They’re only half a billion dollars off this year. But hold 

it, hold it. They added $1 billion in debt to the province, so it’s 

one and a half billion. So it’s not much of a difference from 2 

billion to one and a half billion. So it’s not a universal miss of 

projections; it’s a stratosphere miss of a projection. 

 

So I think what’s really important for the member from Carrot 

River, the member from Carrot River, is you be very, very 

careful. Because don’t come to Regina and don’t sing from the 

song sheet because if that song sheet is wrong — which he was 

proven to be wrong at the time — then the member looks silly. 

And I know he’s an intelligent guy. I know he’s an intelligent 

guy. But don’t come give any financial advice if you’re not 

certain about that financial advice. Especially don’t give it to 

the New Democrats because we know what the game plan is 

from his front bench. My advice to him: know the game plan, 

and in the future don’t make bold predictions based on your 

enthusiasm. Get some facts, man. Get some facts. And the fact 

is your government was $2 billion off its mark. This year 

they’re one and a half billion dollars off their mark. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I think is really, really important is 

people out there don’t have to take the NDP opposition’s word 

for it. We’ve got a new bible, and it’s called the Provincial 



2410 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

Auditor of Saskatchewan 2012 report. And this good book, this 

good book will certainly prove to the people of Carrot River 

and the MLA from Carrot River, the member from Carrot River 

exactly what they’re doing wrong. Their projections, the 

magnitude of their miss on projections of two years ago and 

now this year is universal. Their budget is totally lost in space, 

Mr. Speaker. You know, it’s lost in space. If I can do the 

analogy of, Mr. Speaker, of Star Trek, the debt that these guys 

have given our province is gone into warp drive, if the member 

from Carrot River can understand that. It’s gone into warp 

drive. It’s a new level now. 

 

And I think they should’ve fired the minister from Kindersley, 

the member that talks about the economy. He’s the one that was 

projecting $2 billion in potash even though he was told no, Mr. 

Minister, it’s not going to be this amount; it’s going to be this 

amount. And I wonder how much he had to pay back the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. Some of us say there was quite a 

bit of money, quite a bit of money. 

 

So when we talk about economic building, we talk about 

financial competency. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 

the last place we will get any advice from. And when it comes 

to labour development, respect for labour, labour peace, making 

sure that the economy has highly skilled workers that are paid 

fairly for their services, Mr. Speaker, the NDP will never take 

advice from the Saskatchewan Party, the right wing 

Saskatchewan Party because so far they have failed miserably, 

miserably on many, many fronts. And that’s what’s really 

important. 

 

So I’d highly recommend to the member from Carrot River is 

please get your facts right because on this side of the House . . . 

Because you’re, you know, you’re not a bad guy. We’ll give 

you a break on that front because you were given a song sheet 

to sing from. But in the future be very, very careful what kind 

of projections that you have. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, on this particular bill, I think it’s 

important that the advice that we afforded the member from 

Carrot River, we afford to ourselves as well: make sure of your 

facts. Make sure that you consult. Make sure that there isn’t 

anything hidden in this particular bill. Make sure that you’re not 

impacting the middle-class people. Make sure that this is good 

for the Saskatchewan economy. Make sure that you respect the 

working men and women that serve our community. Make sure 

that this is good overall for the finances of our province. Make 

sure that we understand the impact. Make sure that if there’s an 

omission here, that we’re aware of it. And make sure that you 

have a solid, well-informed opposition to keep that 

government’s feet to the fire on any front they do, especially 

when it comes to the civil servants of our great province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is what’s really, really 

important. 

 

So I think it’s important that we continue to encourage people 

to participate. Please advise us. The doors are open. The lines of 

communication are open. There’s Internet. There’s social 

media. There’s telephone, and there’s fax, if some people still 

use the fax machine. There’s all kinds of avenues of 

communication. We would encourage you to use those avenues 

of communication and get us the information because, by golly, 

we’re going to use that information to correct the 

miscommunication coming out of the backbench of that 

particular government and the misinformation coming from the 

front bench. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of information that 

we want to share. We want to go through all the documentation 

that was presented to us — 186 pages of information. We will 

go through it. And we’ll continue seeking the advice and the 

leadership of my great and dear friend from Saskatoon Centre, 

the only guy, I might add, the only person I might add, that has 

done any credible work on this file, and that includes the Sask 

Party. And the NDP certainly will benefit from his leadership. 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

this particular bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 85, The Saskatchewan 

Employment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 69 — The 

Information Services Corporation Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon after question period and some other adjourned 

debates and a few other things going on here in the House today 

— and a busy day in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, with the 

Christmas season here now that we’re into December — having 

said all that, it’s a pleasure this afternoon to enter into the 

discussion on Bill No. 69, An Act respecting Information 

Services Corporation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at different pieces of 

legislation that come before the House, there are a variety of 

types of bills that come forward. The range is fairly great, Mr. 

Speaker. In some circumstances, the types of bills that come 

forward are of a housekeeping nature. And these bills, Mr. 

Speaker, are part of the regular review that occurs within a 

ministry as officials within the ministry interact with the 

community, business, stakeholders, unions, a variety of groups, 

Mr. Speaker, receiving information and then doing regular 

reviews of the legislation to address things that have popped up 

through the normal course of action. Perhaps there’s an aspect 

of a bill that is not as reflective as it needs to be to the current 

reality on a given topic. And in those situations, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s appropriate that changes come forward so that we ensure 

that the bill — sometimes not always of a high-profile nature — 

but we need to ensure that the bills are contemporary, are 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2411 

modern, and are appropriate for what Saskatchewan people 

need, whatever the case may be, whatever the ministry may be. 

 

And we think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at these 

housekeeping types of bills, sometimes it is of a fairly minor 

nature and it’s changing language so that there’s consistency 

between the different Acts. Sometimes it’s making it more 

gender neutral. As times have changed, so too has our approach 

to how we phrase legislation. And that is most certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, an appropriate change. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s been a more significant change in one part of the laws of 

the land, which has a domino effect and therefore changes are 

needed in other pieces of legislation. So these types of bills, Mr. 

Speaker, sometimes are not that high profile, sometimes do not 

have a huge, huge bearing on the everyday lives of 

Saskatchewan people as they go about their business of working 

in businesses or working for an employer or raising a family 

and contributing to the community. 

 

There are other types of bills, Mr. Speaker, which are more 

influential in the effect that they will have in people’s lives. 

And sometimes the effect is immediate. It’s a particular piece of 

legislation that affects the business of an individual. Perhaps it’s 

really specific in a ministry and deserves great attention. 

 

In other situations, Mr. Speaker, the changes that may be 

proposed in a piece of legislation might be more big picture and 

might affect the province on a big scale, which in turn over time 

or in a long period of time or short period of time will affect 

people’s lives. And often this relates, Mr. Speaker, to the 

financial picture of the province, decisions that are made with 

respect to the role of the provincial government, decisions that 

are made with respect to the role of individuals, and decisions 

that are made with respect to, as we see in this instance with 

Bill No. 69, the privatization of Information Services 

Corporation. 

 

So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that with whatever the type of 

legislation that we’re looking at, whatever the type that is on the 

floor of the Legislative Assembly, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have a high level of scrutiny. It is important that we 

have a thorough debate. It’s important that the committee 

process be as productive and as comprehensive as it needs to be 

so that the correct questions are asked. And it’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, that we recognize that the decisions that we make 

through legislation do in fact have a bearing on the provincial 

books and have a bearing on the lives of people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s with making those introductory comments, 

Mr. Speaker, that I want to talk about this particular piece of 

legislation, Bill No. 69, The Information Services Corporation 

Act, because I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very 

important piece of legislation. It’s a piece of legislation that 

does have a bearing for the people in the province — first, Mr. 

Speaker, through the impact that it may have on the provincial 

books and how it ties into decisions that the government has 

been recently making, but also, Mr. Speaker, in how the piece 

of legislation could ultimately affect individuals as they go 

about their business of living here in the province, and whether 

that be from their own perspective of buying and purchasing 

homes, or whether that be as a business that may be operating, 

or whether it be a resource company doing work here in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s important that we have an approach to the Information 

Services Corporation that does in fact speak to the best interests 

of the province, whether it’s an individual living in any 

community or whether it’s a business function in the 

community, whether it’s a community organization or a group 

operating in the province. It’s most certainly important that we 

get things right. 

 

The issue, Mr. Speaker, of ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] has been an interesting one 

based on the comments that the Sask Party has made, and in 

some circumstances, based on the comments that they haven’t 

made, Mr. Speaker. This most certainly wasn’t something that 

was talked about in the previous election, the privatization of 

Information Services Corporation. It wasn’t something, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Sask Party discussed. It wasn’t something that 

they campaigned on, the privatization of it. It wasn’t something, 

Mr. Speaker, that was identified as a priority for the 

government. In fact, we’ve had some truly conflicting 

information come from members opposite with respect to their 

view on privatization, and with respect to their view on Crown 

corporations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for many decades there has been a 

discussion that’s occurred in the province, a discussion that’s 

occurred in the broader community. It’s occurred in businesses. 

It’s occurred in coffee shops throughout the province, and it’s 

occurred on the floor of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, back when 

the carpet was red. And that has to do with, Mr. Speaker, with 

the role of Crown corporations within the province, and also 

when governments have decided to pursue a course of 

privatization. This is an issue that matters to Saskatchewan 

people in a very significant and real way. 

 

And it comes down to, Mr. Speaker, a view of whether we view 

Crown corporations as having a productive and constructive 

role in the province and providing services to people in a way 

that is timely, a way that is effective, and a way that is 

affordable, there are some, Mr. Speaker, who believe that 

Crown corporations have an important role to play and that the 

role is one that provides benefits to a broad cross-section of the 

province. And it’s through our work collectively as a province, 

through having strong corporations that exist within 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that in many ways we’re able to 

provide some good, tangible, real benefits to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

The other side of the coin, Mr. Speaker, are individuals who do 

not like Crown corporations, individuals who see them as an 

unnecessary intrusion into the lives of people and that in all 

circumstances — whether it makes good economic sense for 

people, whether there is a sound fiscal argument to be made — 

it’s always an approach, Mr. Speaker, of privatization. It’s 

always an approach, Mr. Speaker, of downplaying the role of 

Crown corporations, and what I would say in many 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker, is at the expense of Saskatchewan 

people who have been benefiting from Crown corporations in a 

real and tangible way. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of Crown 

corporations that exist within the province. And over the course 

of the province’s history, over the past decades, Mr. Speaker, 

there have been many debates with respect to what is the 



2412 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

function of Crown corporations here in the province. And when 

the issue of privatization has come forward, it’s been one that 

has been hotly debated because there are, as I outlined, there are 

differing views on the correct approach for Crowns within the 

provincial economy. So it’s within that larger philosophical 

discussion, Mr. Speaker, that we find ourselves in situations 

about a specific Crown, about a specific issue in a particular 

legislative sitting of the history of this legislature. It’s an 

important discussion. 

 

I think earlier on I remarked, Mr. Speaker, about the necessity 

of the government to be clear in its intention with Crown 

corporations. And when government announced their desire to 

privatize ISC, at first it happened through a bit of a trial balloon 

that the minister responsible put up saying that well, you know, 

this could be something that we’re maybe thinking about. 

We’re looking at the options. We could do this and this; this 

and this would happen. There was no talk of that, Mr. Speaker, 

during the election. There was no talk of it whatsoever. In fact 

the Sask Party government was telling a very different story 

with respect to Crown corporations. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But once in a position that it was able to carry out its will with 

respect to the Crowns, we saw a different course of action. And 

at first it was as I described it as a trial balloon put up or 

perhaps a softening of the position that it had taken earlier, Mr. 

Speaker. From that point we get to the point where, well 

actually we’re drafting some legislation. And oh, actually that 

legislation might be drafted and it might be coming very soon. 

So it hasn’t, in my view, Mr. Speaker, been an approach that the 

government has taken in being clear and open and transparent 

with respect to its intentions surrounding the Crowns. I think 

that’s an important point to make. 

 

The decision to sell a Crown corporation comes from a few 

different approaches. And it’s hard to exactly pinpoint and 

determine what are the exact motives with all members of the 

opposite side. Most certainly for a good number — I would 

probably say the majority of the members, Mr. Speaker — the 

motivation to privatize a Crown corporation would be more 

along the ideological debate that I talked about earlier on, the 

question of what is the role for Crowns in society. 

 

And I think most individuals on the opposite side — whether or 

not it makes good economic sense, whether or not it is a good 

public policy, whether or not it would benefit or harm 

Saskatchewan residents — I think the majority view on the 

opposite side within the government’s cabinet and caucus 

benches, backbenches, Mr. Speaker, would be one of, well 

privatize at all costs. That’s our general orientation. That’s 

where we want to go. And so I think in many instances that 

could be identified as a prime motive or driving force as to why 

we would want this type of legislation, why government would 

want this type of legislation. 

 

There’s another factor as well, Mr. Speaker, that I think plays 

into what could be some potential motivations as to why 

government wants to go down this path. So the one is to sort of, 

privatization regardless of the economic case or the current 

reality on the ground. Let’s just do it, plow ahead. 

 

There’s also, Mr. Speaker, the context of the provincial 

finances. And it’s timely that we’re having this discussion 

because, as members know, through the previous two question 

periods we’ve had and through the news and announcement that 

was made yesterday by the Provincial Auditor, there is a 

financial reality within the government’s books. I should say, 

there’s a discrepancy in the financial reality between the 

messages the government is saying on the front bench and that 

of which the Provincial Auditor is saying — who is, as 

members know, an officer of the legislature. The Provincial 

Auditor does not report to any one political party, but reports to 

the entire legislature. 

 

And it’s important to state that off the top I believe because it 

speaks to the credibility that the Provincial Auditor has in 

providing an opinion that is trustworthy. And when the 

Provincial Auditor began her term, there of course was a very 

thorough vetting process that members from both sides 

participated in in order to ensure that the role of the Provincial 

Auditor is as respected as it is strong, and has as much rigour as 

we need — not just we as the Assembly, but we as the 

Saskatchewan public, the Saskatchewan people. We need to 

ensure that the Provincial Auditor is a top-notch individual with 

good credentials, whose word can be trusted, recognizing the 

fact that the auditor is not tied to any one political party, not 

working for government, not working for opposition, simply 

working for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the Provincial Auditor’s not the only officer of the 

legislature. There are other officers, of course. There’s the 

Provincial Ombudsman, the Children’s Advocate, the Conflict 

of Interest Commissioner, and the privacy officer, Mr. Speaker. 

So it’s these individuals who we often turn to when we want an 

opinion on something that is objective. 

 

Because on the floor of the Assembly, I know both sides, 

members will strive to be objective, but we also realize that we 

work within the parliamentary system, a system that has 

political parties. So we have perspectives and we ought to have 

perspectives. That’s the point of having a political system with 

parties, so that parties can take positions on things, can promote 

certain positions and have an effective debate. And it’s through 

that debate that we have a stronger democracy. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s necessary that we really do respect and take heed 

of words that the Provincial Auditor makes. And when there’s a 

discrepancy, Mr. Speaker, between what government members 

may be saying on an issue with what the Provincial Auditor is 

saying then, Mr. Speaker, I think we should take note of that. It 

should perk up our ears. We should pay closer attention to it 

and we should take this seriously. And thankfully, Mr. Speaker, 

that does occur in many situations. 

 

We rely on these officers of the legislature to do that good and 

important work in the same way, Mr. Speaker, that when an 

individual has had problems with receiving a service from 

government, from a ministry, there’s the Provincial 

Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker. And the Ombudsman is an 

individual where people have concerns about a situation, if they 

feel that they have not been treated well or properly by a 

government ministry, that they have not received due process, 

that their concerns have not been heard, that there has in fact 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2413 

been an injustice that has occurred in some way, well the 

Ombudsman is there, Mr. Speaker, to provide that impartial 

opinion.  

 

Right now, as one example, Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman 

provincially is looking at the issue of the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program and whether or not the conduct of 

the provincial government has in fact been fair. And whether or 

not the relationship between the province and the feds on the 

issue of the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, 

specifically as it relates to the family class, the Ombudsman is 

looking at whether or not the government has acted reasonably, 

responsibility, and whether or not they should be changing their 

course of action. 

 

And I know the Ombudsman is doing his work, I’m told, on this 

issue, is doing the investigations, will talk to the necessary 

people, and based on his office’s experience of familiarity with 

these issues and knowledge of the issue will provide a ruling, 

and I would hope perhaps provide recommendations. Because 

right now, Mr. Speaker, it’s at a political stage where we in the 

opposition are saying one thing based on our understanding of 

what is fair and government is saying another. The Ombudsman 

will provide clarity from a position of non-partisanship with 

respect to how people have been treated fairly. It’s in that same 

light and that same general vein of thought, Mr. Speaker, that I 

think it’s appropriate to look at the words of the Provincial 

Auditor in a very serious manner. 

 

And so let’s take it back to ISC. We talked about why there 

may be some motives, what may be the motives on the opposite 

side as to why ISC would be privatized. And most certainly in 

my view, and with a majority of the government cabinet 

ministers and backbenchers, it is a general approach of 

privatization no matter what. That’s the general orientation. 

That’s the default position. 

 

But there are other factors and concerns, and specifically with 

respect to the finances, Mr. Speaker, where we might be seeing 

another motivation and reason as to why the government may 

be choosing to privatize ISC. With the privatization of ISC, Mr. 

Speaker, of course there would be money made by the province 

for the selling of ISC. And that’s a reality; some have estimated 

it as between 90 to 120 million. So I don’t know exactly what it 

would be. I assume those are the government’s estimates with 

respect to how much they think they could garner in selling 

ISC. 

 

And the catch is, Mr. Speaker, I think, increasingly by members 

opposite, especially cabinet ministers, there’s a desire to have 

access to that money to address and deal with some financial 

pressures that they may see. Now what they may see, Mr. 

Speaker, what they may know to be true and accurate around 

the confines of their cabinet table and through the briefings that 

they would get through the Ministry of Finance and other 

ministry officials, what they know to be the actual case, Mr. 

Speaker, I think is quite different than the lines and the opinions 

that we have received from government front bench members, 

especially the Finance minister. Some might even call it a stark 

contrast, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the difference of what 

they actually know to be the picture and then what they are 

saying. 

 

And that’s where, in my view, the presence and the role of the 

Provincial Auditor is important. Because it’s through the 

Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, where we can obtain an 

accurate picture of what is the financial picture with respect to 

the province. I think that’s important. So while the official lines 

coming out of question period and the rotunda and government 

news releases that churns them out, Mr. Speaker, is one story, 

we’re getting a very, very different story with respect to what 

the Provincial Auditor is saying, as released just yesterday 

through her report. 

 

So at this point in my speech, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

examine more closely what the Provincial Auditor is saying 

about the current financial situation. And having just made a 

speech about the non-partisan nature of the Provincial Auditor 

and the important role that she plays in ensuring that there is 

accurate and transparent reporting and a proper understanding 

of her provincial finances, Mr. Speaker, I will not take her 

words and spin them into something else. 

 

What I will do, Mr. Speaker, I want to read the news release 

that was provided by the Provincial Auditor that was tabled in 

the Assembly by Mr. Speaker at the very beginning of 

yesterday’s proceedings and provides, I think, some useful 

information and some insight as to why certain government 

members may be interested in finding an extra $100 million. So 

it doesn’t get into the question about whether or not the 

privatization is actually in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people in the long term, whether or not services will be 

increased or improved, whether or not services will be more 

affordable or less affordable. 

 

What I’m focusing in on, Mr. Speaker, is what may be the 

immediate and more pressing concerns that certain government 

members may have as to why they would want to privatize ISC, 

what could be the motives beyond a general disposition towards 

privatization. I think it’s, Mr. Speaker, probably a confluence of 

the two motives. 

 

So the Provincial Auditor said, “Government General Revenue 

Fund Financial Statements Wrong, Says Provincial Auditor.” 

That is the title of the news release that was stapled to the inside 

of the very lengthy report, Mr. Speaker. It’s a number of pages. 

It is actually over 400 pages, Mr. Speaker. So there’s a lot of 

information and, well, it’s double-sided, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the news release reads as follows, from Regina, 

Saskatchewan, of course where the auditor does the good work 

that the auditor does: 

 

December 4, 2012 — The Saskatchewan Government 

uses “two sets of books” [that’s a quote] to report its 

finances despite longstanding recommendations to stop 

this practice, says Provincial Auditor Bonnie Lysyk in 

Volume 2 of her 2012 Report, released today. In the 

Report, Lysyk states that the Government’s General 

Revenue Fund (GRF) financial statements contain 

significant errors and are materially wrong. 

 

Most provinces in Canada present their finances to the 

public using only one set of financial statements — 

Summary Financial Statements — which are prepared in 

accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting 



2414 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

principles. In Saskatchewan, however, the Government 

uses two different sets of financial statements depending 

on the message it wants to send to the public regarding 

the state of its finances. When discussing debt or 

balancing the budget, it most frequently refers to the GRF 

statements — a custom that is both poor practice and 

misleading to the public, particularly when those 

statements contain significant errors. 

 

For example, the GRF statements for March 31, 2012 

excluded $6.12 billion in pension liabilities and $100 

million of related pension expenses. “An omission of this 

magnitude is similar to a company not including in its 

financial statements all relevant information for its 

shareholders, such as the financial results of a mine it 

owns that is losing money,” says Lysyk. “The ‘creative 

accounting rules’ that the Government uses for the GRF 

allows it to communicate to the people of Saskatchewan 

that the GRF budget is balanced and there is a surplus 

when in actual fact, there is not.” For the year ended 

March 31, 2012, the Government reported a surplus in the 

GRF of $352.3 million. What it should have reported was 

a deficit in the GRF of $46 million. 

 

If the Government used proper accounting rules, the 

forecasted GRF surplus of $56.2 million in last week’s 

2012-13 Mid-Year Report would have actually been a 

deficit of $528.3 million. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Let me read that again part again, Mr. Speaker, as I deviate 

from the text of the news release. But what the news release 

says: 

 

If the Government used proper accounting rules, the 

forecasted GRF surplus of $56.2 million in last week’s 

2012-13 Mid-Year Report would have actually been a 

deficit of $528.3 million. 

 

Lysyk further cites an example of how a continued focus 

on the GRF can affect decision-making. In October this 

year, the Provincial Auditor found that the Government 

had issued letters to four school divisions promising to 

fund all of their principal and interest payments for new 

external capital loans totalling $31 million until the loans 

are paid off. As such, the GRF financial statements for 

March 31, 2012 should have included an additional 

expense of $31 million. The Ministry of Education 

recently advised the Provincial Auditor’s Office that it 

plans to notify the affected school divisions, in writing, 

that it has revoked its promise to fund their new debt. 

Instead, it will determine each year whether it will fund 

the annual payments due on these loans. However, this 

debt is still included in the Government’s Summary 

Financial Statements and must be paid each year. “The 

intent of the letters appears to be to avoid having this new 

debt recorded in the GRF financial statements,” Lysyk 

notes. “This is just another example of why the GRF 

statements do not provide the complete financial picture 

to the people of Saskatchewan. We continue to 

recommend that the Government record the $31 million 

in the GRF.” 

In early 2013, the Provincial Auditor will release a report 

focused on the importance of clear and transparent 

provincial financial statement budgeting and reporting. 

“The GRF issue can be complex and difficult to explain 

clearly, but my Office is committed to ensuring that the 

public fully understands why the Government should not 

be using the GRF statements to explain its finances,” says 

Lysyk. “It is time for the Government of Saskatchewan to 

focus its financial reporting on only the Summary 

Financial Statements.” 

 

And then it goes on to say: 

 

The full Provincial Auditor’s 2012 Report — Volume 2 is 

available online at www.auditor.sk.ca. 

 

An important note here, Mr. Speaker. At the bottom of the news 

release it says: 

 

The Provincial Auditor is an Independent Officer of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. The Office of the 

Provincial Auditor serves the Members of the Legislative 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan by providing 

independent assurance and advice on the management, 

governance, and effective use of public resources. 

 

So that was a lengthy news release, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 

important to read into the public record. And I read it verbatim, 

for the most part, Mr. Speaker, because I wanted to make 

perfectly clear that the views that I was stating are not my own. 

I was simply reading what the Provincial Auditor, an 

independent officer of the legislature, is reporting. 

 

What the auditor has stated, Mr. Speaker, what she has 

identified, in my view, is that the province is not, Mr. Speaker, 

in its reporting of the financial state of the province, the 

province is not providing the full picture and all the information 

that Saskatchewan people need in order to make informed 

decisions. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, as the minister, or as the 

auditor said, they should, what it should have reported was a 

deficit in the GRF of $46 million. 

 

The auditor specifically cited, Mr. Speaker, the issue of the 

government breaking its word with respect to funding some 

school capital projects and basically taking a new position that 

they are not committed to paying for the school capital projects 

over the long run, as opposed, it will be determined on a 

year-by-year basis. The hope, Mr. Speaker, that the government 

is making in breaking this promise is that if they say they’re not 

committed to providing the funding over the long run, over the 

long term, over the completion of the project, over the full 

amortization, what it does, Mr. Speaker, is it changes the debt 

commitments that the government has on a particular project, 

thereby painting a prettier picture than what may actually be the 

case when one wants the entire accurate view of what the 

provincial finances are. The auditor, Mr. Speaker, is talking 

about the public schools in this situation with the specific 

projects. 

 

But a very, very similar situation is occurring on the campus of 

the University of Saskatchewan. And this, Mr. Speaker, is with 

respect to the completion of the Health Sciences Building, a 

very important project as we’ve discussed through multiple 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

question periods here in the Assembly. Prior to the election, Mr. 

Speaker, there was a commitment by the government in a news 

release around the same time that the Premier cut the ribbon on 

the cornerstone of the building; a commitment to fund the 

project, over $400 million. It was the total tab as identified in 

the news release. 

 

Fast-forward a few months, post-election, Mr. Speaker. And 

what we actually saw was very similar to the situation with the 

local school divisions, but we saw the provincial government 

walking away from that commitment to say that it’s going to 

fund the project. And what they actually did, Mr. Speaker, was 

turned around to the board of governors at the university and 

said, no, we’re not paying for this. You actually have to take 

this on as debt. You have to take this on within your financial 

picture and make do. 

 

What this did, Mr. Speaker, according to the University’s own 

books — financial reporting and annual reports available 

online, and as publicly stated by the university administration, 

Mr. Speaker — is that this maxed out the University of 

Saskatchewan’s borrowing capacity. It put them in a place 

where they are at the top level with respect to how they 

compare to other universities within the same class with respect 

to the amount of debt per FTE [full-time equivalent] student. 

And that’s a concern. It’s maxed out their borrowing capacity, 

Mr. Speaker, and it was most certainly causing problems. 

 

So now we’re in a situation where there is continued work that 

needs to happen on the Health Sciences Building, the 

completion of the A and B wings which has to do a lot with the 

actual teaching space in the Health Sciences Building, and the 

board of governors, which needs to make a decision this month 

on how they will or can proceed on this project, is in a situation 

where they say, according to our financial guidelines, according 

to our parameters as to what is acceptable debt for us to have as 

an institution given our revenue potential, and given the 

commitments that we know we have from government on 

certain areas, this is as much debt as we can take on. They’re in 

a position, Mr. Speaker, where they need a pledge from the 

provincial government that they will in fact provide the funding 

for the completion of the Health Sciences Building, the A and B 

wings. 

 

The close to $100 million, Mr. Speaker, of debt that was forced 

upon the university’s books when the Sask Party government 

walked away from its pledge to provide the funding for the 

project, Mr. Speaker, is very similar to the situation that the 

auditor raises in this news release, a desire and attempt in my 

view, Mr. Speaker, to downplay the commitments that the 

province has made with respect to projects. 

 

You know, in this situation that the auditor clearly states, Mr. 

Speaker, the desire here to not be on the hook for the full cost of 

school capital projects, in the same way, Mr. Speaker, when we 

look at the $100 million of debt putting the additional resources 

that are needed to complete the A and B wings, Mr. Speaker, 

but looking at the issue of the $100 million of debt, it’s my 

understanding, Mr. Speaker, that there is no long-term 

commitment for the University of Saskatchewan to provide 

funding to pay that amount. 

 

There was an agreement, a short term, perhaps one year, 

perhaps a bit more. But there is not a long-term agreement, Mr. 

Speaker, in place for the ministry to provide the necessary 

funding after they turned around and said, oh I know we 

promised you the total amount for the completion of the Health 

Sciences Building, but actually we’re no longer doing that, and 

please go to the bankers and see what you can do. 

 

So in doing that, in my view, Mr. Speaker, it was motivated by 

the desire to improve the financial picture of the province’s 

books because, Mr. Speaker, as reported by the auditor, there is 

a desire to paint a prettier picture than what may actually be the 

case. So that’s the context, Mr. Speaker, which is very 

important. And I appreciate members’ attentiveness and 

attention to the matter because that is the context which sheds 

light on to why government members may be interested in 

privatizing ISC, beyond their natural inclination to privatize 

because it’s a personal belief that that’s a better approach, 

regardless of what facts may say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s because, Mr. Speaker, I think there is a desire to get one’s 

hands on revenue that would be obtained through the 

privatization. I think that is important to state because it does 

indicate why in fact we may be seeing this migration, this 

not-so-subtle migration from a position where recently the Sask 

Party said they liked Crown corporations but actually, when 

push comes to shove, if they’re given the opportunity to 

privatize, Mr. Speaker, they do so. 

 

Because we most clearly know, as do many people in the 

province, that the natural inclination, the predisposition of 

members opposite is to privatize. And you know, we hear it in 

the heckles. We hear it in the speeches. That’s their general 

orientation. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, we’re best served, 

we’re put in a position to do as well as we can, Mr. Speaker, 

when instead of simply relying on our natural desire to do 

something that may be privatization, that we actually look at the 

facts and see, what is the argument that can be made in this 

circumstance? Is this a good approach? Will this benefit 

Saskatchewan people? Not just in the short time frame of an 

election window, Mr. Speaker, or in the time frame of one term 

of government, but what is the best decision over the long term? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think if members opposite were willing to 

pause for a second and do some reflection — and maybe there 

are a few members that are willing to do this — if members 

opposite were willing to do that, I think they would see that the 

argument for privatizing ISC is not there. 

 

We see that ISC, Mr. Speaker, has provided a profit to 

Saskatchewan people, that it continues to do so. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s also, I think, with many Saskatchewan people, 

there is a belief and a feeling that when it comes to things like 

land titles, when it comes to the services that are provided by 

ISC, that those interests, Mr. Speaker, are in fact best placed 

and best served through a public Crown corporation, 

recognizing that there is a service to be provided most certainly 

that needs to be timely, that needs to be effective, that needs to 

be affordable. But there are also the necessary safeguards that 

need to be put in place, Mr. Speaker, that can be guaranteed 

through a Crown corporation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a chance to talk about this piece of 

legislation now for a bit, and I have enjoyed the opportunity 



2416 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

because it talks about a number of issues. It talks about, or I 

think it illustrates clearly how, regardless of what has been said 

in an election campaign or in other venues, we definitely have 

seen a migration and a walking away from many commitments 

that the Sask Party government has made, whether it’s the 

absence of discussion prior to the election that we heard about 

privatizing ISC, or whether it is the post-election broken 

promises that we’ve seen with respect to, as identified in the 

auditor’s report, of not funding school projects in the 

post-secondary sector, and walking away from commitments 

that were made for the Health Sciences Building. 

 

I think this piece of legislation is a good example of changes 

that we’ve seen in government members. Having seen those 

changes we have to ask ourselves, why are government 

members going down this path? I think the first aspect, Mr. 

Speaker — and I know other members in my caucus have 

spoken about this — there is a natural inclination that members 

opposite have to privatization whether or not the economic case 

justifies it or the best interests of Saskatchewan people are 

taken into consideration. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, very importantly, combined with the personal 

views that many people have, I think there are immediate 

pressures that would cause many members opposite to want to 

privatize ISC now in order to take the revenue in order to help 

the financial picture that the province finds itself in — not by 

my words, Mr. Speaker, not according to my viewpoint and 

what I have stated, but according to what the Provincial Auditor 

has clearly detailed in her report that was released yesterday. 

 

You know, looking at her actual report . . . I won’t go back into 

the news release, Mr. Speaker, but it’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, 

that when looking at what the Provincial Auditor has said on 

page 35: 

 

When calculated in accordance with Canadian generally 

accepted accounting principles . . . the GRF incurred a 

deficit of $46 million instead of a surplus of $352 million. 

 

So the auditor has given us, has given Saskatchewan people that 

objective, arm’s-length opinion with respect to the state of the 

finances. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that reality that members 

know but they’re not willing to talk about, members opposite 

know but they’re not willing to talk about, cabinet ministers 

know but they’re not willing to talk about, even some of the 

backbenchers know but they’re not willing to talk about, I think 

it’s that awareness that members opposite actually have, based 

on what the Provincial Auditor has said — who is non-partisan 

— combined with a natural inclination that members opposite 

have to privatization just because which gets us to the point 

now where we have the privatization of ISC. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve appreciated the opportunity to provide 

comment on this piece of legislation. I look forward to other 

discussions that members of my caucus may have, not to 

mention the discussions that we’ll have in committee. And with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

69. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 69, The 

Information Services Corporation Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Bill No. 82 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 82 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

very pleased to rise this afternoon to offer my comments on Bill 

No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012. 

And this is amendments to The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act 

which was introduced in 1986, quite some time ago now. We’re 

looking at 26 years ago. And I’m of that age where I actually 

remember when this bill was introduced and remember people 

talking about it. 

 

And I remember the government ad campaign for this pension 

plan. I think I was a university student at the time and was 

thinking that might be something I wanted to invest in. As it 

turns out, I’ve been fortunate to be part of a pension plan 

through my employers since I started I guess what you would 

call responsible employment in my 30s. But we certainly didn’t 

have a pension plan when we were tree planting, and maybe I 

should’ve benefited from this plan on those days. But I used my 

money for other things when I was younger. 

 

But there’s certainly a lot of people that are benefiting from the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. We see in the minister’s comments 

when he introduced this bill that there are over 32,000 members 

— 32,000 people in Saskatchewan are taking advantage of the 

pension plan Act because they don’t have that advantage if 

they’re self-employed or working out of their home, 

self-employed, or just in those types of positions, working 

positions, working people who don’t have access to a pension 

plan through their work. And certainly these types of programs 

help those people who aren’t fortunate enough to be in a 

workplace with a pension plan. And this an important plan that 

is there for the people of Saskatchewan to use. 

 

I think the attempt of the bill that’s under debate right now is to 

clarify and modernize some of the language in this bill. There 

doesn’t seem to be a lot of really substantive changes that are 

being proposed. And I guess through some work and the main 

work that’s being done under this bill is to have it bring it in 

line with The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. And The Pension 

Benefits Act has, I guess . . . It’s good to harmonize this bill 

with that type of bill so that there’s parallels between those 

plans, and it’s probably easier for the administrators of those 

plans to ensure that the bills are properly managed. 

 

And I know my colleague who spoke first to this bill was 

indicating that’s really important for people, is to know that 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

their pension plans are being managed properly. It’s kind of like 

for us to know that the government is managing, let’s say, our 

oil wells properly. That’s something that we want to be sure 

that we’re protected and that future generations don’t have to 

deal with the lingering effects of unattended environmental 

issues as they relate to mining and extraction of natural 

resources in this province. 

 

So certainly, you know, we want to see the management occur 

that’s reasonable and balanced. And it’s important for people to 

invest in their pension funds. It’s important for us to develop 

our resources. But it’s also important for us to manage those 

resources properly, either the pensions themselves or indeed the 

natural and non-renewable resources that this government has 

in plenty, or this province has in plenty. So we’re certainly 

concerned, as my colleague had indicated prior to me, that we 

want to make sure these pension plans are properly being 

handled. We hear all kinds of stories about people losing their 

entire savings because the pension plan has not been properly 

managed or bad investments have been made. 

 

The changes that are being proposed to this Act don’t directly 

deal with the management of the fund. But I will speak to them 

now as they’re presented in the bill itself. The first section 

that’s changed is . . . Actually a new definition is being added. 

And that’s the definition of spouse which apparently wasn’t 

there before. And this is being added to the interpretation 

section, so it brings this plan into sync with The Pension 

Benefits Act. And indeed a number of the changes that are being 

proposed deal with spouses and how transfers can be made, and 

various things in The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. So that’s 

the new clause, is clause 2(1) is being amended by adding 

clause (k.2) which is spouse. And that’s just in the alphabetical 

order that the definitions are provided in section 2 of the 

existing Act. 

 

The next change that we see is a new clause being added after, 

in section 5 of the Act. And this new clause is clause 5(2)(e.1), 

and it’s a housekeeping item. And all it does is clarify the 

board’s authority to provide pension benefits to retiring 

members. So it’s just housekeeping and allows them to be 

proactive if and when new retirement products are available to 

the members by setting these options in the regulations rather 

than the Act. 

 

So if you look at section 5 of the existing Act, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it is the section that’s headed up, duties of the board. 

So this sets out the board that’s administering the plan and 

acting as trustees. There’s a number of duties that they already 

have. The board can enter into contracts under 5(2)(a). They can 

also employ staff and acquire goods and services under 5(2)(b). 

They’re allowed to invest their monies in the credit of the fund 

under 5(2)(c), and then dispose of securities under 5(2)(d). 

There’s a number of other ones that are added: entering into 

agreements, charging fees, establishing policies, determining 

rates of interest to be allocated to the amounts standing to the 

credit of participants, determine rates of interest, and set out the 

terms for annuities. 

 

So this additional clause is to prescribe . . . sorry, to provide 

prescribed pension benefits that may be purchased by 

participants with amounts standing to their credit in the fund. So 

it’s a bit of clarity that’s being added and allows them to 

provide pension benefits to retiring members. So that seems to 

be a good change that is being proposed and allows more 

flexibility and also clarifies some of the board’s authority. 

 

The next change that we see is a change to clause 6 and this is 

pure housekeeping, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re trying to, 

what they call, clean language or clear language and modernize 

the language of the section. So it’s just regarding the decision of 

the board and I think there’s no need to go into detail on that 

one. 

 

Section 7(5) is the next change that we find in the Act. And 

what they’re doing there . . . 7(5) is in the fund where, the 

section that establishes the Saskatchewan Pension Plan Fund, 

and it just talks, it talks extensively about that fund. What 

they’ve done in the fifth section is they can require participants 

to pay fees with respect to admin costs for any year that they’re 

not living here. That’s the way it used to read. But what this 

amendment is doing is removing the reference to residency 

because it’s no longer required. 

 

Now what the explanation notes say is that all members have 

access to plan services regardless of where they live and this 

will allow them to charge separate fees for services where 

appropriate. So this is just clearing it away, saying the board 

can require them to pay a fee whenever they choose to do so. So 

even if you are a resident in Saskatchewan, you may be charged 

a fee. It’s a bit of a big change and it looks like it’s allowing the 

board to charge fees across the board now, rather than just 

applying them to people that aren’t resident in Saskatchewan. 

I’m not sure. The minister didn’t indicate why that was felt to 

be necessary in his comments but I will just take one more look. 

He’s indicating that it’s just to keep it current with modern 

times but he didn’t speak to that particular change. He did make 

reference to some housekeeping changes. 

 

The next change is to section 12(1), and all they’re doing there 

is correcting some references to other sections which was 

necessary because the big change is in section 13. 13 itself is 

being rewritten basically in clear language, and it’s also . . . It 

talks about a new definition of the beneficiary and that’s again 

bringing it in sync with The Pension Benefits Act. So we have 

section 13 is repealed in entirety and then there’s a new clause 

about the beneficiaries. And these are the kinds of language that 

you find in these kinds of statutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

show the density of the language that’s required to set up 

pension funds. And I’m just going to share with you this 

particularly clause because it’s particularly dense. 

 

So good credit goes to those drafters over there in the Ministry 

of Justice. We know that they work hard and that they’re public 

servants who deserve to be recognized for the hard work they 

do, particularly in a climate where there’s been cuts to the 

public service up to 15 per cent, just as an arbitrary number 

that’s been picked. And these people are left holding the bag 

when those kinds of cuts are imposed on the public service. 

 

Anyways, the new section that they’re talking about reads — 

and I’ll quote it — it’s section 13(3) and it says: 

 

A participant who has a spouse is required to receive a 

life annuity or a prescribed pension benefit that provides 

for the benefit to be paid to the spouse after the 



2418 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

participant’s death that is not less than 60% of the life 

annuity or prescribed pension benefit to which the 

participant would have been entitled, unless the spouse 

provides a written waiver of the annuity or benefit in a 

form acceptable to the board. 

 

And what I’m going to do is I’m going to challenge my own 

colleagues to make sure that they understood this section. And 

I’m going to test them afterwards to make that they’re paying 

attention. Because it’s a very complicated clause and the . . . 

You may need to deal with this and ensure that your spouses are 

covered under the Saskatchewan Pension Plan benefit Act. 

 

So to be sure, it’s complex and dense language, but you can see 

that’s the kind of language that’s required when pensions plans 

are being discussed. And again I give credit, full credit to the 

good people over at the Ministry of Justice and the drafters who 

have to take these complex ideas, put them in legal language, 

and then present them so that they’re there to protect the people 

of Saskatchewan, the 32,000 members of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan. 

 

So right now again, you know, this is a pension plan with a lot 

of people in Saskatchewan contributing — people who work 

hard, but they don’t have access to a pension plan through their 

workplace. And there’s over $318 million under trusteeship 

right now. So we certainly hope that the board and the 

managers of that fund are doing a better job than what we see 

this government doing with the books right now. 

 

We understand from the Provincial Auditor that there really is 

two sets of books now for this government. And I’m hoping 

that’s not happening with the board of directors of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan . . . [inaudible] . . . The good people 

over there, I’m sure, are managing those funds quite adequately 

and if we had comments from the auditor on the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, I trust that they would be very positive comments 

indeed. 

 

You know, there’s a good reason for the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan. It’s for families to make sure that they have access to 

funds, families that may not have pensions in their workplace. 

And it’s always nice to see families come here to the 

legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, we have a lovely family sitting in 

the legislature right now with one of our legislative staff. And 

we certainly welcome families here any time. So welcome to 

your legislature, to Stacey Ursulescu’s family. 

 

Anyways carrying on here with the rather mundane features of 

the pension plan amendment Act, it is very, very interesting, 

you know, and again I give credit to the good people over at 

Justice for drafting these wonderful changes. 

 

There’s a couple more clauses that are being amended. And the 

next one that’s being amended is section 16. The explanatory 

notes on this one says that it updates beneficiary requirements 

for members who have not yet retired and going forward 

members — so that must be a technical term in a pension 

language. We’ll have to look into that — going forward 

members with a spouse must name them as a beneficiary unless 

the spouse signs a waiver. 

 

So perhaps, you know, if my colleague from Regina Rosemont 

was not working under a pension plan and he chose to enter into 

this and his wife didn’t want to receive the funds that he has in 

the savings, she would have to sign a waiver before he could 

not provide them. So his wife would have to sign the waiver. 

And I think she’s a wise woman, and she would probably want 

to keep her hands on that kind of fund. I think that Stephanie’s a 

wise lady so she would probably want to make sure that she 

doesn’t waive any funds that her husband has put away in a 

pension plan. 

 

And again there’s some changes to subsection 13 and they bring 

the plan into sync again with The Pension Benefits Act. The 

next changes we see are just some renumbering changes for 

clause 16(3)(a) and subclause 16(4)(a). So those are just 

housekeeping. And the next change is to section 19(1). And 

what they’ve done here is they’ve actually rewritten it so it’s 

now in clearer language and again it’s more consistent with 

other government pension plans. 

 

And then finally there’s a new provision 19.2, and if you want 

to take a look at this one, this is kind of interesting. And again 

it’s bringing it in sync with what other pension plans do and 

other funds in the government. So if for whatever reason 

somebody disappears and they actually have funds available to 

them, the amounts are now payable . . . to people who can’t be 

located, the money is taken out of the management of the 

pension plan and is just put in the General Revenue Fund. So it 

becomes property of the Crown and then if people want to make 

application for those payments, they have go through the 

Minister of Finance rather than the board. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Of course, you don’t want to just write all this money off if you 

get a return address unknown letter or something when you’re 

trying to pay off a member. You would need to make 

reasonable attempts to locate that person. And so we see in (2) 

of the new clause that “. . . the board must take reasonable steps 

to locate the person to whom the amount is payable.” 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is eminently reasonable and it makes a 

whole lot of sense to approach it that way. It could be 

significant amounts of money, and again, the person’s gone 

missing. We don’t know why they can’t be located. They didn’t 

send a forwarding envelope with their change of address. 

Perhaps they’ve disappeared and gone off to Mexico for a few 

years. Who knows? Maybe they were really worried about the 

financial situation in Saskatchewan and they thought, I better 

get out of here, Mr. Speaker. I read the auditor’s report and I 

think I’m safer in Mexico or somewhere else that’s warmer 

perhaps. 

 

So if they can’t be located, then we have an opportunity here for 

the good people that are managing the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan to say, we tried. We tried to locate them. Can’t find them. 

So here you go, Mr. Minister of Finance. You’re now 

responsible for the money that these people have saved. 

 

So it seems to be covering up a little bit of a gap that was in the 

bill and as the indication here in the explanatory notes is that 

the members would still continue to have it claimed but they’re 

not administered by the plan. 

There’s only one more change and that’s another housekeeping 



December 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 2419 

change in clause 21(1). So I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s really the extent of my comments on The Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan Amendment Act. Again you know, kudos to the 

people over at Justice for working hard to bring these technical 

changes and clean up the language in these types of bills; and 

secondly, to the board of The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act for the good work they do in managing this 

fund of over $300 million. 

 

Perhaps this government could take some lessons from this 

board in terms of financial management and start looking at the 

comments and the criticisms of our Provincial Auditor, in 

taking them seriously when it comes to the state of our 

province’s finances, and using the wisdom of these people that 

are looking after these funds and maybe following more 

acceptable accounting principles for portraying our finances to 

the good people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So again we continue to recognize the good work that’s being 

done by the people that are responsible for the program, and 

congratulate the 32,000 citizens of Saskatchewan who have 

taken advantage of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan over the 

years. 

 

So at that point, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s going to conclude 

my comments on this bill, and I move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 82, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2012. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 83 — The Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join the Assembly here today, and it’s a pleasure to 

have the energy in this Assembly, that warm welcome to take to 

my feet to speak to Bill No. 83, An Act respecting Foreign 

Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this bill looks as though at first blush that it brings forward 

some practical measures, some supports to ensure that we’re 

providing fairness, that we’re protecting those that are coming 

to Saskatchewan, and we’re ensuring the rights of immigrant 

workers, of foreign workers, of individuals choosing to build 

and better their lives in our province and bettering our province 

in the process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a piece of legislation that brings about, I understand, five 

different aspects or five different changes, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 

addressing what it suggests are some circumstances where these 

workers, these foreign workers have been exploited, where 

contractors may have not kept their word or may not have dealt 

with them in good faith. And certainly we do need to make sure 

we’re doing all we can to be protecting all workers in 

Saskatchewan, and certainly we need to be doing all we can to 

be protecting those newcomers that are building and bettering 

our province, Mr. Speaker, building and bettering their lives in 

our province as well from all around the world. 

 

And I know how important it is that we make sure that we have 

fair, respectful workplaces, circumstances that allow those that 

are coming from all over the globe to build their lives here, 

making sure that they’re able to do so and build the same 

quality of life that has the same fair opportunity as anyone else, 

Mr. Speaker. And when I look at what’s been put forward here, 

I think there’s a couple practical measures. Certainly we’re 

going to go out and do consultation and engage with those 

whom this impacts and make sure that this is as practical and 

meaningful as it can be. 

 

But I think there’s some failed opportunities on this front as 

well. We can do a better job I believe of educating our foreign 

workers — those that are coming to our province to work — of 

their rights, making sure they understand those rights, and 

making sure that we get across, get over some of the language 

barriers that may exist, Mr. Speaker, because for some that are 

coming to the province, certainly some of the language barriers 

that exist can prevent some of those workers from 

understanding their rights to their fullest extent. And I believe 

we need to do a better job of making sure that we have an 

advocate working with those workers, that we have education 

for those workers so that they understand their rights and that 

they’re not exploited. 

 

We also need to do a better job in a broad-based way of 

addressing occupational health and safety and we have . . . The 

current number of safety inspectors or safety officers is 

certainly too few, Mr. Speaker, and we need to, at a time where 

we’re welcoming workers from all over the world but also the 

workers that are here right now, we need to make sure that 

we’re able to in fact enforce the legislation, the protections that 

have been in place for many years. And to do that, we need to 

make sure we have the capacity by way of officers, safety 

officers to do just that. 

 

So this is something that’s really important. I know that it 

suggests that there’s some improvements of providing 

protection for these workers through this piece of legislation. 

That’s something that we welcome, but we want to make sure 

that this is as strong as it can be. 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, it’s passing strange that this 

government talks about providing protections to workers in one 

breath and then on the other side has broken its own word with 

many workers that have chosen to build their lives here in 

Saskatchewan, broken their word with far too many immigrant 

families that were choosing to build their lives here in 

Saskatchewan. And I can cite just a few examples of that, Mr. 

Speaker, but certainly the broken promise as it relates to 

allowing those that are choosing to build their lives in 

Saskatchewan, allow them to bring their families to 

Saskatchewan and build out that network here in our province, 

and the actual gutting of the family class of the SINP 



2420 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2012 

[Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program] program, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s but one example of the broken word of this 

government as it relates to those newcomers, new Canadians, 

those immigrant families that are choosing to build their lives 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So it’s passing strange that in one breath they’re speaking about 

strengthening protection — something we fully support. As I 

say, we could certainly go further by way of proper education 

about workplace rights and workers’ rights here in 

Saskatchewan with those workers. We could take it one step 

forward by making sure we actually have the appropriate 

complement of occupational health and safety officers in those 

workplaces to enforce the legislation that we currently have. 

 

But we have a government that’s suggesting and providing 

some strengthening and protection on one side but on the same 

side are breaking their own word to thousands of families all 

across our province. Not only that, we have the broader context 

of the pressures where we see the federal cuts by way of refugee 

health care cuts in this province. This is something that we need 

to stand united as a province. It’s an issue that we need to stand 

up for fairness and stand up for the rights and dignity of all, Mr. 

Speaker, here in this province, and something we need to be 

strong in resolve towards working towards that resolution to a 

cut that is damaging, a cut that’s unfair, a cut that is, in many 

ways when you look at the impact, something that disgusts 

Saskatchewan people and doesn’t represent the kind of 

Saskatchewan or the kind of Canada that the people I’ve been 

talking to believe we should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also speaks to the case of this unfair, unjust treatment of these 

young international students that are currently at the University 

of Regina, those students that are being deported in very harsh 

measure by the federal government, Mr. Speaker, something 

that we need to stand united as a province on, Mr. Speaker, 

something that we need to stand up for fairness, recognizing 

that this minor infraction that these two young students 

involved themselves with is nothing more than an honest 

mistake with appropriate consequences that should certainly be 

applied. But the deportation of these students is unfair and 

unjust. 

 

So when we’re looking at this piece of legislation, we need to 

look at how it could have been strengthened. Well we could be 

strengthening it by putting an education component in place for 

workers building their lives here in Saskatchewan. We could be 

strengthening it by making sure we have the proper complement 

of occupational health and safety officers to enforce the 

legislation that we have in this province, Mr. Speaker. And we 

should not be taking the regressive steps that we see 

government opposite, where they’ve broken their word, broken 

their promise with immigrant families from around the world 

that are choosing to build and better their lives in this province, 

preventing them from bringing their families to our fine 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also could be making improvements in the classroom, Mr. 

Speaker, where we see the diversity that’s occurring all across 

our province and properly supporting that diversity to make 

sure that all students, those that are coming from all over the 

world, those that live here in the province for generations, Mr. 

Speaker, are in a position to learn and to thrive, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s about an enriched education for all. And instead we see 

a government that’s been intent on cutting and constraining in 

the classroom and not properly supporting English as an 

additional language programs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I see the importance where we could be strengthening 

settlement supports all across this province, where we wouldn’t 

be making cuts to offices that interface with immigrant families, 

those families that are building their lives here in southern 

Saskatchewan, northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, rural 

Saskatchewan. And we need to address the big issue, Mr. 

Speaker. When I’m sitting down with those that are building 

their lives in our community, in our province, in Regina but also 

all across this province, we need to be addressing the big 

challenge of housing, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that far too 

many are not able to find adequate, affordable housing. Far too 

many are subjected to vulnerable circumstances. Far too many 

don’t have peace of mind that they deserve, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we speak about an immigration policy, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to do so in a way that’s dignified and respectful of 

those that are coming to build their lives here in Saskatchewan, 

recognizing how important they are to our province’s future, 

not from a simplistic view of an economic widget, Mr. Speaker, 

but in a view of building and bettering their lives in our 

province with the same fair opportunity that we all have to the 

same access to qualify of life and with an understanding, Mr. 

Speaker, that as we grow, as our immigration continues, those 

individuals will shape who we are as a province as well and will 

determine who we are as a future and be ready to be involved as 

a province in making those democratic changes in representing 

all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this piece of legislation is something that we’ll do further 

consultation on. It seems to bring forward some measures of 

protection. That’s something that we support. We’ll continue to 

do that consultation to make sure that the measures that are 

brought forward don’t have unintended consequences, Mr. 

Speaker, that aren’t in the best interests of immigrant families 

throughout our province, of newcomers and new Canadians, 

Mr. Speaker. But I will certainly be solidly on the record calling 

for all the types of supports, improvements, and enrichments to 

provide the opportunity for those that are choosing 

Saskatchewan to build and better their lives to make sure they 

can access the kind of quality of life, dignified quality of life, 

Mr. Speaker, that they so deserve. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate of Bill 

No. 83, An Act respecting Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 83, The Foreign Worker Recruitment and 

Immigration Services Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It now being 5 o’clock, the Assembly 

stands adjourned to 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2389 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2389 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2389 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2389 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2390 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2390 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2390 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2390 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2405 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2405 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2390 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2390 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Rural Physician Recognized 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2391 

 Athletes Against Bullying Alliance 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2391 

 Saskatoon Girls’ Soccer Team Wins National Championship 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2391 

 Prairie Women on Snowmobiles Support Breast Cancer Awareness 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2391 

 Nipawin Volleyball Team Wins Provincial Championship 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2392 

 Safe Shelter Works to End Violence Against Women 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2392 

 Increasing Market Access for Agri-food Products 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2392 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Asbestos in Public Buildings 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2393 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2393 

 Changes to Labour Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2394 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2394 

 Conditions in Personal Care Homes 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2395 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2395 

 Orphan Oil Wells 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2396 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2397 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Crown Corporation Partnerships Facilitate Utility Installation 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2397 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2399 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2399 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2399 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2399 



 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 87 — The Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 85 — The Saskatchewan Employment Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2401 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2402 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Information Services Corporation Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2410 

 Bill No. 82 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2012 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2416 

 Bill No. 83 — The Foreign Worker Recruitment and Immigration Services Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2419 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Russ Marchuk 
Minister of Education 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Randy Weekes 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 


