




















































Hansard: March 05, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 9B MONDAY, MARCH 5, 2012, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 293 

 March 5, 2012 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, the House is 

reconvened. And I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi 

de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

was just determining over supper what’s the best course of 

action to kind of wrap up debate on this particular Bill. And I 

did have plans to adjourn the debate, but I only had five 

seconds left before it hit 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker. But 

nonetheless, as I’m given the opportunity to speak on this Bill 

one more time, I just want to point out to the people of 

Saskatchewan that the whole notion of this Bill is primarily to 

extend the election date from 2015, the fall of 2015, to the 

spring of 2016. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again as we mentioned in the outset, we 

always are trying to find ways and means and their true intent 

of some of these Bills. And I think certainly from our 

perspective that the whole notion of being courteous to the 

federal Conservative government as they go through their 

re-election time frame much the same as this, that certainly 

that’s not the objective of this Bill, that there is some other 

plans and there’s other things that are at play here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important as well is that if 

you look at the whole notion of the set election dates, it’s 

something that I think the people of Saskatchewan like, and 

they want to see that continue. And I guess the whole notion is 

after the election of the federal government, if they are 

successful, whoever wins in the federal election of 2015, they 

will obviously set their date to four years down the road to 

2019. So is this a permanent thing where you are going to be 

postponing the next election to every four and a half years as 

opposed to every four years? These are some of the questions 

that we have to ask because obviously the Government of 

Canada will want to hold their election every four-year time 

frame. And is this a permanent adjustment or are we going to be 

able to go from six months after or six months before? Like 

how does that scenario work its way through? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the reason why we are asking the 

question that we are asking on this particular Bill. There is a lot 

of questions that other groups and organizations may want and 

may have to offer in terms of advice to the opposition. And 

that’s why it’s important that we ask people to take the time to 

look at the Bill and see if there is anything that they are aware 

of as to why the timing has changed. What situation occurs that 

we have to do this? Just the one . . . Is this the one-off? And the 

list kind of goes on and on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that in mind, I move that we adjourn 

debate on this Bill. 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 35, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill 36, The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has enjoyed 

significant growth over the past several years. Since the census 

upon which our current boundaries were drawn, our population 

has increased by over 5 per cent, and we are proud to say that 

this dramatic increase is continuing. 

 

Under The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993, a Constituency 

Boundaries Commission is to be struck following each 

decennial census. This commission is to prepare a report on the 

establishment of constituencies for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the view of this government that this process 

must reflect the increase in population since the boundaries 

were last drawn. It should also anticipate the population growth 

that we are confident will occur before the next commission is 

struck based on the 2021 census. For these reasons, the time has 

come to recognize the population change in the province of 

Saskatchewan and the need for increased representation by 

members of the Legislative Assembly by increasing the number 

of constituencies in the province from 58 to 61. 

 

This 5 per cent increase in the number of seats will be achieved 

by increasing the number of constituencies south of the dividing 

line, as that term is currently defined in the Act, from 56 to 59 

members. There is no direction provided in this Bill or the 

legislation as to where these three new seats may be situated. 

That will be for the independent Constituency Boundaries 

Commission to determine. 

 

The other amendment that is made by this Bill will provide that 

the term total population in the Act refers to that portion of the 

population of Saskatchewan that is 18 years of age or older as 

determined by the most recent census data. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a fundamental principle in our democracy that 

each vote should be roughly of the same value throughout the 

province. While the two northern constituencies have special 

rules for obvious reasons, in Saskatchewan we have one of the 

lowest permitted size variances of plus or minus 5 per cent 

between constituencies. It is our view that to ensure votes of 

equal value in Saskatchewan, it is the number of voters in a 

constituency that should be established as roughly equal rather 

than an equal overall population. 

 

By using the most recent census data to determine who is of 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

voting age in a constituency, rather than using the voters list as 

has been done in some other jurisdictions, we are using the best 

available data. Otherwise future boundaries commissions may 

be required to work with data from a three-year-old voters list. 

Furthermore given that the census participation is mandatory, 

we feel that it is a better source for this information, rather than 

a voluntary enumeration. While the census data may include 

citizens over 18 years of age who are ineligible to vote, it will 

certainly include far fewer ineligible voters than is currently the 

case. Mr. Speaker, it is the voters who elect the members of the 

Legislative Assembly, and in our view it is the voters who 

should therefore be the focus of the constituency boundary 

process. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will clarify that if a commission 

is already established under the terms of the Act at the time this 

Bill comes into force, the commission will proceed to prepare 

its reports on the basis of the direction contained in this Bill. 

This is the result that The Interpretation Act, 1993, would 

provide without this amendment, but to avoid any confusion we 

have included a transition provision to make this result clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 36, 

The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved Bill No. 

36, The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 

the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

it’s my pleasure to join in the debate. And this of course is a 

debate that is going to pique a lot of interest from a lot of 

different groups and different organizations throughout 

Saskatchewan. And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that of 

course as an opposition we’re pleased and we’re happy that the 

population growth in Saskatchewan is continuing, that it’s 

something that we’re embracing, and we certainly want to make 

sure that the people that are making Saskatchewan their new 

home, that they feel welcome and that they continue being part 

of our province for many, many, many years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, no question in our mind that we see that 

growth as something positive. And the people of Saskatchewan, 

as we all know, they enjoy the economy that’s as strong as it is. 

And we must make sure we’re vigilant in terms of making sure 

that the economy stays strong and that we also must ensure that 

the whole notion of making people understand and comprehend 

that Saskatchewan has got a population that is vibrant, a 

population that is multicultural, a population that is excited, and 

of course a population that is highly trained and professional. 

And so of course we want to continue building up on that 

success. 

 

There is no question that as our population growth continues 

that the question has to be asked when we’re getting more seats. 

Because right now in the Assembly, we have a certain amount 

of seats, and as the minister alluded to, as the population grows, 

do we have the need for more seats, for more MLAs [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly]? And the obvious answer is yes, 

as the population grows. And you should have more MLAs as 

the population should reflect that in the number of seats that we 

have in the Assembly. 

I think the important point that I want to point out is that in 

respect of the population growth, as I pointed out, we as an 

opposition applaud that, and we continue making sure that we 

spread that message. And that work began early in the 1990s, 

Mr. Speaker. It certainly didn’t occur five years ago when the 

Sask Party took office. This would have occurred anyways. 

Saskatchewan was getting ready for the boom. Lucky on them 

that they managed to get elected at that time. And now every 

second word they’re saying, oh we did it, we did it, we did it. 

The people of Saskatchewan know that the bottom line is that 

this economy was going to move. The resource base that we 

have in Saskatchewan was going to . . . the people were going 

to take advantage of it, and that’s what we’re seeing in this day 

and age. 

 

So I think the vast majority of people in Saskatchewan know 

that no matter who was in government, the boom was going to 

happen and is going to continue building this province and 

make Saskatchewan a greater province as time went on. 

 

And as the greater province that we aspire to become, Mr. 

Speaker, of course the more people want to move here, Mr. 

Speaker. In spite of the Saskatchewan Party government, more 

people will move here because this is a hot economy, Mr. 

Speaker. And the members across the way laugh. Members 

across the way laugh. In four years . . . The population was 

growing before you guys even got to your seats. The economy 

was starting to build. The economy was starting to build, Mr. 

Speaker. Things were on the move. Saskatchewan’s star was 

rising. And all of a sudden the Saskatchewan Party got elected 

and they are saying, oh, we did it. We did it. 

 

And you know the people of Saskatchewan, they don’t like 

self-serving politicians, Mr. Speaker, that tend to say, oh, we 

did it, we did it. Mr. Speaker, they inherited the booming 

economy. Mr. Speaker, they inherited the growing population. 

Mr. Speaker, they inherited billions of dollars in money and, 

Mr. Speaker, to sit on that today and they’re saying, oh, we did 

it. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan know who started the work. They know who 

started the work, Mr. Speaker, and they know who got the trend 

going. But the fact of the matter is right now, due to timing, 

they became the elected Government of Saskatchewan. And 

every second word is, look what we’ve done. Look what we’ve 

done. 

 

And the growing population, Mr. Speaker, I found that kind of 

funny. One of the ministers across the way was saying, oh, 

people were waiting at the border, and as soon as we were 

elected, they all piled in. And I said, yes, is that what 

happened? Absolutely, absolutely. And the problem, the 

problem is if they keep saying that and saying that over and 

over and over again, then they’ll start to tend to believe it, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s the problem They are starting to believe it, 

but the public of Saskatchewan is saying, oh come on you guys. 

That thing was . . . The work was done before you got there. 

Admit it. But the most important message is don’t mess it up, 

don’t mess it up. That was the most important message, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So that was the key point in this whole notion is that on 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

November 7th, 2007, there was 60,000 people waiting along the 

Lloydminster border and on the Manitoba border, and as soon 

as they declared the Saskatchewan Party victorious in their 

election bid, they all moved in. They all moved in. Now we got 

more people thanks to these guys, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s exactly my point is why a lot of people smile when they 

hear these guys say these things. We don’t . . . We laugh over 

here. We laugh when they say that, but the people of 

Saskatchewan are a bit more polite. They simply smile and they 

say, okay. Okay you guys, you know, go ahead and say it. We 

know what happened, but what the heck, you know. And the 

main thing is to continue building on this positive economy and 

building for the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

And of course as New Democrats, we want to see the 

population growth. We’re telling people we want to see that 

growth continue. And we’re telling the people of 

Saskatchewan, it doesn’t matter whose done the work. The 

most important thing is where we go from here. Where we go 

from here, Mr. Speaker, is to continue building on the economy 

and continue hoping to see the population grow and of course to 

make our communities and our province stronger and grander 

and certainly make sure that they continue to boast about our 

province and they continue boasting about our communities, 

our future, and our people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the point that I think is really important 

is that as you have more people and as you have more services 

and as you have a growing population, what we find happens is 

that the Saskatchewan Party’s solution is to say, well we want 

more MLAs because the population is growing, thanks to the 

NDP’s [New Democratic Party] policies of the early 2000 era 

and thanks to some of the great work of some of the leaders of 

the NDP, but we’ll claim it anyway. But because the population 

is growing, because the population is growing, we need more 

MLAs. 

 

So we on this side of the Assembly generally agree. If you have 

a growing population, have more MLAs. But the problem is, as 

you turn around then you begin to cut services. Then you begin 

to fire people. So if you have more population and you have 

less people to service that population, less workers to serve the 

increased population, whether it be teachers or whether it be 

union workers or whether it be the steelworkers, as you have a 

growing population, the theory is you’d have more services. 

You’d have more demand for services because you have more 

people. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Well their answer is let’s have three more MLAs, and that’ll 

solve our problems. That’ll be it; the three MLAs will be able to 

do all this wonderful work. And the 60,000 people waiting at 

the border there, you are now served by three MLAs. So every 

MLA can serve 20,000 new people. And that’s it. That’s their 

idea of getting ready for their growth agenda, as their phrase . . . 

as they often use that phrase, ready for growth. You know just 

say, we inherited their growth; we’re trying to figure out how 

we keep it going. That would be a better phrase. 

 

But the problem is, Mr. Speaker, as you have the growing 

population, you will begin to see the frustration set in because 

you’re doing a lot of cuts to labour. You’re doing a lot of cuts 

to the service industry. And as you begin to cut public service 

what happens is the people that, well to their theory, that 

flooded in after they were elected, you know, they’ll begin to 

say, well where are the services here? I’ve got a great job, but 

our highways aren’t being cleared. I’ve got a great job, but our 

kids are in a classroom that’s twice the size from where I come 

from, with one teacher. Or I need some policeman service, and 

there’s no police around. 

 

As you see, as you have more people, the theory is you should 

have more services, not just more MLAs. So as you sit there 

wondering what’s going on, here they are; they’re cutting 

public service. They’re attacking the working people. They go 

to war with the teachers. And yet they turn around and say, oh 

the population growth is great. We’re doing things for you 

guys. We’re a wonderful government, but we’re going to be 

cutting services on this side. 

 

It just simply doesn’t add up, Mr. Speaker. So either you 

prepare for the growth as you say you are and do the basic 

common sense things to make sure, to make sure that you’re 

able to serve that population . . . That’s a very simple, simple 

thing to understand, Mr. Speaker, very simple to understand. 

 

Now the thing that’s also kind of worrisome, Mr. Speaker, is 

that if you look at the independence, if you look at the 

independence of how you appoint these boundaries and the 

commission that will appoint these boundaries, we on the 

opposition side we’re asking for complete independence, Mr. 

Speaker, free of any political interference of the Saskatchewan 

Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan are saying okay, we have a 

growth agenda, and we’re able to do things that are going on. 

We see our population growing. We don’t want politicians 

messing up that process. At the very least keep your nose out of 

the whole notion of trying to do the design work for these new 

MLAs to make sure you position your Sask Party candidate 

well. We’ll take this part and that part and make sure we get 

him elected kind of thing. Stay out of it. Stay completely out of 

it. Make sure it’s completely independent because if you’re 

appointing any of your buddies to these commissions and they 

get to make a decision as to who they want on these boards, 

well, they might as well get the Premier to go out and write out 

those boundaries if that’s the case. 

 

Because what you’ve got to do is you’ve got to make sure that 

they’re independent and that they assess everything that they 

should be assessing and they hear from the public, and to hear 

from the public as to how and where these boundaries or these 

new constituencies should be set up and how they should look, 

Mr. Speaker. There are many factors. There are many factors at 

play here, and that’s what is really important. 

 

The other thing too that’s kind worrisome, Mr. Speaker, on this 

particular Bill is the notion of the people that are under 18 years 

of age. No question that that’s the date or the age in which you 

are allowed to vote. And many younger people that are maybe 

17 or even 16, they’re asking if they could possibly look at the 

opportunity to participate in the democracy at an earlier age. Is 

16 years of age too young to vote? Are they kind of important 

to us as politicians? And the obvious answer is yes. But it 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

doesn’t appear that that’s so for the Saskatchewan Party 

because they don’t seem to be wanting to look at that particular 

issue when we talk about it on this side of the Assembly. 

 

We think those discussions have merit, that we should actually 

look at that and say, is this a distinct possibility, as opposed to 

slamming the door shut and saying no, it’s everybody over 18 

and that’s it. I think we want to value our young people, and we 

want to make sure that they are engaged in the political process 

younger. Because as they start the process when they’re 

younger, they understand things quicker and a lot faster than 

some guys like me and the member from Cumberland. It takes 

us some time to figure things out. But these younger folks, they 

can catch up on things fast. And that’s one of the things that’s 

also really important is to make sure that they engage younger 

people and perhaps at a younger age as opposed to 18, maybe 

one thing that should be considered. And that’s something that I 

think has a lot of merit, and I think the opposition members 

agree with me. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

while we want to sit here and say, yes, we applaud the 

continuing growing population of Saskatchewan, yes, we want 

to see the economy continue staying strong making sure that 

it’s steady and the growth is steady and to make sure that 

Saskatchewan continues to build for the future, a sustained 

future, and that’s what’s really important. But when we see 

them focus on just having three new MLAs, we ask them to do 

two or three things — one, to keep their noses out of it so it’s 

completely independent, not to politically interfere, and not to 

have some Sask Party hacks appointed as commission and they 

decide where the boundaries are. And that would be very 

hurtful to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And secondly, and secondly, Mr. Speaker, that the services that 

they cut, the services that they cut for a growing population, 

how does that work? How does that work is you’ll have less 

people working and serving the public, yet you have more 

people moving here. Like I can’t understand. And that’s why 

when we make the references that you inherited all this great 

news, that’s been the easiest job in the world is being 

government now because they have all this money. But if you 

have all that money and you’re talking about ready for growth, 

Mr. Speaker, they’re not ready for growth. They have people 

coming in. They have no place to live, and they have no 

services. And guess what? Eventually they’ll want to move 

somewhere where they have affordable housing and where they 

have services available to them. 

 

So it’s a lot more than simply saying, oh we have a growing 

population. Let’s pat ourselves on the back. Let’s get three 

more MLAs and that’ll solve our political future. That’s not the 

case, Mr. Speaker. That is not the case. Obviously there’s going 

to be a lot of scrutiny to this Bill. There’ll be a lot of scrutiny to 

this Bill. 

 

And I look at some of the history of how parties have 

manipulated boundaries to their benefit. I look at our boundary 

in northern Saskatchewan where, you know, from our riding — 

Churchill riding area — we have communities like Meadow 

Lake, like Big River. I think Hudson Bay is in there as well. 

But all these communities are lumped in with the northern 

communities. And the economies are different. The language is 

different. The population is different. And I always ask myself, 

why didn’t we have our own separate, our own separate riding, 

our own separate federal riding, Mr. Speaker? And well that’s 

the way the boundaries were drafted up many, many years ago. 

 

And you look at the history of that, and you don’t think that 

there was some political manipulation to make sure that the 

people of the North didn’t have their own strong voice in 

Ottawa? So they lumped them in with three or four other 

southern communities that have a greater population than some 

of our biggest community. Absolutely, Mr. Speaker, there was 

that manipulation of how those boundaries, federally, were 

designed. And I would suggest today that if we don’t watch this 

very closely and see who the Sask Party appoints to do the 

provincial boundaries, that you’re going to see the same kind of 

result that occurred with our federal ridings. 

 

So you don’t think that hurts democracy, that discourages 

people? So you lump all these factors in, Mr. Speaker, you can 

see how this Bill is so, so vitally important to the basic 

principles behind democracy, and that is to be fair, to be 

representative, and of course to allow people to vote. And on all 

those three fronts, we don’t see no evidence of the 

Saskatchewan Party doing anything to really, to really embrace 

those ideals and to make a big difference with the people of all 

of the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have any idea as to what they’re 

planning on doing in terms of the proposed members. We don’t 

know what areas that they’re considering expanding these three 

MLAs. We don’t know what they’re doing with these people 

that are under 18, how they determine that choice as to why 

they’re not involving them. We have very little detail as to 

when this whole commission is supposed to start. They have 

some timelines attached to the Bill, but when is their work 

supposed to be done? And who are they going to consult with? 

Who else are they going to be consulting with? We don’t have 

that information, and that’s why we’re going to try and find the 

information and take our time in the Assembly to really dig and 

to research as to what the objectives behind this Bill are. It’s 

really important that we understand this Bill as best we can. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think in the overall thrust of the Bill in terms 

of having more MLAs, and we think it’s a great idea, but please 

don’t cut public service because they need those people to serve 

the growing population. And if it’s more MLAs we need 

because of the growing population, we would suggest on this 

side we need more people to service that growing population so 

stop firing the working men and women of our great province. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that I go back to 

our federal riding, the federal boundary in northern 

Saskatchewan. It is a split boundary, Mr. Speaker. There are 

people that live in totally different ways than other people 

within the riding. And if you look at how it’s set up, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s no question that the northern communities, 

given their population base and the fact that they have to have 

voter ID [identification] now to vote and a bunch of other 

factors facing them, that it’s really a split riding, Mr. Speaker, 

that there’s so many different, different aspects of the southern 

part of the riding versus the northern riding. And it’s just totally 

a different culture, different people, different language, 

different circumstances, and so on and so forth. And somebody 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

lumped them all together to try and get the Conservatives to 

keep that seat and keep it for, you know, for many, many years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s too bad. Because in northern 

Saskatchewan, had we had our own federal riding for northern 

Saskatchewan, the DNS [Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan] line, then I can assure you that northern 

Saskatchewan would have had a great MP [Member of 

Parliament], Mr. Speaker. We would have had a great MP to be 

able to speak up for all the people of the North as a whole. This 

MP would have done wonderful things for us in making sure 

that we grew accustomed to have somebody in Ottawa fighting 

for us. And, Mr. Speaker, we would know that this person 

would also be understanding of all of our issues and share those 

issues and those beliefs and those challenges as a person 

themselves. 

 

So it’s something that’s really, really important to democracy. 

And that’s why I think when you look at this Bill, we tell 

people out there we don’t trust the Saskatchewan Party. They 

say it’s supposed to be independent. We have to ensure that it’s 

independent. And that is one of the critical things when we look 

at this constituency boundaries argument that they are making 

today. It’s something that we will definitely be paying attention 

to and that we hope never, ever again what happened to 

northern Saskatchewan by lumping us in with some larger 

southern communities just to stifle the opportunity for a 

northern person to become a MP, that was done deliberately. 

And we lost great opportunity and great time under that 

scenario and that the design of our federal riding was 

manipulated for the benefits of certain parties. And that’s a 

shame, Mr. Speaker. It’s an absolute shame. 

 

And we encourage people out there to listen to this particular 

Bill. And they may want to offer comments on this Bill, that we 

point out that there are some significant challenges on the 

boundaries that may be drafted, and we hope not by the 

Saskatchewan Party but by an independent body that people can 

go to speak to and can participate in the discussions and to 

know that they are respected and that they are heard. And that’s 

the only way that this thing can work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I will close on the note that we embrace growth. We 

embrace population increasing. We want to see the economy 

continue being very strong. We want to be inclusive of all the 

people, not exclusive to the Saskatchewan Party friends, and to 

make sure that we build this province for all of us. Otherwise 

it’s no good for any of us. And that’s one of the key points that 

I want to raise as I close my comments on this particular Bill. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we would encourage different groups 

out there that are aware that the Sask Party wants to put up 

three more seats by using the argument that there’s a growing 

population and we need more seats. We agree with that, that 

there is a growing population and more seats are necessary. We 

would applaud that, and certainly from the opposition 

perspective, don’t be cutting services if there is a growing 

population. It confuses people. And secondly, why are you 

excluding people under 18? And the third and most important 

point is if there is going to be a boundaries commission for the 

provincial election, that this boundaries commission be 

impartial and be solidly independent and that they’re not being 

politically interfered or they’re not being driven by the 

Saskatchewan Party, which I think people of Saskatchewan will 

not appreciate. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 

debate on this particular Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 36, The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 6 — The 

Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this evening to join in to the discussion on Bill No. 6, The 

Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011. Before 

I get into the comments of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

thank the member from Athabasca for the speeches he made 

throughout the afternoon and into the early evening during 

second reading speeches. Thank you for the comments that he 

made and the discussion that he has started. I know many 

members on this side of the House look forward to jumping in 

on the debate and carrying on the discussion that the member 

from Athabasca began. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, when looking at Bill No 6, the miscellaneous 

business statutes, this was a piece of legislation that was 

introduced by the minister with a second reading speech on 

December 13, 2011, so before the Christmas break. And now 

we’re at a point, Mr. Speaker, where adjourned debates are 

continuing the discussion from what the minister has said. As 

the minister identified in his remarks on this piece of 

legislation, this is legislation that’s being brought forward in 

order to make some of the changes that are coming out of the 

New West Partnership, the agreement that members opposite 

have engaged in with neighbouring provinces. Well provinces 

to the west, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The rationale that is provided as to why this piece of legislation 

is important is under the guise of or with the intent, I should 

say, of streamlining practices and making things simpler for 

businesses and allowing for co-operation between the provinces 

in terms of registering businesses as well as one annual return. 

When looking at this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and 

looking at this explanation, I think it’s important to first make a 

few remarks about the role of business. And most certainly 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

business is very important to Saskatchewan in terms of 

providing many of the jobs that Saskatchewan people enjoy and 

appreciate, and provide livelihoods to their families as well as 

providing diversity in our economy for the different types of 

activity and ensuring that we have a wide range of economic 

activity. Local businesses do this. 

 

The steps that are being proposed here in this legislation, while 

I would imagine it’s the intention of members opposite that it 

would benefit all types of businesses, I imagine that it is their 

desire that it would have an effect on businesses of a smaller 

scale when making and taking the necessary steps for 

registration in the province. 

 

Just to quote from the minister’s second reading speech so that 

listeners at home have a sense of his intent for this piece of 

legislation, he stated that “Effective July 1st, 2012, businesses 

registered as a corporation will no longer need to be registered 

separately in each of the three jurisdictions.” He goes on to say 

that “It also allows business corporations to file one annual 

return in their home province instead of three separate returns.” 

 

So we can see, Mr. Speaker, that the filing as I would see, the 

reduction of steps and the reduction of . . . or the simplifying of 

the steps and the streamlining of the process may have some 

benefits for local businesses. When I’m thinking about, in my 

own constituency, some of the people who are establishing and 

creating businesses which are supporting the local, the 

provincial economy and the economy in Saskatoon, some of 

them, Mr. Speaker, are new individuals coming to the province. 

And I do, Mr. Speaker, think it is a good thing, especially in the 

context of international migration and people from abroad 

wanting to come to Saskatchewan. 

 

Now it is, Mr. Speaker, important to have the correct balance in 

paying attention to the needs here at home, especially with First 

Nations and Métis communities, at the same time as we look at 

international migration. And I personally think, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a balance that members opposite don’t quite yet have 

right, and a balance, Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t been benefiting 

everyone in the province, and an approach, Mr. Speaker, that 

has not yet demonstrated itself to be proper long-term thinking. 

But that is perhaps a discussion for a different piece of 

legislation on a different night. 

 

But when I think of some of these individuals coming to the 

province and wanting to establish a business, it’s at least 

comforting, Mr. Speaker, to hear members opposite wanting to 

talk about how the process could perhaps be simplified. 

Because whenever government can improve its operations and 

what it does, that’s a positive thing. 

 

I think of some of the international new residents to 

Saskatchewan coming from abroad, and I think of their recent 

experience that many of them would have with the 

Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program — a program, Mr. 

Speaker, that has been effective in bringing people into 

Saskatchewan. And I, you know, I would like to thank the 

previous member for Saskatoon Nutana for having the foresight 

and the work that she did in bringing the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program into existence. 

 

But what I am increasingly hearing from people, Mr. Speaker, 

in Saskatoon, especially when it comes to the family class for 

the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, are the huge 

delays, the shortage of resources allocated to the program, and 

the uncertainty and the frustration that it’s causing with many 

of the people that want to come to Saskatchewan or the people 

that have just recently arrived to Saskatchewan or the people 

that have been here over a year and are choosing to sponsor 

family members. And I know members opposite, I’m sure some 

of them have had similar . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Relevance? 

 

Mr. Broten: — The member opposite is worried about the 

relevance. And he just needs to have a little bit of patience here 

because we’re talking about individuals’ experience with 

government, with programs, and how members opposite have 

chosen to allocate resources in order to have effectively running 

programs. And I think when many of these new individuals 

who are coming to the province through the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program, individuals who would be looking 

at establishing a business, I think if the members opposite are 

sincere in what they say that they want to streamline the process 

and make it more effective — they want to make it better — I 

think that’s a positive thing because I know many of them have 

had a less than positive experience with the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program, based on the decisions that 

members opposite have made in terms of allocating resources 

and processing applications in a timely manner. 

 

So when I look at this piece of legislation and hear that 

members opposite are wanting to improve a situation or a 

process of registration or wanting to look at ways to make it 

more effective and to make it more friendly for the citizen, for 

the user, I think that’s a positive thing. And I know for the 

people that are recently coming through the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program, that may in well, may in fact be a 

breath of fresh air based on their most recent experience. 

 

When looking at any piece of legislation, while it’s always, 

while the minister may be willing to identify the advantages as 

he or she sees them, it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to look at 

any of the potential pitfalls or drawbacks that may be associated 

with a particular piece of legislation. And in going through the 

minister’s comments on this piece of legislation, I didn’t see too 

much of a recognition of potential problems or concerns or at 

least flags that members opposite ought to be aware of and be 

perhaps taking steps to reduce any potential harm or drawbacks 

that may be associated with the legislation. 

 

So I do wish that the minister’s comments had a bit more detail 

in some of the areas. I think it’s also . . . Well let’s go back to 

the legislation, specifically based on the intent stated by what 

the minister has said. The first section, as I stated earlier, was so 

that businesses registered as a corporation would no longer 

have to do so in each jurisdiction but it would apply for the 

provinces under the agreement and one return would have to be 

made, not one in each of the jurisdictions. 

 

Another aspect of the legislation as identified by the minister in 

his remarks states that the first phase of the business portal is up 

and running now. The business registrations Saskatchewan 

website provides one easy-to-use online process to complete the 

steps required to (1) register a business with the corporate 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

registry; (2) as an employer of a workmen’s compensation 

board; and (3) the provincial sales tax with the Ministry of 

Finance. 

 

So it’s another step here by using the portal to assist with 

businesses in having a better service which, Mr. Speaker, may 

be a positive thing, and I look forward to hearing from different 

organizations and businesses that would have an opinion or a 

view on that. I think it’s also though important, Mr. Speaker, 

when looking at this suggestion, is to have a discussion about 

what the associated costs are. And while there may be savings 

in one area, as promoted by the minister, there may also be 

expenses. And in the minister’s comments I don’t see much 

detail about the potential expenses associated with these steps. 

And I think that might be a concern. 

 

When looking at the legislation, as I said earlier on in my 

remarks, this piece of legislation falls under the New West 

Partnership. And as with any type of agreement, Mr. Speaker, 

while there may be advantages in certain aspects, there may 

also be drawbacks. And there may be trade-offs that need to 

occur in order for the agreement to come into full effect and 

take place. And, Mr. Speaker, the benefits may in fact outweigh 

some of the drawbacks. But I don’t see that, Mr. Speaker, as the 

discussion that members opposite are having. I don’t have a 

sense, based on the minister’s remarks, that we’re having a full 

discussion about the potential drawbacks or problems. 

 

Yes, there may be advantages. Yes, there may be some 

efficiencies that are gained. But there may also be some 

negative aspects to the legislation. And when that’s not flagged 

as a concern or a problem by ministers opposite in their second 

reading speech, it causes me to pause and wonder what else 

might be in there, what negative aspects may be a result of this 

piece of legislation, and why aren’t members opposite being 

open in discussing what those challenges are. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I’ve identified that there may be 

some positive aspects to this piece of legislation. I’ve identified 

that if efficiencies are in fact gained, and it helps small 

businesses, or large businesses for that matter, that could be a 

positive thing. And I’ve stated, Mr. Speaker, how for some of 

the new arrivals to Saskatchewan — if they’ve just dealt with 

other programs that are being administered by the Sask Party 

government — if this new program is more efficient, that might 

be a welcome change for the new residents of the province. 

And I think members opposite could spend some time looking 

at other programs where things could be improved and where 

more resources need to be allocated in order to experience the 

full benefits of the various programs. 

 

So I see, Mr. Speaker, I see an absence of a discussion about 

what associated costs may be with this approach, whether it be 

a savings or whether there would be increased expenses, either 

in the short term or the long term. I think that’s a concern for 

residents, for taxpayers, for this Assembly. And I think more 

discussion is warranted on that note. 

 

So with those comments, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 

hearing from more people in Saskatchewan about this piece of 

legislation. I look forward to hearing from more of my 

colleagues on this piece of legislation and I would hope they 

might also spur on a bit of discussion among members opposite 

instead of simply only promoting what’s positive — instead of 

only focusing on a positive, always positive, nothing but 

glowing news releases, to look at some of the challenges and 

some of the potential drawbacks based on the decisions that 

they’re making. I’m not confident that they will in fact have 

that change of heart and change of course but, Mr. Speaker, I 

suppose members, people in Saskatchewan can always hope 

that they do come to that position sooner or later. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 6 and thank members of the Assembly for the chance 

to speak to it. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 

moved adjournment of Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous Business 

Statutes Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 7 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 7 — The 

Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and debate this evening on Bill No. 7 with 

amendments to The Co-operatives Act, 2011. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, this past week of course in the city 

of Saskatoon we saw the convention for the Federated Co-op, 

certainly a large, vibrant co-operative organization in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And anyone that was in the city of 

Saskatoon certainly saw the co-operative delegates from around 

the province gather to tend to the business of Federated Co-op. 

 

So when we look at legislation such as this, Mr. Speaker, you’ll 

forgive me if I tend to get a little parochial in how I look at this 

as a member of the Sherwood Co-op and, you know, how that 

fits into the Federated Co-op, Mr. Speaker. Of course he’s, you 

know, got multiple co-operative memberships down there in the 

Southeast. Arcola and Redvers, I think, were two just off the 

top of his head there. But certainly the well-being of the 

co-operative sector is something that is a fairly widespread 

concern in this legislature, as should be the case in a province 

like Saskatchewan where the co-operative sector has played 

such a critical role in the development of our provincial 

economy and in people banding together to make sure that they 

had some control over their own economic destinies, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So when we see legislation that comes forward, that moves . . . 

that deals with the regulatory regime under which the 

co-operatives conducted business, it is with a great deal of 

interest that we analyze that legislation, Mr. Speaker. Now I 

have the pleasure of following in this debate after the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place who is considering the 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

miscellaneous business statutes Act. This is a parallel piece of 

legislation of course for the co-operative sector with a couple of 

key differences though, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Whereas both — the business side with the co-operative side — 

both are intended to be actioned after 2011, the co-operatives 

follow a bit behind the business in this regard and aren’t 

anticipated to be brought on board until 2013, if I am reading 

the minister’s second reading speech from December 13th, Mr. 

Speaker, correctly. So we wonder why that is, why there’s the 

lag time in the implementation for this legislation around 

co-operatives. Certainly BC [British Columbia], Alberta, 

Saskatchewan, as well as Manitoba, these are economies in 

which the co-operative sector is a significant and a vibrant 

contributor to the economic well-being of all four Western 

provinces. So I guess that leads me to another question, Mr. 

Speaker, which is, why the aim of streamlining registration, the 

extraprovincial designation? Is it the case that this would have 

had to . . . Is it the case where we needed the New West 

Partnership Agreement to move on this front? 

 

And I somehow doubt that, Mr. Speaker, and I also think that 

by limiting it to the New West Partnership Agreement and not 

pursuing it through other venues such as the four Western 

premiers, that perhaps this legislation is not all that it could be 

or should be, Mr. Speaker. And again I’d reference the 

significant co-operative sector that exists in the province of 

Manitoba. 

 

So this is brought forward as somehow evidence that the New 

West Partnership has triggered this co-operation. Fair enough, 

Mr. Speaker, but I can’t help but think that there have been 

other venues in the past and that are ongoing that could have 

served to prompt this legislation and perhaps made it more 

comprehensive as regards the four Western provinces. And 

perhaps that will be remedied in the days, months, or years 

ahead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the substance of the legislation seems to be fair enough, Mr. 

Speaker — the streamlining of the registration process, the 

providing of the category of extraprovincial whereby you 

register as such as a co-operative and then are considered to be 

registered for each of the three Western provinces. That seems 

to be straight ahead enough. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, we’re interested to see how this is 

perhaps limited by the scope of the New West Partnership and 

whether or not there’s a bilateral consideration been given to 

Manitoba or whether or not the New West Partnership, while in 

one breath serving to broaden the perspective, is perhaps 

limiting that perspective and curtailing this legislation and not 

enabling it to be all that it could be or should be. 

 

In terms of the role that is played in this legislation by the 

Information Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 

yourself, following the evolution of ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] over the years, it’s interesting to 

note the progress that has been made on that file. And I think 

back to the good work of many people who did a lot to bring 

the registry, the land titles registry and the attendant 

information services into the 21st century. I can remember the 

committee meetings where at the time it was compared to 

taking a cow path and paving it and bringing it into the 21st 

century in terms of the paper-based land titles system that we 

had at the time and bringing it into a more modern digitally 

based service, and the troubles that were inherent in that. 

 

And I think of the good work that was done by people such as 

Mark MacLeod, who stepped in and played a key role in not 

just helping to get the corporation on the right track but turning 

it from a troubled start-up into something that is, I think in a 

number of different categories, one of the finest of the Crown 

corporations in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the ISC is used as one of the central instruments in this 

endeavour to improve the process whereby businesses are 

registered between the provinces or at least between the three 

western-most provinces. It makes some sense, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the progress that has been made over the years. We’re 

not sure, of course, what’s happened lately with the Information 

Services Corporation because we have considerations to 

undertake with the Crown Corporations Committee. And I 

appreciate the good work on the part of the Chair of the 

committee, the member from Arm River-Watrous, in working 

with the opposition to try and get that work up to date. And we 

look forward with great interest, Mr. Speaker, to the 

consideration of the annual reports for the Information Services 

Corporation. 

 

So to recap, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the streamlining of 

regulation, in terms of making it easier for co-operatives 

alongside businesses to register in the three Western provinces, 

we think that is a positive thing as long as equal attention is 

being paid to make sure that the purpose of those registrations 

in the first place is not being forgotten to make sure that there is 

that assurance of quality, to make sure that there is that balance 

struck between ease of registration but also proper oversight on 

the part of due authorities to make sure that that is maintained, 

Mr. Speaker. We think that’s a balance that obviously gets a bit 

trickier when you’re involving three separate provincial 

jurisdictions. So we will be watching what happens on this 

front very closely. 

 

And again on the same footing, Mr. Speaker, given that this is 

brought forward under the aegis of the New West Partnership, 

we can’t help but wonder, given the vibrant co-operative sector 

in Manitoba and the close relationship that we share with our 

eastern neighbours but certainly one of the proud four Western 

provinces, why they need be left by the wayside, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms . . . If this is really about reducing barriers in the name 

of increasing productivity and increasing economic growth and 

doing what we can as co-operative government entities to 

facilitate that while striving to maintain the appropriate 

oversight, we think the exclusion of Manitoba from this is 

perhaps a limitation and detracts from what this Bill sets out to 

do. 

 

I guess I’d also point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill was 

brought forward en français, and we’re happy to see that. 

Certainly amongst the Fransaskois there is a great interest in the 

co-operative sector of the economy, as you well know, 

Monsieur le Président. So we are glad to see that the French 

version of the legislation has been included as well. 

 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

That is about all I would say at this time, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps 

one of my colleagues will get into a greater discussion of how 

this relates to providing the Canada Revenue Agency the 

business number identifier, how that relates to this legislation. 

And certainly steps on that front have already been taken in five 

other provinces and several other federal ministries. 

 

So again it would seem that there is a bit of catch-up being 

played here, Mr. Speaker. But again I will perhaps leave that to 

one of my other colleagues to discuss at greater length in 

consideration of this Bill during second readings, Mr. Speaker, 

during adjourned debates. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

conclude my remarks, and I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved 

adjournment of debate of Bill No. 7, The Co-operatives 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 8 — The Land 

Titles Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to enter into the 

debate tonight on this Bill, An Act to amend the Land Titles Act, 

2000. As stated by the minister, the purpose of this particular 

piece of legislation is introduce a new division or a division into 

the Bill to provide for a document storage library. The minister 

indicated in his comments on the Bill that this enhancement to 

the service is a direct result of consultations with representation 

from legal and financial sectors. And I was part of a focus 

group, Mr. Speaker, several years ago where this was identified 

as a pressing need for the registry, and I’m pleased to see that 

the government is considering this amendment to the Act. 

 

The Land Titles Amendment Act of course is part of the . . . is 

further enhancement to The Land Titles Act, 2000. As you 

know, Mr. Speaker, the land in Saskatchewan was developed 

along the Torrens system, which was the foundation for The 

Land Titles Act in Saskatchewan, and it certainly is the envy of 

the eastern provinces. I have done a lot of work nationally with 

land titles registries, and the Torrens system itself in the 

original land titles registry was a gem of western land 

management regimes. And the amendments in 2000 were very 

welcome although they did introduce some new complexities 

and nuances to the land titles registry system that have been 

worked out through the last 10 years and 12 years but were 

certainly challenging at the time the Bill was introduced. 

 

Certainty is the critical feature of the land titles system. So what 

happens in Western Canada with the Torrens system is that 

when we have a title, that is guaranteed by the government to 

be the be-all and end-all of ownership, is that the buck stops 

there basically, Mr. Speaker. In Eastern Canada they had the 

deed registry type of system which required a lot of work to 

prove ownership and going through the deed registry back to 

the original deed. And the western Torrens system made it 

much easier for landowners and for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to manage land development in the province. 

 

Some of the complexities that have come up in land ownership 

in recent years after the development of the paper system was 

the complexities in oil and gas ownership and mineral 

ownership and also condominiums, which presented special 

challenges for the land titles system. So those were some of the 

things that the Government of Saskatchewan changed when 

they introduced The Land Titles Act, 2000. They made it much 

more clear. Well originally it was a bit confusing but the 

condominium Act and the mineral title layer have been 

continuously improved since the introduction of the Bill and is 

certainly again the envy of Western provinces as well as 

Canada as a whole. And I would say other countries are looking 

to the quality of this registry as a model for modernization of 

their land titles as well. 

 

The system basically helps people of Saskatchewan and the 

government deal with transfers of land ownership, the 

management of estates when it comes to real property, also the 

management of mortgages. And I think this particular Bill 

speaks to the mortgage aspect because the types of documents 

that the legal and financial sector are looking for storage in the 

document storage library would generally be large and long 

mortgage agreements or any kind of registrations against 

property for financing and security. 

 

So these types of documents are very complex and cumbersome 

even in electronic format, Mr. Speaker, because there is a 

number of pages. And the data, the electronic data that is 

needed to store these documents is quite large, so it’s a burden 

on the system. But it’s also a lot of these documents are 

identical and so it doesn’t make sense to have them registered 

over and over and over again, taking up space on the electronic 

database. 

 

Other things that The Land Titles Act, 2000 dealt with is the 

whole layer of leasing which has been changed from the 

paper-based system where it used to be you could get a 

certificate of lease. Now it’s just registered as an interest 

against the title. And a new feature in The Land Titles Act, 2000 

was the abstract directory, which was a very interesting 

addition because it’s not a registry. It was merely a directory 

registering abstract land which is typically Crown land in the 

name of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the pieces that was missing from the original Bill was 

dealing with federal Crown land and there was a number of 

very complex and involved debates and focus groups on how to 

improve the abstract directory as it relates to federal Crown 

land. And certainly in 2003, Mr. Speaker, I was seconded to 

provide some expert Crown legal advice on that abstract 

directory. 

 

[20:00] 

 

The registrar’s priorities were also changed under the new land 

titles Act, 2000. And I guess another main feature of The Land 

Titles Act, 2000 was the introduction of The Land Surveys Act, 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

2000. And again this is an introduction of a piece that was 

unique, I think maybe in North America, but certainly in 

Canada, where the title information, electronic title information, 

was directly tied to the land surveys information that was 

available at the time. So it was a major shift in the way land 

titles were operating and also the way the land geographical 

information was stored. So the GIS [geographic information 

system] system was greatly enhanced and considerable 

investment was made into the GIS in order to be able to tie each 

one of those geographical information parcels to the actual 

certificate of ownership. So that the marriage of those two 

layers and the integration of those two layers was incredibly 

significant to the modernization of this particular registry and 

ownership in Saskatchewan. So that was something that was 

very helpful for landowners at the time. 

 

The GIS system also exposed many deficiencies in the land 

titles system, which is an interesting, I guess, offshoot of the 

introduction of the new system. There’s two areas where there 

were many deficiencies in the old paper-based system and that 

was particularly in the area of the abstract, what we now call 

the abstract directory. In the old days, in the paper days, there 

would merely be a marker placed in the paper registry if there 

was any action or any kind of interest registered against the 

abstract directory and this was often inconsistent and there was 

incorrect markings on those abstract recordings simply because 

it was not an area that was often used. So as the paper abstracts 

were converted into electronic abstracts, a number of problems 

appeared in the registration there, and those have been fixed as 

we go along. 

 

The other issue that I think became a critical issue was in the 

mineral layer. The Land Titles Act, 2000 actually separated the 

surface ownership of land from the mineral ownership of land 

and previous to that in the paper-based system the surface title 

and the mineral title could’ve been on the same title or not. 

Quite often it was abstract minerals and so those were just 

simply part of the Crown’s holdings, but as we went through 

the conversion we understood that there was a number of issues 

with mineral titles and quite often they were Crown mineral 

titles because of certain actions that had been taken by the 

government in relation to an individual property title. 

 

So there was a considerable backup there in the early 2000s that 

had to work with the certification of mineral titles, and there 

was a lot of uncertainty in the mineral sector on ownership on 

some of those. I think by and large that has been cleared up 

over the years, but it certainly was interesting to see the new 

broom sweeping clean and how the mineral title layer really 

had a number of deficiencies in it that was corrected by the new 

system. 

 

In terms of this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, what the Bill is 

attempting to do is create a new division in the Act. First of all 

the definition of application is being amended. And an 

application typically in the land titles system is where an 

individual applies to have something done to a title, so I am not 

sure that the inclusion of a document storage library in this 

particular definition is the best place for it. But typically when 

you have an application, you get a title issued. You would 

register a transfer, an interest, or somehow deal with a 

registered interest against the title. You may want to file a 

document in the abstract directory. That’s another form of 

application. Or you may want to register a writ or a 

maintenance order in the registry against a particular piece of 

property, maybe even do some other things like adding, 

changing, or removing information. 

 

So to file a document like this is not really an application in the 

context of the existing provision and the interpretation 

provided, but I suppose they had to pick a place to put it, and 

that’s where it ended up. The filing of a document in the 

document storage library is more like filing something to back 

up an application so it’s in support of an application, but the 

way the Bill is currently written, it looks like it’s an application. 

So that’s something we want to take a look at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second part that the Bill is looking at is creating a new 

definition for authorization. It’s being done in a curious 

manner, Mr. Speaker, because what it’s doing is creating a 

definition as defined in the regulations. And I suggest to you 

that there might a better way to do that because definition 

should really be found in the Act itself, and I would prefer to 

see them there than placed in the regulations and then referred 

back to in the Act. It makes it somewhat awkward for the 

reader, and certainly I think the Bill should be the first place 

that the definition is located. 

 

The document storage library itself is also established in the 

existing, or it’s added as a new definition into the definition 

section. So basically it just talks about the document storage 

library being that which is established under section 74.2 which 

is a new provision being introduced. And following that, there 

is a new definition called standard interest terms which again 

uses the definition in the regulations to refer to a definition in 

the Act. These types of things are very confusing for readers, 

even those who read legislation as a matter of course, but it’s 

also . . . Well it’s more difficult for people who aren’t used to 

dealing with legislation, and to flip back and forth between the 

legislation and the regs is quite awkward, so it would be helpful 

to have that just directly referred to as a definition in the Act 

itself. 

 

Now section 50 is also being added or amended in this 

particular Bill, the amendment Bill, and what it’s talking about 

is standard interest terms. So that what the document storage 

library will do is store what they call documents that have 

standard interest terms, and in this case, interest is referring to 

an interest registered against the title. So I expect that the 

document storage library will really only contain documents 

that are interest-based, and I suspect that the intent here is 

basically for mortgages because back in I think it was 2003 and 

2004 when I was on a focus group, that was certainly the 

interest of the financial institutions of the day, was to have 

these sorts of standard interests, which would be mortgages, 

able to be filed and accessed through the registry rather than 

submitting them each time from an individual basis. And 

certainly the financial institutions that were on the focus group 

were very, very keen to have this in place, so it’s something I 

think they’ll be very happy about. 

 

Following that, the next part, the section establishing the 

standard interest terms just really sets it out that they’re 

incorporating them, as the application to use that standard 

document is made, those terms are being incorporated into the 

application itself. So it’s just basically a pro forma situation 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

where the document is just being dragged electronically from 

its storage in the library and now being applied to a particular 

registration for a particular property. 

 

The document storage library is established as a new part in The 

Land Titles Act for the document storage library, and it gets its 

own little section in the Act right now, so that’s where it’s 

being placed. And of course filing in this case means an 

electronic filing and it will say this is, the filing means entering 

into the document storage library one set of standard interest 

terms for the prescribed type of interest. So I’m assuming that’s 

the way it’s going to work is that a mortgage company will 

establish its one mortgage that it wants to use, or perhaps a 

whole bank of different types of mortgages, and then they 

would reuse them from time to time. 

 

So in section 74.2, the proposed new section, there is a whole 

list of requirements for the standard interest terms and the 

subsequent authorizations that will be filed. Again I’m not sure 

how authorizations can be filed in the document storage library, 

but there is a provision for that in section 74.2(4), so I would 

have to talk to a few more people about the actual intent of that 

particular part of the Bill, the proposed Bill. It makes it clear in 

74.2(5) that the documents contained in the library are not part 

of the land registry. So again it is a distinction I think that is 

supported in my view of this. And certainly my earlier 

comments about how this really isn’t part of an application and 

may not fit in that definition in the Act, I think that supports 

that. So I am not sure what the intent would be here and would 

certainly want to see some clarity around that if at all possible. 

 

The existing provision . . . There is a new provision, 74.3, that 

is being created as well, and it talks about how an individual or 

an organization could file these standard interest terms and 

authorizations. Again we would need to take a closer look at 

some of that to be sure that it is clear and not too confusing for 

the users. 

 

I’d like to look at section 85 right now because the amendments 

to it, I think there is something missing. In particular, if you 

look at section 85, there is a whole host of things that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council can make regulations for. The 

list is long, but . . . I’m sorry. That’s section 187. In section 85, 

there’s a number of things that are filed for no compensation. 

So this is where the registrar isn’t responsible if something goes 

wrong. There is no compensation for these particular things. 

There’s one that’s being added here, and that’s there’s no 

compensation for any errors “occasioned by the filing of 

standard interest terms or reference to standard interest terms 

stored in the document storage library.” So again the registrar is 

always looking for ways to avoid compensation when 

necessary, and I think that’s an essential feature of the land 

registry. 

 

In this particular case, the only thing I’m concerned about is 

that the Bill proposes to strike out the word “or” after clause (q) 

and add an additional clause (s), but not inserting “or” after 

clause (r). So I think there’s a slight typographical issue there 

that should be looked at and cleared up. 

 

And then the last major change is in clause 187(1)(l.1). And the 

Bill proposes to add (l.2) to that section. And it’s really a 

prescriptive list of the types of standard interest terms and 

authorizations, and the types of, the rules that will apply to the 

use of those standard interest terms and the document storage 

library. 

 

Again my only concern here is that this section has a long, long, 

long list of authority and power that’s being delegated to the 

regulatory sphere, which means less scrutiny by the public, and 

certainly more ability for the government to make changes 

without bringing them before the Legislative Assembly. So 

that’s something that I’m always concerned about, is when 

there are prescriptive powers being delegated off to legislation, 

and that the scrutiny of this Assembly is not brought to bear as 

closely as it would be if they were kept in the legislation. I 

understand in a complex society, as things become more 

regulated and more complex, that it isn’t possible for this 

Assembly to look at everything. But the trend is certainly there, 

and it’s one that is of concern. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, in general the idea of the document 

depository, document storage library, is one that’s long 

overdue, and it will be one that’s very welcome to the focus 

groups that the minister has consulted with. Certainly there are 

other issues in the land registry that could use the same kind of 

scrutiny. And I think in particular the mineral layer itself still 

needs a lot of work, as the historical development of the 

mineral layer was basically one of overlooking until 1950 when 

major changes were made to the land titles system to allow 

registrars to provide more scrutiny. And that’s when you first 

started seeing certification of minerals. But between 1885 and 

1950, there were a lot of mineral titles that simply were 

overlooked because there was no need to look at them, for a 

lack of a better description. 

 

What’s happened now is that in a lot of cases, errors and 

compounded errors in the mineral layer have led to situations 

where there is a lot of orphan mineral titles, and certainly the 

Ministry of Energy and Resources has been loath to proceed in 

court to escheat those titles back to the Crown. But I think there 

is ample reason for the government to consider doing 

something like that as it would simplify a lot of wee little 

orphan mineral titles that were just left behind through neglect. 

And there is a number of resources being applied to that, both 

within Information Services Corporation, certainly in the 

private sector and in the Crown sector to try and resolve those 

issues, but really there is no ability within the legislation itself 

to deal with them. So those are some things that I think are still 

overlooked and need to be addressed as part of the 

modernization of land titles in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think at this point, based on my first look at this Bill, I 

think it’s something that’s been called for. Certainly I was 

aware of the need for this in the early 2000s. It will provide 

better search capabilities and access to documents. I guess 

much remains to be seen about how the regulations will be 

written in terms of this, and exactly what kind of scrutiny the 

public can have of these documents, how accessible they will 

be when searching in the search function in the Information 

Services Corporation electronic search portion of the registry, 

and what kind of uptake this library will actually see within the 

financial sector and the legal sector. 

 

[20:15] 

 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

The minister has said that the functionality of the library will 

improve the ability of ISC and the customers to manage files 

and documents of all types of transactions including mortgages 

and leases, interests in such easements and assignments of rent, 

various authorizations such as court orders, powers of attorney, 

and letters probate. I’m not sure that there’s standard letters 

probate or standard powers of attorney that would be used to 

file in the registry, but it could very well be that there be a 

standard established and there’s an uptake on the part of the 

public for those types of things. And I think the ultimate 

benefit, as the minister has said, will be quicker and easier 

submissions of land transaction documents. And that’s certainly 

something that would be of benefit to the public when using the 

land registry. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think that I would wrap up my 

comments on this Bill. I just want to acknowledge that I think 

my colleagues will also have additional comments and I want to 

make sure I leave room for that and also debate on other Bills 

this evening. So at this point, I will move to adjourn the debate 

on Bill No. 8. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved the adjournment of debate on Bill No. 8, The Land 

Titles Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 11 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 11 — The Court 

Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de 

justice be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

my pleasure to join in discussion here this evening and debate 

here this evening as it relates to Bill No. 11, The Court Officials 

Act, 2011. 

 

Just to start off, I’d like to recognize the court officials that 

serve Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan courts in 

providing the services that they do in the important roles that 

they do all across Saskatchewan. And I’d like those individuals 

in their various capacities to know that they’re valued, whether 

they’re registrars or whether they’re clerks and in all the 

capacities that they fulfill for Saskatchewan people. We’d like 

them to know that we greatly appreciate the role that they fulfill 

to our province and for Saskatchewan people. These roles are 

fundamental to the efficient delivery of justice in our province 

and effectively running our court system, Mr. Speaker. And 

their contributions to our province and to timely justice and to 

fair consideration and proper hearing is vital and is something 

we appreciate. 

 

When I’m looking at the Bill here and in reading the minister’s 

comments, I recognize that this changes a piece of legislation 

that in fact hasn’t been changed since 1984 and that it reflects 

an institution or an organization that has gone through some 

changes and reflects likely in many ways a modernization or 

some updating to the legislation to reflect those court changes 

that have occurred that were entrenched in the 1984 legislation 

and now defining some of those roles as they reflect the new 

reality in our courts across Saskatchewan. 

 

But what I think is important any time we’re taking a look at a 

piece of legislation is to not only read the minister’s comments 

and to get an understanding of what the intent of, or objective 

of legislation is of government but for us to also to make sure 

that we are incredibly cautious and thorough in understanding 

and examining any of the unintended consequences through 

that. And to allow for that, certainly strong and wide 

consultation is important. And on this front I know certainly 

consultation is something that we’ll be engaging in and 

certainly carrying that forward through the committee structures 

of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know we’ll be engaging with the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan on this front as well the Canadian Bar 

Association, and understanding and gaining their perspective 

and their understanding both of the intent of this Bill, how it 

reflects, and whether it does reflect in fact the needed changes 

to reflect the changes that exist in our courtrooms across 

Saskatchewan, but also to make sure that there is not a host of 

unintended consequences for which are complications or 

undesirable aspects of this piece of legislation. So that’s the 

thorough process that the official opposition New Democrats 

will undertake as it relates to this piece of legislation, making 

sure that it’s in the best interest of Saskatchewan people and 

reflects the demands and pressure and needs in the current court 

environments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that work will occur in the days and weeks forward and is 

an important piece. And certainly it’s vital to any aspect. And 

I’m not going to get into it here tonight but certainly we’ve seen 

a government that far too often, on so many fronts, brushes 

aside the thoughtful consultation that needs to occur with the 

individuals for whom understand what the changes mean when 

a Bill is put forward but also for whom are impacted by the 

changes of a Bill. 

 

And we’ve seen from that reckless legislation, unconstitutional 

legislation by this government, and we need to make sure that 

we’re, as the official opposition, doing all we can to have that 

oversight, that scrutiny that’s required, that engagement with 

the public and with stakeholders to make sure that we’re 

serving Saskatchewan people. Because the unfortunate reality, 

Mr. Speaker, is we have learned very early on with this Sask 

Party government that thoughtful consideration and 

consultation, scrutiny and oversight aren’t this government’s 

strengths. And certainly in absence of that, we are often in a 

position where legislation or programs or changes are made that 

aren’t in the best interests of Saskatchewan people, that are 

detrimental or that unintended consequences haven’t been 

considered. Or we’ve seen a government rush forward with sort 

of a populist agenda in the past but then left with 

unconstitutional legislation, Mr. Speaker, that in some cases 

have, or in one case in fact was all about taking away workers’ 

rights, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

So we’ll be thoughtful in how we go about examining this piece 

of legislation. We’ll be engaging the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan, the Canadian Bar Association, other legal 

stakeholders, and making sure that we put forward the kind of 

analysis that’s required. 

 

I know that this piece of legislation, just to get to the meat of it 

a little bit as well, Mr. Speaker, there’s two new court officials 

that are established through this piece of legislation that I 

understand, and that the registrar of the Provincial Court. This 

relates . . . and as well the registrar of the Provincial Court and 

also court transcribers. These are some of the new roles that are 

addressed in this piece of legislation. 

 

And I guess the question is, is this process that we’ve 

established here by way of this legislation the most efficient 

process to serve our court system? Questions of, how does this 

connect to the role of the minister? Does it diminish the role of 

the minister? Does it have the proper connect or disconnect, 

shall we say, Mr. Speaker? And I know the minister suggested 

that this will allow a process of a backup to exist within the 

court system in the event that the registrar is away and 

establishes a delegate structure and defines the relationship 

between the registrars to assist the courts to operate effectively. 

 

So this lays out a definition of role and establishes some 

process and arguably, and put forward by the minister with 

some intent, is that this puts forward some capacity by way of a 

backup system if a registrar is away. And certainly, if that 

serves efficient and effective delivery of court services in this 

province, then that’s something that we would welcome. Like I 

say, there is more analysis to make sure in fact that this process 

put forward is the way to best serve that end. 

 

When I look, there are some changes as well to The Jury Act in 

this piece of legislation and the jury selection process and we 

need to gain a broader understanding. We really haven’t had it 

clarified yet by this government. 

 

And we need to make sure that we’re understanding the 

consequences of these changes with the legal stakeholders as 

they exist, Mr. Speaker, but we need to make sure that we have 

an understanding of why these changes have occurred. Is it a 

question of bringing a broader cross-section of society forward 

for a jury selection process? That might be a reasonable case to 

consider such changes, Mr. Speaker, but at this point in time, 

without clarity from the minister, it’s hypothetical. And so 

we’re looking for that sort of clarity. We’re looking for 

engagement of stakeholders, and that’s important to make sure 

that we get this piece of legislation right, to make sure that our 

courts can serve Saskatchewan people in the way that they 

should. 

 

I guess just as another piece here too there is some concern, I 

believe, across the province in the judiciary, Mr. Speaker, as it 

relates to timely justice and consideration of matters, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know that the Supreme Court upholds 

constitutional requirements of timely court use. And this is an 

important aspect, and that constitutional requirement and 

expectation of a timely and fair hearing, court process, is 

important. It’s important on many fronts, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

about relevance of the case and the evidence and the witnesses, 

Mr. Speaker, but it also is important because of the 

constitutional requirements. We put ourselves at risk, if not 

considering court cases in a timely manner, of having 

dismissals or having cases tossed out, for which in some cases 

are quite egregious and really do need to be considered. So it’s 

a matter of proper upholding of justice and proper efficient and 

effective delivery of justice to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I’m not sure that this Bill gets to the heart of that matter at 

all, Mr. Speaker, but I do look forward and we look forward to 

engaging the legal community on that front to gain an 

understanding of their perspective as it relates to this Bill, but 

also to the minister and to the government in committee 

structures to see if that challenge that’s been relayed through, 

you know, in this province by way of the judiciary, if that in 

fact is being addressed by this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on the face of it, Mr. Speaker, I’ve read the minister’s 

comments. They’re short. They’re concise. They’re to the point. 

There’s some merit to what’s being said. What we need to do 

now is make sure that in fact that is the case as far as the impact 

of this piece of legislation, making sure that this is the best way 

to move forward, Mr. Speaker. And certainly it’s incredibly 

important, Mr. Speaker, that we ensure timely justice in this 

province and the importance of that to our province and to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And just to close, this Bill is about court officials. We’d like to 

thank the court officials from across Saskatchewan for the 

important role they fulfill to our justice system and to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So we’ll engage in our consultation. We have many 

conversations to move forward. We invite the input of the 

Saskatchewan public, like we do on all pieces of legislation, 

and certainly the significant stakeholders as it relates to these 

changes. And at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

Bill No. 11, The Court Officials Act, I now adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 11, The Court Officials Act, 2011. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 12 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 12 — The Court 

Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

enter into debate here this evening as it relates to Bill No. 12, 

The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I’ve read the minister’s comments on this as it relates to 

this piece of legislation. From that I’ve extracted some level of 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

intent on behalf of government on this piece of legislation. But 

as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, on so many pieces of legislation, it’s 

so important for us to make sure that we do the thoughtful 

consideration and consultation that unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

often hasn’t occurred with this government, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly as it relates to Bill No. 12, we’ll engage in that 

thoughtful and sincere consultation with legal stakeholders, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that the changes that are put forward in Bill 

No. 12 as it relates to coroners and inquests and handling of 

recording of information, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that this in 

fact is an appropriate way to move forward and in fact in the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

We’ll be engaging the Law Society of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, on this front. We’ll also be engaging the Canadian Bar 

Association to gain their perspectives as to what this Bill’s 

impact will be as we move forward, Mr. Speaker, to make sure 

that in fact the intent of government is fulfilled by way of this 

Bill without bringing a host of undesirable impacts or 

undesirable unintended consequences to Saskatchewan people 

or to our process as it exists here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:30] 

 

But the way I look at this piece of legislation, I understand it 

amends The Coroners Act of 1999 and it reflects changes in 

how evidence is collected and transcribed and collected in 

coroners’ inquests, Mr. Speaker. That’s my understanding by 

way of what I see in the Bill and from some understanding 

that’s been put forward or some comments put forward by the 

minister. 

 

Right now, I believe, as it’s my understanding that in court 

inquests most evidence is in fact recorded by a court reporter 

using shorthand or a recording device. And that occurs in most, 

if not all, coroners’ inquests as it stands right now, Mr. Speaker. 

And what I believe this Bill, as I read the legislation, what this 

Bill intends to do is to make that not a standard practice in 

coroners’ inquests, and in fact make it optional and to make that 

sort of recording only to occur by request of the minister, Mr. 

Speaker, or by request of the coroner, the chief coroner, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think we have questions about why that change has been 

made and in the circumstance that it doesn’t occur, we 

recognize that that information can be provided to an individual 

or group that requires that information or wants that 

information. But we understand that it will come at a cost, Mr. 

Speaker. So as I read the legislation, it’ll come that anyone else 

who requests or pays for a transcript can and will receive that 

information. 

 

And I do look forward to having some thoughtful questions 

with the minister as to why the change of structure on this front. 

I’m not certain of why this government would choose to limit 

the access of this to, let’s say, a grieving family who now will 

have to both request that information and pay for that 

information. And I would think that many, many individuals — 

say a spouse or a widow or a grieving family — would in fact 

request that information. Now that comes at a cost. 

 

So I guess if I look at this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, it 

may be nothing more than a budget cut of this government 

where they no longer transcribe in all scenarios and 

circumstances, only by order of the minister or the chief 

coroner, in that it’s a cut in what’s been a service in the past. So 

I think questions to the minister about the usage of that 

information, the past uptake of that information, and then the 

impact potentially on grieving families, Mr. Speaker, otherwise 

it would be a question of why the change of practice. The only 

piece I can extract at this point in time without further 

consideration is that it falls in line with some of the budgetary 

cuts that we’re seeing from a government that’s really put 

Saskatchewan people in a challenging and precarious 

circumstance by way of their mismanagement of our public 

finances; when I say their mismanagement, the Sask Party 

government’s mismanagement of our public finances, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

So we have questions that remain and exist as it relates to Bill 

12, the changes put forward to The Coroners Act and making 

sure that this piece of legislation and then the impact back into 

the processes of a coroner’s request is in the best interest of 

Saskatchewan people. So we’ll go about our work, as we do, 

consulting the stakeholders that are engaged and that 

understand the impacts of this work. And we’ll make sure that 

we’re listening to Saskatchewan people on this front. 

 

As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that we have to be so 

diligent as an opposition on this front to make sure that we’re 

providing the oversight that often hasn’t occurred by the 

governing party, Mr. Speaker, when they put forward these 

many pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker. But we’ve learned in 

very short order that that’s an important requirement of the 

opposition and something that this, a responsibility that this 

government unfortunately doesn’t take very seriously as it 

relates to consulting stakeholders. And that’s as it relates to 

certainly education where you see all sorts of changes 

occurring, Mr. Speaker, with no consultation with partners in 

co-governance across the education sector. And of course 

certainly we’ve seen that on other pieces of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, where in some cases, Mr. Speaker, we have actually 

seen legislation that was put together in such a reckless and 

foolhardy fashion, Mr. Speaker, that’s been ruled 

unconstitutional, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we as the official opposition in our roles as respective critics 

will take very seriously our role to undertake the proper review 

and scrutiny of legislation put forward by that government. 

Certainly as it relates to Bill No. 12 we have questions for the 

minister, but we also have questions for stakeholders. And we 

have questions about why this service that was provided once to 

all individuals and provided in all circumstances is now going 

to be something that a family, for example a grieving family, 

will have to pay for, as I understand the legislative changes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In some ways this foreshadows, I believe, many of the 

concerning budgetary cuts that have been signalled by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. And I know it’s a concern to 

Saskatchewan people, as they look forward into their own lives 

but also into the plans of this government, how the programs 

and services that they find important to their lives, Mr. Speaker, 

how they’re going to be impacted by this reckless government, 

Mr. Speaker. Is there going to be cuts inside the classroom, Mr. 

Speaker? Is it going to be reductions in community school 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

services, Mr. Speaker? Is it reductions as it relates to, in this 

case, how we deal with evidence in coroner’s inquests, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

What we hope to not see is a theme, but unfortunately we do 

see a theme in so many areas, Mr. Speaker, whether it is in 

housing programs or in Education or in Health, Mr. Speaker, 

where we see the consequences of fiscal mismanagement of this 

government directly bearing an impact on Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. And we have a Premier right now that is 

over in Ireland on the taxpayers’ dime, who just before he left 

talked about the fact that Saskatchewan people are going to 

have to brace themselves for budget cuts. 

 

So we have a lot of information, a lot of questions that we have, 

both of this minister on this piece of legislation just to make 

sure that the proper consultation has occurred, to make sure that 

the changes are not going to be detrimental to Saskatchewan 

people. And then of course, Mr. Speaker, we have so other 

questions of ministers up and down those rows, Mr. Speaker, as 

it relates to this broader theme of budget cuts resulting from 

financial mismanagement. 

 

But at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, we will engage in our 

thoughtful consideration of this piece of legislation. We will 

certainly look forward to further committee processes, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s been my pleasure to enter discussion here this 

evening. At this point in time, I move adjournment of Bill No. 

12, The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 12, The Court Officials Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 13 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 13 — The 

Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les 

questions constitutionnelles be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess 

it’s time for my evening constitutional. 

 

Bill No. 13, The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011 again 

provides a bit of a clarification if you will. It’s a new bilingual 

Act as iterated in both official languages, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s interesting that it comes forward at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, given that this is the very day when we’ve seen action 

on the constitutional front in the province of Saskatchewan, 

wherein the Government of Saskatchewan of course has . . . 

having been ruled unconstitutional — in the case of Bill No. 5 

in stripping away the rights of workers — by Justice Dennis 

Ball in his ruling of February 6th of this past month, that the 

Government of Saskatchewan of course has seen fit to appeal 

the constitutionality of Bill No. 5 and the way that it attacks 

workers’ rights, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that we’d be 

participating in another front procedurally on the question of 

constitution and what it means. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, rising in this Chamber, when it 

comes to this constitution, and serving as I do, having the 

honour to serve as the member of the Legislative Assembly for 

the riding of Regina-Elphinstone, wherein one of my 

predecessors was the now departed Allan Blakeney, Mr. 

Speaker, and the role that Mr. Blakeney, along with many 

others of course played in the patriation of the constitution and 

serving as a modern-day father of Confederation, Mr. Speaker. 

Also the role that then Attorney General Roy Romanow, former 

premier of the province — went on of course to be the premier 

of the province, and at the time the member for Riversdale — 

the role that people like Blakeney and Romanow, and also then 

Deputy Minister Howard Leeson for Intergovernmental Affairs, 

people like John White, the role that they played in the 

patriation of the Constitution. That of course, following on the 

constitutional battles and talks of the ’70s, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting to rise in a debate about the Constitution. 

 

I guess the contribution is made out of Saskatchewan, I like to 

think, of the Quebec secession reference that was made to the 

Supreme Court in 1998. And Saskatchewan of course was an 

intervenor in those proceedings. There’s a great line about 

Canada and how constitutions come together to represent the 

wishes of the people or the fact of the people. There’s a line in 

that intervention from then Deputy Minister of Justice John 

White wherein he wrote the threads of a thousand acts of 

accommodation or the fabric of a nation. It’s an elegant and 

eloquent comment on what it is to be a nation, Mr. Speaker, and 

the role that a constitution plays within that. 

 

Of course the Quebec succession reference, Mr. Speaker, refers 

to the overall constitution and the terms by which one of the 

provinces, in that case Quebec, might seek to separate the 

clarification that was brought to that process by the subsequent 

Clarity Act. All of these things are actions that the province of 

Saskatchewan impacted mildly, Mr. Speaker, and certainly 

given the history of this province and the history, not just 

engaged in but made by people like Blakeney and Romanow, 

it’s certainly for myself something that informs my headspace 

when I come to a question like The Constitutional Questions 

Act of 2011.  

 

And it’s also something that comes to mind again on a day like 

today when the government of Saskatchewan having been ruled 

unconstitutional when it came to Bill 5 and the attack that it 

represents on workers’ rights by Justice Dennis Ball, again I 

believe, head of the Labour Relations Board in the 1980s under 

the then Grant Devine Progressive Conservative government. 

That Justice Dennis Ball found this to be an attack on the rights 

of workers and unconstitutional, I think says a lot about the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll see where that winds up and 

the government has certainly availed themselves of the options 

open to them under the legislation. 

 

But again we can be, I guess, at once thankful that we live in a 

country like Canada with a Charter of Rights and Freedoms 

where rights of workers are constitutionally guaranteed. But we 

are reminded that those rights come with a cost of eternal 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

vigilance, Mr. Speaker, and the need to continually safeguard 

those rights, not just in our legislatures but as the case requires 

in the courts of the land. And this provincial government having 

been ruled unconstitutional has sought to take this to the higher 

courts. So be it, Mr. Speaker, but that fight will go on. And that 

they have been ruled unconstitutional in this, what represents an 

attack on the rights of workers and especially for something 

that was presented as fair and balanced labour legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, the irony of it is self-evident. And this is a fight that is 

not over and will be carried out on down the line. 

 

[20:45] 

 

As it relates to Bill No. 13 specifically, The Constitutional 

Questions Act, it arises from an ongoing sort of review that the 

government undertakes of various pieces of legislation. 

Certainly a number of the things that are sought to be 

accomplished in this legislation are in the order of clarification 

and to make sure that extra judicial or separate judicial 

proceedings aren’t required to resolve judicial proceedings 

themselves. So you know, in and of themselves, that’s not 

exactly earth-shattering or something to stop the presses about, 

Mr. Speaker, but should hopefully be helpful in terms of 

providing a clarification to the process and ensuring that where 

there is uncertainty and doubt that may give rise to a further 

protest of the proceedings that would arise under The 

Constitutional Questions Act, that there might be some 

certainty given there and that the process not become a point 

itself but rather that the questions of law be first and foremost. 

 

The current Act gives the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

the power to refer any constitutional or legal . . . 

[question] to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal for its 

opinion. The opinion of the Court of Appeal is considered 

to be a judgment for purposes of an appeal to the Supreme 

Court . . . 

 

I quote there from the second reading speech of the Minister of 

Justice from December 13th. And again, what the Bill attempts 

to do through a number of amendments is to clarify what 

happens following such a reference. The status of the parties, 

who is granted intervenor status, who is granted status of the 

full party, who needs to be notified, these are things that are 

further clarified under the legislation. 

 

So again, there are some fine legal minds on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll await their intervention in this 

debate on Bill No. 13, The Constitutional Questions Act with 

certain interest and will certainly . . . You know, from an 

intergovernmental perspective, from a legal constitutional 

perspective, what’s the broader sort of impact of this 

legislation? But on its face or prima facie, Mr. Speaker — if I 

can use such an expression in a question considering a piece of 

legislation — on its face, it seeks to clarify a number of the 

proceedings under The Constitutional Questions Act and as 

such it seems to be more helpful than harmful. But again I 

guess I’ll retain my right to seek a second opinion on this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again I’m entering into this debate on a piece of legislation that 

relates to constitutional questions on this day when the 

government of Saskatchewan has sought to appeal a decision 

whereby they were judged to be unconstitutional when it came 

to an attack they had made on the rights of workers. I guess I 

underline that, Mr. Speaker, both in connection to the proud 

history that we have as relates to this province. The first Bill of 

Rights that was introduced provincially in 1947 by the then 

Tommy Douglas government, the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation, one of the drafters of that particular piece of 

legislation was a gentleman named Frank Scott, long-time dean 

of law at the McGill law school and certainly someone whose 

thoughts and ideals on charters of rights and freedoms and 

constitutions was seen to be realized in 1982 through the work 

of one of his one-time pupils, Pierre Elliott Trudeau. 

 

So this is a province where we’ve had the first Bill of Rights in 

1947. This is a province that sent John Diefenbaker to the 

House of Commons where he sought to bring in the federal Bill 

of Rights, the precursor of course to the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. But it of course was not enshrined in the 

Constitution and was therefore somewhat less robust, less of a 

North Star for a country than what was achieved in 1982. And 

then of course again, Mr. Speaker, the role that Saskatchewan 

played in the patriation of the Constitution and the 

establishment of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

So we look at this piece of legislation with its attempts at 

housekeeping and clarification. We think that is helpful but we 

think that the broader sort of debate around the constitution and 

its meaning and the attitude of this government when it comes 

to the defence of that constitution and the respect that a 

government should have for the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. We think that the appeal that was launched today 

speaks much more loudly about that government’s attitudes 

towards questions of rights and freedoms under the Charter or 

the constitution than this piece of legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am very interested to hear what my 

colleagues have to say on this piece of legislation, and in that 

regard I will thereby conclude my remarks in this debate and 

move to adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 13, The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 14 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 14 — The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise to speak 

to this Bill, The Securities Amendment Act, 2011. The Securities 

Act was introduced in Saskatchewan in 1988, and this is a series 

of changes to the existing Act that the government is proposing. 

 

From the minister’s comments when it was first introduced, we 

understand that the first goal of this Bill is to permit financial 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

advisers to conduct their business through a professional 

corporation, and he stated that this privilege is enjoyed by many 

other professions in the province, and it will allow people to 

make better succession and tax planning decisions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The minister stated that Saskatchewan has taken a lead role by 

introducing this legislation and that other provinces are 

considering similar amendments. We will be sure to look into 

the other provinces and how they are considering to amend 

their securities legislation and whether they’re following the 

same path as the minister is here. Sometimes we need to 

understand that professional corporations and the establishment 

of professional corporations comes with certain prices, Mr. 

Speaker, that need to be carefully considered as they create a 

certain eliteness around their operations that can exclude other 

people from conducting the same type of business. So those are 

things that we will be looking at in the development of this Bill. 

 

The second thing the minister has stated is that it will grant 

powers to audit oversight organizations such as the Canadian 

Public Accountability Board. We know that audits are 

complicated, and particularly in this day and age when things 

can be hidden very carefully and cleverly through electronic 

manipulation of data, that it’s difficult to have clarity around a 

lot of audits. And he’s stating that the auditor oversight 

organizations perform a key role in the financial services sector 

as they ensure information made available to investors and the 

general public are reliable and of high quality. And that’s 

certainly a tall order, Mr. Speaker, for audit oversight 

organizations to be able to do, when the complexity of auditing 

and financial accountability is such these days that it’s very 

difficult to monitor properly. I am not sure whether the 

amendments as being proposed here will allow Saskatchewan 

to be able to do that with any better ability than our 

counterparts in other provinces, but we will certainly be 

watching that as it goes along. 

 

He goes on to say that the amendments will provide these 

organizations, the auditor oversight organizations, with a 

statutory power to compel disclosure of documents and records 

from accounting firms that audit publicly traded companies. 

And I think this is a very good addition to the securities 

legislation because it ensures that disclosure is required and 

people can be compelled to disclose. We have certainly seen 

disasters in our neighbour to the south where disclosure didn’t 

always happen and a lot of people where hurt in the process 

financially. 

 

Again the minister stated that other provinces are planning to 

implement these amendments if they haven’t already done so. 

So that is something that we will take the time to ensure and 

review as this Bill progresses through the legislature. 

 

The next statement he made in his introductory comments was 

that the amendments would ensure that officials of auditor 

oversight organizations can’t be subpoenaed or are otherwise 

compelled to disclose privileged and/or confidential 

information in third party proceedings. It’s not clear to me why 

that they would be given that opportunity to be protected from 

subpoena and that is something that I will be looking to some of 

the experts in the area on more clarification on and perhaps get 

some clarification from the minister on that because it seems 

unusual to give them an ability to compel disclosure and yet be 

protected from subpoena. So this is an interesting part of this 

proposed legislation that I think requires some further 

examination. 

 

The minister goes on to talk about credit rating organizations 

and their role of providing information on creditworthiness of 

particular securities and financial obligations of particular 

companies. I agree totally that the importance of these opinions 

to investors and other market participants and their influence on 

the securities markets have increased significantly over the past 

decade. Again because of the complexities of the securities 

area, it’s not something the ordinary lay person has a good 

understanding of, and it’s very difficult to understand. So the 

layers of understanding are . . . People who are investing are 

relying more and more on these types of organizations to give 

them good advice and reliable advice. And as the minister 

pointed out, it’s due in part to the increased number of issuers 

and the advent of new and complex financial products. 

Certainly this is something that I struggle with understanding, 

and I think a lot of people are in the same boat as I am. 

 

The minister spoke about the suffering of losses in the stock 

market in 2008, and his statement is that many investors 

purchased asset-backed securities and other investments that 

were tied to these sub-prime mortgages that were extremely 

unstable. And, Mr. Speaker, I was reading an article today from 

Maclean’s magazine, and they talked a little bit about how 

Canada is starting to progress down the same, the same path. 

And there’s some very serious concerns about what’s 

happening in Canada that actually reflect what happened in the 

United States. 

 

One of the quotes from the magazine says that one really 

terrible narrative that we’ve allowed to develop is that Canada 

is somehow better than the US [United States] when it comes to 

the mortgage situation. Everybody points out . . . This is a quote 

from David Madani who’s a former Bank of Canada analyst. 

And he says: 

 

Everybody points out the differences in the U.S., about 

financial regulations and subprime mortgages. But [he 

says] to me this is all a borderline attempt to misdirect the 

whole debate because we’re engaging in that type of 

discussion and only that discussion. It ignores the . . . 

elephants in the room. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the elephants that Madani identifies are 

these. First of all, a sharp run-up in house prices compared to 

income. He states the average Canadian home now costs five 

times the average income, well above the multiple of three that 

is considered acceptable. He goes on to say that there’s “a sharp 

rise in home ownership rates, which at about 68 per cent of 

Canadians mirrors . . . the 69 per cent at the top of the U.S. 

bubble.” 

 

He said, “The biggest elephant of all is how much the boom has 

been fuelled by cheap and abundant credit thanks to a low 

interest rate policy pursued by the Bank of Canada, along with 

government-insured mortgages.” And the article goes on at 

length about those two particular things. 

 

Another quote from the article, from TD Economics chief 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

economist Craig Alexander. He says: 

 

Low interest rates are like a drug. The low interest rates 

are encouraging people to buy houses and take on debt. 

When they’re unhooked from that drug, they’re going to 

have to be unhooked very gradually because going cold 

turkey is going to hurt them. 

 

Madani, the economist I referred to formerly, he says that the 

Canadian housing market has already hit a wall. 

“Overconfidence is what’s driving the market. It’s been fuelled 

by cheap credit. That just can’t keep going on forever,” he says. 

“I think it’s going to end badly.” 

 

[21:00] 

 

So that’s the views of the economists on Bay Street. 

 

[But] getting back to normal interest rates of 3 to 4 per 

cent becomes increasingly difficult the longer interest 

rates stay low. Carney may be caught between trying to 

boost employment by getting businesses to spend their 

unused capital and trying to stop consumers from digging 

themselves into a hole. 

 

But our economist from the TD Economics, he goes on to say 

that “an interest rate hike of two percentage points would push 

10 per cent of Canadians into danger territory where they would 

be spending upwards of 40 per cent of their income on debt 

payments.” And he says, “The economy is very sensitive to 

shocks.” 

 

I don’t think we are immune here in Saskatchewan either. But 

they go on to say at the end of the article that mortgage rates are 

especially vulnerable and that it may be too late for the 

discussion. 

 

As the U.S. showed in 2005 [the article states] no matter 

how loud the alarm bells and how long they have been 

ringing, a housing crash always comes as a surprise to the 

people paying the mortgage. 

 

And the article closes by quoting John McCallum, who says, 

“The thing with household debt is it’s not a problem until it’s a 

problem. But when it becomes a problem, it’s usually a really 

big problem.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Securities 

Amendment Act are looking at ensuring that credit ratings and 

market turndowns won’t be affected by unstable mortgage 

markets, and unfortunately I think Maclean’s magazine is 

pointing out that we may already be there. So this Bill is 

building on something that may already be too late. So this is 

something that we are going to have to watch as we go through. 

 

The minister also identified concerns that credit rating 

organizations have relied on flawed methodologies to determine 

these ratings. And many investments failed as a result of it, and 

then there was a serious negative impact on the people with 

retirement savings and pensions and other long-term 

investments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just to look a little bit at the actual provisions 

of the Bill itself, there’s a whole section of new definitions, 

including things like auditor oversight organizations, and this is 

a whole section in the proposed Bill called recognition of 

entities. This is a fairly complex change to the Act, to an 

increasingly complex area and a very complex Act to begin 

with, so these are things that we will need to take a close look at 

to ensure that it reflects the needs of people like me and my 

neighbours and my community, and to ensure that their 

investments are properly reflected and protected by these 

changes to The Securities Act. 

 

Some of the things the minister’s proposing to get rid of are 

things like the insiders of income trusts, and his explanation is 

that it’s contained already in a national instrument so that it’s 

no longer required provincially. We’ll take a look at that. 

There’s an interesting provision in section 15, the 

confidentiality of the Act, and what the proposal is that the new 

definition will narrow the current section 15 to address a 

decision of the British Columbia Court of Appeal which struck 

down an equivalent provision in their Act. So I guess it’s 

interesting to see that they’re worried about British Columbia’s 

Court of Appeal decisions. I’m thinking that we will be seeing a 

similar decision from our Court of Appeal now on the essential 

services legislation, and I’m hoping that if indeed the appeal is 

not successful, that the government won’t want to proceed to 

the Supreme Court, that they will respect the decision of the 

Court of Appeal as it comes down to see whether they protect 

the freedom of association that’s been established in 1982 as a 

right of all Canadians in our Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

So we’ll be watching that closely for sure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another part of the Act that is being added, I believe, is part V, 

self-regulation, and it’s a fairly long part that’s being installed 

in the Act. It’s new, according to the explanatory notes, and it 

updates provisions relating to the recognition of entities. I’m 

always concerned about self-regulatory type provisions in 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, because it’s putting the fox in the 

chicken house. When organizations are given the right to 

regulate themselves — and I think we’re going to see that in the 

new changes in the environment Act in Saskatchewan — that 

the impetus for enforcement and maintenance of these types of 

provisions, when left to the proponent or the organization itself, 

the incentive is taken away to be vigilant about those things and 

that often it can be overlooked and perhaps neglected. And so 

those are some of the concerns that we have about this type of 

parts in this particular Bill and in other Bills as well. 

 

They do give the commission, the new provisions give the 

commission the power to recognize auditor oversight 

organizations and quotation and trade reporting systems and 

clearing agencies — all very complex organizations in the 

securities world, Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of provisions in this 

new section 5, and I won’t go through them all tonight. I’m sure 

that at some point some of my colleagues may want to address 

some of those as well. The rest of the Bill, as identified by the 

minister in his introductory comments, is dealing with some 

housekeeping items that I think will provide some clarity for 

the securities people and the people that use this Bill. One other 

final comment about the changes is the removal of $100,000 

limit on the amount of financial compensation that the Financial 

Services Commission can award to individuals who have 

suffered financial loss. I think this is a welcome improvement 

to the Bill. 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

Certainly people that are hurt by misleading information and 

mismanagement of credit rating organizations or using poor 

methodologies is something that individuals shouldn’t have to 

suffer through, nor should individuals have to suffer through 

mismanagement of mortgage schemes that are set up for the 

benefit of the banks and not of the people. 

 

So those types of things are things I think that are welcome, and 

it protects individuals who are the vulnerable ones in these 

types of situations. So I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, the 

complexities of this area are great and the impact on individuals 

can also be great. So it requires vigilance, and I think the intent 

of that is to provide this kind of vigilance. We’re not sure that 

it’s striking the mark entirely, and certainly I’m sure my 

colleagues on this side of the House will want to make further 

comment on that. 

 

So on that basis, I would like to move to adjourn this Bill and 

pass on the mike. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved adjournment of Bill No. 14, The Securities Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 15 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 15 — The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased tonight to enter the discussion on 

Bill No. 15, An Act to Amend The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Act or UBAS as the minister had 

referred to it. 

 

I just want to talk a little bit about what this Bill proposes to do, 

Mr. Speaker, some of the minister’s comments and what he’s 

outlined this Bill is expected to do. So currently through The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Act, right now 

the province adopts the national building code as the minimum 

standard of construction applicable to new buildings and the 

renovation of existing buildings throughout the province. 

 

So municipalities right now are required to administer and 

enforce the standards. But this isn’t the case for farm buildings, 

including one- and two-unit dwellings or houses on farms. So if 

a rural municipality wishes to apply building standards to farm 

buildings within their jurisdiction, they have to pass a 

resolution stating this. Then they have to request that the 

government authorize the application of the building standard 

for farm buildings. And then finally, the government must pass 

a regulation allowing them to apply these standards. So no such 

provision exists for cities, towns, villages, or resort villages to 

apply building standards to farm buildings. 

 

So to speed up the process and to provide all the municipalities 

with the autonomy to apply building standards to farm 

buildings within their jurisdiction, the new subsection 7(3) will 

remove the need for the province to pass a regulation each time 

a rural municipality wishes to apply these building standards 

and extend the same authority to other municipalities, but this 

doesn’t change the requirement that municipalities still have to 

submit their bylaw for ministerial approval. 

 

So on the face of it, Mr. Speaker, this sounds like a reasonable 

thing. The minister pointed out that he’s had people contact his 

ministry, farm families actually, who want to ensure that their 

homes and other buildings are built or renovated to the same 

standards as in the non-farming community, so that makes 

perfect sense, Mr. Speaker. We all need to ensure that we all 

have acceptable standards for our homes and buildings. 

 

I actually would like to chat a little bit about the National 

Building Code under which the province runs the building 

codes. I’d like to talk a little bit about the building codes. So the 

2010 National Building Code is an objective-based code format 

in which all the requirements are linked to one or more of the 

following objectives. They have to be linked to safety, health, 

accessibility, fire, and structural protection of buildings. 

 

So under safety, one of the objectives is to limit the probability 

that as a result of the design or construction of the building, the 

person in or adjacent to the building will be exposed to an 

unacceptable risk of injury due to fire. You will find actually in 

many of these National Building Code objectives, fire safety is 

mentioned throughout them. But the interesting thing, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve seen in some of our newer communities 

because of building materials and because of close proximity of 

houses, when one house catches fire, it’s not long before the 

next house catches fire. And I’ve had an opportunity to speak 

with firefighters who have some concerns that actually even the 

National Building Code needs to change to reflect some of 

these issues or concerns around building standards. 

 

Also under safety, a second objective is structural safety to limit 

the probability that as a result of the design or construction, a 

person in or adjacent to the building will be exposed to an 

unacceptable risk of injury to structural failure. It also addresses 

safety and use, that as a result of the designer construction of 

the building, a person in the building or adjacent to it will be 

exposed to an unacceptable risk of injury due to hazards. It also 

talks about resistance to unwanted entry. So the National 

Building Code, one of its objectives is that as a result of the 

designer construction of the building, a person in that building 

will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of injury due to the 

building’s low level of resistance to unwanted entry. 

 

They also talk about the safety at construction and demolition 

sites to ensure that . . . to limit the probability that, as a result of 

the construction or demolition of the building, the public 

adjacent to a construction or demolition site will be exposed to 

an unacceptable risk of injury due to hazards. 

 

Under health, the goal is to limit the probability that a person in 

the building will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of illness 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

due to indoor conditions. We also have sanitation. That goal is 

to limit the probability that a person in the building will be 

exposed to an unacceptable risk of illness due to unsanitary 

conditions. So, as you see, this building code is quite far 

reaching Mr. Speaker, or sweeping. 

 

So another one of the objectives is to limit the probability that a 

person in the building will be exposed to an unacceptable risk 

of illness due to high levels of sound originating in adjacent 

spaces in the building. 

 

A fourth objective under health is to limit the probability that, 

as a result of the design or construction of the building, a person 

in the building will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of illness 

due to high levels of vibration or deflection of building 

elements. 

 

Number five under health. I think it’s really important to 

understand how our building standards here are informed, Mr. 

Speaker, so this is why I’m walking us all through this list. 

Number five here under health, an objective of the National 

Building Code is to limit the probability that the public will be 

exposed to an unacceptable risk of illness due to the release of 

hazardous substances from the building. 

 

And in terms of accessibility, accessibility is addressed under 

the National Building Code, Mr. Speaker. So under 

accessibility, the goal is to ensure that we limit the probability a 

person with a physical or sensory limitation will be 

unacceptably impeded from accessing the building or 

circulating within it. And as well under accessibility, one of the 

other objectives is to limit the probability a person with a 

physical or sensory limitation will be unacceptably impeded 

from using the building’s facilities. The last thing we want is to 

limit the opportunity of people with varied abilities in their 

opportunity to access our public buildings, Mr. Speaker, or the 

buildings in which we call home as well. 

 

[21:15] 

 

And the last piece here around the National Building Code 

actually is the fire instructional protection of buildings. As I 

mentioned a few minutes ago there’s a big piece here on fire 

safety, Mr. Speaker. So under fire protection of the building, 

one of the objectives of this code is to limit the probability the 

building will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of damage due 

to fire. 

 

A second is that we want to limit the probability that the 

building, or part thereof, will be exposed to an unacceptable 

risk of damage or loss due to structural failure or lack of 

structural serviceability. 

 

A third piece, Mr. Speaker, is the protection of adjacent 

buildings from fire. We want to limit the probability that 

adjacent buildings will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of 

damage due to fire. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the fourth objective is, under fire and 

structural protection of buildings, is to limit the probability that 

adjacent buildings will be exposed to an unacceptable risk of 

structural damage. 

 

So that is basically the objectives of the National Building Code 

of Canada which our Bill actually . . . which is being amended 

right now, Bill No. 15, The Uniform Building and Accessibility 

Standards Act refers to or defers to actually, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the minister’s notes, he did talk about how, as I mentioned 

earlier, he had heard from many people in the farming 

community that their homes and other buildings should be up to 

the same code as everybody else here in Saskatchewan. So 

there’s been some consultation or some feedback there. As well 

he wraps up his speech or he wrapped up his speech, Mr. 

Speaker, by saying that the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities has been consulted on this amendment and has 

confirmed its support for that amendment. 

 

So that’s great to hear, Mr. Speaker. On this side of the House, 

we’re big believers that when you’re creating any kind of 

public policy, it should be in fact connected to people’s 

realities. So if you’re making, say a child care policy, Mr. 

Speaker — and we’re talking about any policy here — it’s so 

important to consult. So if you’re creating child care policy, Mr. 

Speaker, you should talk to child care providers. You should 

talk to educators. You should talk to families. You should talk 

to people who are impacted by the legislation or the policy that 

you’re proposing, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely imperative that 

when you’re creating public policy, if you want it to be 

effective, you need to ensure that you’ve connected with people 

who are impacted by this policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say that this government has not been 

stellar in that regard. We can look to Bill 5. Recently we’ve 

heard the Court of Queen’s Bench has ruled Bill 5 

unconstitutional. We can look to an Act that passed last 

legislative session, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. There 

was no consultation with First Nations and Métis people and all 

kinds of other communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Consultation is absolutely imperative when you’re creating 

public policy — and not consultation after the fact — and real 

and meaningful consultation, Mr. Speaker, which isn’t always 

easy to do. There is many groups who don’t . . . You might run 

an ad in the paper and say, if you’re interested in this, come out 

and speak. But the whole goal of consultation, when you think 

about participatory democracy, it’s about you going out as a 

government and with your bureaucrats and making sure that 

you’re doing the work to engage with citizens and groups who 

know something about the policy that you’re proposing. That’s 

absolutely imperative. 

 

We could look to maybe another piece of legislation that’s 

before us right now, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about 

consultation. I have to say, like I said I’m glad to hear that the 

government has consulted with SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] and with some individuals, 

but there is usually a broader field that you can pursue in terms 

of getting feedback. 

 

So I’d like to talk about another piece of legislation that this 

government hasn’t consulted on, and that would be The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act. I want to know and 

this side of the House wants to know with whom the 

government has spoken about the need to add three more 

MLAs, Mr. Speaker. So consultation is the most important 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

thing, we believe, in creating public policy when you want to 

ensure you are addressing real issues impacting real people but 

you’re also thinking about unintended consequences. 

 

We have all sat around tables, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, we’ve all 

sat around tables, Mr. Speaker, where maybe someone new 

comes to the table. We’ve had a little bit of groupthink, or 

we’ve all been talking about the same thing, and we’re all on 

the same page. And then someone new comes to that table and 

says, hey, did you ever think about that? And I think, yes, yes, 

you know what? That’s true; I hadn’t thought about that. And it 

amazes me actually, Mr. Speaker. So some of these . . . In my 

short time in this Legislative Assembly, just over two years, 

when we as opposition review these Bills that come before us 

— and we have the opportunity to take them out and consult 

and try to connect with organizations who will be impacted — 

and when you first look at a Bill, you think, there’s not too 

much too this. It maybe isn’t that big of a deal, or maybe this is 

just housekeeping. But then someone will raise an issue that 

you think, that’s a really good point. So again, Mr. Speaker, 

consultation and real and meaningful consultation is absolutely 

imperative.  

 

This is a Bill, Mr. Speaker, about building standards for 

renovations and new buildings so . . . You know what? I 

actually want to talk a little bit more about consultation — 

sorry, Mr. Speaker — as this is one of my favourite pet topics 

actually, Mr. Speaker. So again, again the ministry has spoken 

to farm families, and they said they’ve spoken to SARM. But it 

might be helpful to find out, did they speak to First Nations and 

Métis people? Have they spoken to people on a reserve who are 

facing huge housing issues? That’s what I’d like to know. Has 

the government engaged with people other than First Nations 

and Métis people . . . or pardon me. Has the government 

engaged with a broad range of people? They’ve left out First 

Nations and Métis people out of this equation. And that’s, as 

one of my colleagues pointed out, that would be a first for this 

government. 

 

My point around building standards, Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill 

about building standards. I know in my own constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to tour houses in my own 

constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale where people are living 

in derelict conditions. These are older houses, so the new 

building part doesn’t necessarily apply. But when it comes to 

the renovation part, making sure that when contractors and 

people are coming in that renovations are done to the best 

possible standards is absolutely important, absolutely critical. 

I’ve toured houses, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency. One in 

particular stands out. Standing in the second floor of this house, 

Mr. Speaker, and there was a giant hole in the floor. You could 

see through to the main floor. There was no toilet, no 

operational toilet in this house, Mr. Speaker. The family living 

in this house was using a bucket. So building standards and fire 

and safety standards are really, really important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Housing, while I’m on the topic of housing, housing is a really 

pressing topic. So we have farm families here saying that they 

want to make sure that their houses are up to the same standards 

as everyone else’s. And that is absolutely fair and right, and we 

should be pursuing that. But when it comes to housing, Mr. 

Speaker, housing is close to absolutely everything. If you don’t 

have a good roof over your heads, how do you go to school? 

How do you attend work on a regular basis? How do you make 

sure you raise happy, healthy, secure families? And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would argue — and I can tell you from the casework 

that comes into my constituency — that housing is top of mind 

for most people here in this province. There’s not a day that 

goes by that someone doesn’t come in who can’t afford to rent 

a house; they have to move because they haven’t been able to 

pay rent. They are living in substandard conditions. 

 

This is, with respect to Bill 15, a point around substandard 

conditions. We have many people living in substandard 

conditions because they’re too afraid to raise the issue of the 

kind of living conditions they’re in because there’s nothing else 

out there. The availability of housing is so scarce that people 

are willing to live in a house or an apartment that is derelict and 

run down because they have no other options. People in 

Saskatchewan are our best resource, and we should be treating 

them with more respect then they do. I know that there are 

many people concerned that this government’s housing strategy 

is not meeting people’s needs today — not six months down the 

road, not two years down the road. The housing crisis is 

something that needs to be addressed today. And there’s all 

kinds of different ways of doing that, Mr. Speaker, but this Bill 

is talking about building standards, Bill No. 15. 

 

And so as I’ve said, I’m glad that the minister has heard from 

people around the necessity for this Bill, and the opposition will 

do its due diligence and still continue to reach out and talk to 

people and see if others have any other concerns or pressing 

issues around this Bill. As I’ve said, at face value it seems like 

it’s a very reasonable proposal, but we will continue to do our 

due diligence. We will continue to do our due diligence to 

ensure that no piece is being missed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with that I know that I will have colleagues 

who will also want to enter into debate on this particular topic. 

So with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 15, The 

Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 16 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 16 — The 

Correctional Services Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure at this 

hour to join in on the debate around Bill No. 16, The 

Correctional Services Act, 2011. For individuals who are 

following at home or reading in Hansard at a later date, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister responsible for this piece of legislation 

did the second reading speech on December 13th, 2011, where 

there are remarks made outlining many of the aspects of this 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

piece of legislation and the implications that it will have for the 

issue of corrections here in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is a fairly extensive piece, 

having had the opportunity to read through it as well as to look 

at the minister’s remarks and to look at some of the explanatory 

notes associated with the Bill. It’s a substantial piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, and a piece of legislation that has such 

an important relevance and input and influence on a very 

important part of what occurs in correctional facilities here in 

the province deserves close attention and deserves the proper 

kind of scrutiny in order to ensure that the approach being taken 

is a wise approach, is one that is forward thinking, and one that 

has the best interests of all of Saskatchewan in mind. 

 

And when I say that, Mr. Speaker, I am thinking of a few 

different components of the province, and I think it’s important 

to ensure that the legislation serves a number of interests. It’s 

important that it meets our communities’ needs. As someone 

who represents a number of neighbourhoods in Saskatoon, the 

issues of safety, issues of crime are something that are raised 

with me on a fairly regular basis. And I’ve had many 

discussions with constituents about incidents that have occurred 

— how they’ve been affected, how that influences some of their 

views of the world, and how things are going. It really affects 

their safety, Mr. Speaker, and their sense of security. 

 

I think as many members here in the Assembly would think 

about door knocking when it’s getting dark or shortly after 

dark, and I know that there’s been more than one instance 

where, you know, after ringing the doorbell, you can tell 

someone’s inside but you know that they’re just maybe not 

quite comfortable coming to the door and having a conversation 

with you because they’re not sure who is on the other side. So I 

give that little example, Mr. Speaker, because it demonstrates 

the importance of the issue, of corrections, and the issues of 

security in our communities. 

 

And it has a big effect on people in terms of how they structure 

their days, how they live out their life, but more the 

psychological mindset that people have — whether they feel 

secure in their homes and secure in their communities, whether 

they feel part of the community, or do they feel like they need 

to be withdrawn and in their homes. So when looking at a piece 

of legislation about corrections, one area to consider, Mr. 

Speaker, certainly is the issue . . . the Saskatchewan 

communities, individuals who are living out in homes, on 

streets, and want to be safe. 

 

[21:30] 

 

When looking at a piece of legislation dealing with corrections, 

it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to look at the people working 

in the system, men and women who work in correctional 

facilities doing their best to keep individuals in the facility safe, 

keep themselves safe, and keep the community safe. And I can 

think of attending, over the years, attending different 

ceremonies where these people are recognized, medals are 

given out, long service awards, those types of things. And many 

people devote their working career to the job of working in 

correctional facilities, and it’s an important job. It’s a very 

difficult job. It has its challenges. It has its rewards. And I think 

it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to look at the piece of legislation 

on corrections through their eyes as well and see how the 

changes can affect how they do their jobs and how effective 

they can be in doing their jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know many individuals also working in 

correctional facilities want to do the best that they can in terms 

of enabling the best rehabilitation possible with offenders. And 

the goal, Mr. Speaker, is that when someone leaves a 

correctional facility, that they’re less likely to perform another 

criminal act than more likely. And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, 

that’s not always the case in our experience with corrections 

here in the province. But I know that’s the desire of correctional 

workers. I would hope that’s the desire of members opposite. I 

would assume it is. It’s a pretty common sense idea, and I think 

it’s an approach, Mr. Speaker, that all people of whatever 

political stripe would strive towards in order to have a stronger 

and safer society. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s the . . . When looking at a piece of 

legislation to do with corrections, it’s important to look at it 

from the community perspective. It’s important to look at it 

from the perspective of correctional officers. And, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s important to look at it from the perspective of the inmate, 

the perspective of the individual who has done a crime, has 

been convicted, or has agreed that he or she was responsible for 

something and is spending time in a correctional facility. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I say it’s also important to look at it, the 

legislation, through their eyes because, as I said in my earlier 

comments about the desire of correctional officers to have a 

better outcome for people at the end, I know for many inmates 

in correctional facilities it’s their desire to improve their lives 

and to break cycles of bad behaviour and turn over a new leaf 

and start again for many individuals. There are some hardened 

criminals that don’t want that, but there are many, many 

individuals who do want that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s important when looking at a piece of legislation, we 

have to ask ourselves, is this legislation improving the 

likelihood of an offender to not reoffend? Is it improving the 

likelihood of rehabilitation? Is it improving the connections and 

the ties that one has to their community and an understanding of 

empathy with other people? Is it improving their ability to be 

high functioning outside of a correctional facility, to have the 

educational opportunities they need, to have the job training 

opportunities they need? 

 

It’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that changes to legislation would 

enable that kind of change for inmates, for people in 

correctional facilities. Because I think if we are to have a better 

society, if those senior citizens that I’m thinking of living in 

their homes who are afraid to answer their doors at night, if 

young people in our schools are to feel safe and to be able to 

reach their full potential, we need to have that kind of approach, 

Mr. Speaker. We can’t simply make matters worse when people 

are spending time in correctional facilities. We must do our best 

to stop cycles of bad behaviour in order to ensure that we have 

a stronger province as a whole. 

 

In the minister’s remarks on this piece of legislation, the 

minister stated that the changes in the legislation are a result of 

an outside panel that was put together in response to an incident 

in 2008 when there were inmates who escaped from a Regina 

provincial correctional centre. And, Mr. Speaker, I am glad to 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

hear and glad to read in the minister’s second reading speech 

that the ministry utilized an external investigation team’s 

recommendations. Based on my reading of the minister’s 

speech, he doesn’t state who exactly made up this 

recommendation group. But the fact that they went outside of 

the minister’s office, I think that’s a positive thing in order to 

have the expertise and the insight from other individuals who 

are able to comment on what should be needed and what could 

be needed. 

 

That’s not to say that every recommendation might be perfect, 

but it’s the idea and at least the recognition, Mr. Speaker, that 

other people need to contribute. Because when we look at the 

track record of Sask Party ministers on the issues of corrections, 

and Sask Party members and MLAs, I think there are a number 

of troubling aspects that we’ve seen. 

 

We had one minister tell us that gangs weren’t a problem in our 

correctional facilities. And I’m not a criminologist; I’m not an 

expert on correctional facilities. But, Mr. Speaker, I do know 

that gangs are a problem in Saskatchewan and a problem in 

correctional facilities. So to have a minister make that kind of 

remark, I think, is a bit problematic. And it’s for that reason, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that when looking for advice they went 

outside of the minister’s office in that instance. 

 

We also saw, Mr. Speaker, with a different minister, when there 

was an incident of someone being, I believe it was, released 

early or when they were not supposed to and on the outside. 

And the minister got in a bit of hot water with respect to 

wanting to go after an opposition member for information or 

something like that. It was some time ago, but I do recall it was 

a problematic time for the minister because of the approach that 

the minister took in dealing with the issue. The approach that 

the minister took did not demonstrate that he had a reasonable 

approach. It indicated that he did not have a balanced approach. 

It indicated that he did not have a common reserved approach. 

But it was an approach, Mr. Speaker, that proved itself to be 

very heated. It proved to be an approach that was not 

well-thought-out and caused some problems for the minister. 

And for listeners at home that want to go back to that, they can 

go back, search through Hansard, and see the debate that 

occurred at that time. 

 

So I say that, Mr. Speaker, recognizing some of the problems 

the members opposite have had when it’s come to dealing with 

issues to do with the correctional facilities in the province. And 

when it comes to legislation, I think we have to keep that in 

mind that it is a concerning track record. 

 

We can also think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the issue of 

corrections and when we look at the issue of policing, it’s not 

long ago, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite were vocally 

calling for boot camps — an approach to, in their view, 

rehabilitate offenders, Mr. Speaker. Now admittedly in the last 

few years they’ve tempered at least publicly some of that talk, 

but I’m sure members of the caucus and maybe some of the 

members of caucus who are a bit more moderate and some of 

the others, they know the individuals in caucus and in cabinet 

who still have these views. And I think it’s still a fairly 

prominent view that many individuals on the opposite benches 

would have. 

 

And I think that’s concerning because it ties, Mr. Speaker, into 

the earlier comments I made about having an approach to 

punishment that is a good approach, an approach to punishment 

that is actually effective, an approach to punishment that is 

evidence-based and serves the interests of all of society, 

especially those that are offenders and then those that are 

working within the system, proofs that I have identified as 

being very important and that we must take into consideration 

when looking at legislation around the issue of corrections. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s remarks he identifies that 

there was an outside report based on an escape of inmates and 

that outside sources were used in making recommendations. I 

think that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, because what we’ve 

seen from Sask Party ministers are a number of troubling 

incidents when it comes to corrections such as saying gangs 

aren’t a problem in our jails, such as getting into hot water in 

the Assembly here with making actions and threats against 

other members. Not a great approach. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen from past actions, in previous 

statements on the public record, members opposite who are in 

favour of an approach that would not be the best approach for 

the rehabilitation of individuals, as the evidence would suggest, 

and as I think most people in the province would see as well. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I still have my concerns when looking at a 

piece of legislation about corrections based on another fact, 

based on another incident that has happened recently. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, has to do with the federal government’s 

legislation, the crime Bill that will increase the number of 

convictions here in the province, or I guess increase the demand 

for correctional facilities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the federal Conservatives’ crime Bill 

has come down, we’ve heard very, very little, if anything at all, 

but very, very little, Mr. Speaker, from members opposite about 

what the implications will be for our provincial correctional 

system. Not only our correctional system but also, Mr. Speaker, 

the provincial books because we know there is a high cost 

associated with correctional facilities, keeping people in 

custody. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a cost as well with dealing 

with the rehabilitation and the effects of crime, as people live in 

the communities. And what we haven’t heard from members 

opposite is any sort of voicing that the federal Conservatives 

may not have it right, that they may not have it 

well-thought-out, their approach to crime and increase in the 

number of individuals that will be going into the jails. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even if members opposite thought that was 

the correct approach from a rehabilitation perspective by having 

more people in jails, Mr. Speaker, they certainly aren’t looking 

out for Saskatchewan’s best economic interests when 

considering that the tab for incarcerating many of those 

individuals will be experienced by the provincial government. 

And we haven’t heard any sort of clear statement to the feds 

that there needs to be some consideration from a financial 

perspective to deal with the effects. 

 

It’s another speech on another day but, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

unlike the situation that we’ve seen with changes to OAS, Old 

Age Security, and how that will increase the demand and need 

for programs here provincially with the federal government’s 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

decision. But that is another topic, and I would hate to be 

accused by members opposite of being off-topic, so I will leave 

that for another evening. 

 

But when looking at corrections, Mr. Speaker, by members 

opposite, it’s not a strong track record. It’s a concerning track 

record. And it’s a track record that causes me and I know it 

causes many people on our benches, but more importantly in 

the broader public, to ask some real questions and have some 

real concerns about the approach of the Sask Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when looking at the issue of corrections, I think 

there are a number of important components to consider, a 

number of important factors to have the correct mix of, the 

correct emphasis on each of them in order to reduce the amount 

of crime in society, but also to allow victims of crime to have a 

feeling that justice has been served and that their needs and 

their concerns have been respected throughout the process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the first area of consideration is a strong 

focus on prevention, crime prevention. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

cuts to the root. I mean I think all members opposite would 

agree that it is better to deal with individuals before the crimes 

get too serious, before an individual decides to pursue a crime, 

to commit a wrong. So if we can make investments, Mr. 

Speaker, at the prevention level, reduce the demand, provide 

young people with real opportunities, provide supports to 

families so that crime is not the natural option, the natural 

choices that would seem to them, but is a less preferred option, 

Mr. Speaker, that is the best approach. 

 

So when I was going through the legislation, I didn’t see too 

much about prevention. I didn’t see too much about taking 

proactive steps. And you would think, Mr. Speaker, that, I think 

most members would agree, that prevention is important. But 

sadly, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the evidence, when it 

comes to the legislation that members opposite are introducing, 

I don’t think there’s an adequate focus on it. I don’t think 

appropriate attention has been paid to it, and I don’t think the 

appropriate resources have been devoted to the issue of 

prevention. So we’re more than happy, Mr. Speaker, based on 

federal Conservatives’ wants to increase the number of people 

in our jails, to increase the number of correctional facilities. 

We’re happy to spend money there, Mr. Speaker. But there’s 

not the proper focus at the beginning on the prevention aspect, 

and I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s short-sighted. And I think that’s a 

real deficit and something that’s lacking in this piece of 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course prevention is a key component as is 

policing. When individuals know that a crime has been 

committed, individuals want the police there. Police serve a 

wonderful, very important role in society. It’s a job that’s very 

trying and taxing, a job that deserves a lot of credit by all 

people for what they do. And in the same way that corrections 

officers have served proudly for many, many years, police 

officers have done the same. But the right approach to policing 

is necessary. And I realize while this legislation is specifically 

addressing the correctional service, it’s important, I think, to 

have a larger view of the issue. It’s important to ensure that 

proper approaches to policing are occurring. And, Mr. Speaker, 

you know, just based on the actions and some of the comments 

that Sask Party members have made opposite, I’m not 

convinced that that same reality is understood by all members. 

 

[21:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve addressed the issue of prevention. I’ve 

addressed the issue of policing. And then there’s the issue of 

punishment, Mr. Speaker. And yes, there does need to be 

proper punishment for individuals who commit crimes, but 

punishment needs to be smart, Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier, 

it’s important that when an individual leaves a correctional 

facility that they’re less inclined to reoffend. It’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, that they be given every opportunity that they can to 

make the proper decisions, to make good decisions, and be a 

productive, contributing member of society. 

 

And when looking through the legislation, the different 

examples which we’ll be getting into, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 

convinced that everything included in this piece of legislation is 

smart punishment. And just based on some of the comments 

that members opposite and members of the Sask Party have 

made in the past on the issue of corrections, I just don’t have a 

great deal of confidence, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a 

well-thought-out approach. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at some different sections here of 

the legislation. For individuals, as I said before, who want to, I 

refer back to the minister’s second reading speech. It was on 

December 13th, and it’s Bill No. 16, An Act respecting 

Correctional Services and making consequential amendments 

to other Acts. And as I said before, it’s a fairly extensive piece 

of legislation. And as the minister stated in his second reading 

speech, this piece of legislation is intended to replace an earlier 

piece of legislation, and the design and much of the content has 

been produced by an outside team. My concern, Mr. Speaker, is 

that those recommendations are still being given to the minister 

and whether or not he gets it right is an entirely different 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister pointed out that this Act has a 

component of principles. And I’d like to read the principles that 

are identified by the minister. And he says, quote: 

 

The key features of these guiding principles are: 

protection of the public is paramount; offenders are 

required to comply with correctional facility rules and 

community supervision conditions; offenders are entitled 

to fair treatment; and staff members adhere to a code of 

professional conduct. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those principles in themselves sound decent. 

But as I said before, based on members’ track record, based on 

comments made by members, I’m not sure that they . . . I’m not 

willing to place a blind faith in them to trust that they’ll simply 

get it right. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, or the principles rather, are being 

enshrined in legislation. I think it is important to state principles 

and put it in legislation so that it does provide a guide. And it’s 

important to have those principles there as a guide, Mr. 

Speaker, because we can think of incidents in the past where 

perhaps those principles would have been helpful in a situation 

and would have better guided the minister’s actions or would 

have served as a better reference, a better frame of reference 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

when some pretty out-to-lunch things were being said, Mr. 

Speaker. So I think the fact that these principles are enshrined 

in the legislation can be a positive step, but it’s important to 

look what lies beyond the principles. And as with anything, the 

question is in the application of those principles and what the 

implications are for the different groups that I identified earlier 

— the community, the workers in correctional facilities as well 

as the inmates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister identified that this new piece of 

legislation has a code of professional conduct that all 

Corrections staff are required to follow. And, Mr. Speaker, a 

code of conduct is a good thing. It’s something I think that 

indicates an evolution or a progress in any given profession 

when there is a code of conduct that is enshrined. It’s my hope, 

Mr. Speaker, though, that the code of conduct was done in 

proper consultation with correctional workers themselves and it 

wasn’t simply done by the minister, because we know the 

relationship between the current minister and correctional 

workers hasn’t always been the strongest, we’ll just say. 

 

So it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that proper consultation, proper 

discussion occurred. Because in order for any code of conduct 

to have meaning, to have an effect, a positive effect, it’s 

important that members that are impacted or will be affected by 

the code of conduct, that they actually buy in and support what 

is being proposed. If they don’t, Mr. Speaker, it’s fine for the 

minister to enshrine whatever he wants in legislation, but if 

there isn’t the buy-in through the productive consultation that 

needed to occur with the workers, then, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

going to be productive in the long run. And the minister can put 

words on paper to make himself feel better or words on paper to 

sound good or to look good, but it’s not going to have the 

desired effect. And that is a concern that I have, Mr. Speaker. 

So I would like to hear more detail about what interplay 

occurred between the profession and between the minister in 

terms of establishing the professional code of conduct and 

whether it’s fully embraced and supported by those that do the 

very important, very difficult — I’ll emphasize that — very 

difficult work in correctional facilities. 

 

There were also changes, Mr. Speaker, to the section on inmate 

discipline, or there are changes proposed in this piece of 

legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not for a second suggesting 

that correctional facilities aren’t dangerous places. I’m not for a 

second suggesting that we should not take seriously the crimes 

that people have committed and the sometimes very strong 

likelihood that individuals pose a real threat to society and pose 

a threat to fellow inmates and to workers. But, Mr. Speaker, 

when we’re looking at the issue of inmate discipline, it’s 

important that it be done in a smart way. In the same way that I 

said punishment needs to be done in a smart way, I think inmate 

discipline, which is a form of punishment in the larger context 

of what is a correctional facility, needs to be done properly. It 

needs to be done in such a way that it’s not creating more 

problems than it seeks to solve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if a short-sighted approach to inmate discipline is 

taken — a reactionary approach that doesn’t consider the 

long-term implications of something — that, Mr. Speaker, can 

be a concern. And I think that would be a problem because the 

end result will be an increase in crime, an increase in 

disciplinary problems in a correctional facility, and that, Mr. 

Speaker, is not the point of a correctional facility. The point is 

to allow for the . . . to remove threats from communities and to, 

one hopes, allow for the best possible rehabilitation that can 

occur. 

 

But as I said before, Mr. Speaker, based on comments from the 

minister and based on comments from other members opposite, 

based on comments not too long ago about the need for boot 

camps, I’m just not convinced and I just don’t trust members 

opposite to take a wise approach and take an approach that 

considers long-term ramifications of what they may be doing. 

 

There’s another section, Mr. Speaker, of this legislation as 

identified by the minister in his second reading speech and as 

very well detailed in the actual legislation itself, and that has to 

do with inmate transfers. There is a quote here from the 

minister’s second reading speech and it says: 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in relation to inmate transfers, new 

provisions recognize that emergency and voluntary 

transfers of inmates can occur without prior notification 

to the inmate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the idea being here that if it’s within the 

purview of the correctional facility or those in charge and they 

may need to be removed without the proper notification, it can 

be done. There are changes being made that would enable that 

and better facilitate it. And, Mr. Speaker, there may be 

instances when it is appropriate and it is smart to transfer an 

inmate but, Mr. Speaker, for taking a smart approach to 

punishment it’s also important to weigh the possible 

consequences of an inmate transfer, and it’s important to think 

about what other implications a transfer may have to a specific 

inmate and perhaps to the rehabilitation of an inmate. 

 

I can think of one example I heard, Mr. Speaker, about an 

individual who was at one correctional facility and that facility 

was working well for him in the sense, Mr. Speaker, that it was 

planting the seed and it was allowing for some of the good 

quality rehabilitation that needs to occur. That is the desire of 

all of us from a government perspective, but also from a 

correctional perspective. What was occurring there, because the 

inmate was in one location, he was still close to his family 

supports. And while this individual wasn’t a hardened criminal, 

this individual was someone who was early on in making some 

bad decisions but ended . . . but was convicted and was 

sentenced to a correctional facility. But the individual was in a 

specific area where he still had some family supports. His 

grandfather was able to visit him and this was a huge 

encouragement to him because it was a tie to normal life. It was 

a tie to an aspiration of wanting to do something better with his 

life. It was a tie and it was an example of perhaps one of the 

few positive role models that this individual ever had in his life. 

And he was still able, Mr. Speaker, to have enough contact with 

his grandfather in this location that the individual was able to 

make some progress and could see a future, a future that was a 

positive one — not a future of simply getting involved in a 

gang in the facility. Not a future of trying to . . . of hoping to 

get out into the street and getting back involved into crime as 

soon he could, but a future where he was making positive 

decisions. And he was able to do that because he had the 

influence, because he had fairly regular contact with a loved 

one. 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to keep scenarios like that in 

mind when we’re talking about possible transfers of inmates. I 

recognize that there are likely many occasions when it’s 

important and necessary to transfer an inmate for his or her 

safety and for the safety of workers perhaps. But we need to 

look at what other consequences there may be for that action. If 

one finds themselves in a situation where the family supports 

are in a given area, and their transfer would be 

counterproductive to the well-being of that individual and his or 

her hopeful rehabilitation, then maybe some alternatives need to 

be looked at. Maybe some other options exist that can still meet 

the needs for safety, still meet the needs for smart punishment, 

but give this individual a chance at rehabilitation in a real way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope the minister would take that into 

consideration when making changes to legislation. I would 

hope that wisdom would be there. But, Mr. Speaker, based on 

the actions and the comments that we’ve seen from members 

opposite, I’m just not, I’m just not at ease with trusting them 

blindly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation also highlights that their inmates 

still have some protections in place in terms of having a route to 

express concerns or mistreatment by the system as it may be. 

As the minister states in his second reading speech, he says: 

 

I should point out that inmates also have the right to ask 

an investigator from a number of independent offices 

created by legislation to review the facility director’s 

decision. This includes the Provincial Ombudsman, the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, and the 

Privacy Commissioner. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is good that these avenues exist, 

independent offices, and I think that is a positive step. I am 

curious, Mr. Speaker, what consultation occurred, whether 

Elizabeth Fry or John Howard were consulted on this issue, and 

whether they’re of the opinion this is a satisfactory 

accommodation for prisoners’ concerns, for inmates’ concerns. 

I would hope that it is, but again, based on the track record that 

we’ve seen on the issue of corrections and based on the track 

record of consultation, maybe it isn’t, but maybe it is. I will 

give members the benefit of the doubt on that issue and hope 

that it has occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s also important, as the minister identifies in his 

speech, to have the proper kinds of steps and measures in place 

that are constructive in providing safety and security for 

correctional workers and inmates. But also as I said before, 

provide the best possible chance at rehabilitation and 

integration back into society at some point. The minister said in 

his second reading speech that: 

 

This new legislation will augment the existing authority 

already found in the Criminal Code and will ensure that 

Corrections staff not only have the authority to use force 

and restraints, but they also have a legal protection when 

they are authorized to do so. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is important that when we ask correctional 

officers to do a job that is very difficult, that is very challenging 

from many perspectives, whether it be physically or 

emotionally, the strain that it can put on them and their families 

as they continue to function in the community, it is important 

that correctional officers have the appropriate and expected 

safeguards in place for them doing their job. I think the 

important phrase that I would identify in this aspect of the 

legislation, or at least in the minister’s second reading speech, 

is that “when they are authorized to do so.” So that indicates, 

Mr. Speaker, that when taking steps for discipline, when taking 

steps for using restraints and force, that it happens within a 

structure, that it’s not based on an approach that is not well 

thought out and not based on proper protocols in place, that is 

not simply based on reacting to an incident, but that, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s an appropriate response for the threat and for what 

has occurred. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to once again give my 

compliments to the correctional officers that do a very difficult 

job for many years as many of them do. 

 

[22:00] 

 

There is a brief passing reference, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister makes in his second reading speech about 

rehabilitation and treatment, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not very 

thorough and it’s not very detailed. And as I said before, it’s 

very important when looking at issues of crime and safety in 

order to have the proper mix of prevention, policing, and 

punishment. And what I see missing, Mr. Speaker, from the 

legislation and especially from the minister’s second reading 

speech, is an indication that the minister wants to do 

punishment in a smart way. There may be some aspects, but I 

don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that the approach is necessarily well 

thought out and I’m not willing to simply provide a blind trust 

that he has it right in this situation. 

 

The minister once again identifies The Road Ahead report, and 

this was the report that was put together in response to the 

inmates who escaped, the outside panel that provided 

recommendations. So again, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s good that 

this wasn’t simply and solely drafted in the minister’s office, 

but I still do have questions, Mr. Speaker, about what filtering 

or what changes, Mr. Speaker, may have been made to the 

recommendations based on an ideological view of members 

opposite or the minister for that matter. 

 

There is reference, Mr. Speaker, in the speech, to other pieces 

of legislation in other jurisdictions, other provinces, and some 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that is federal. I think that that can be 

a good thing and it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that they drew 

upon best practices in different jurisdictions and sincerely 

sought to hear from different areas about what is working well 

and what perhaps needs to be tweaked in a way to better reflect 

the reality here in Saskatchewan, but also simply to learn how a 

piece of legislation, though it may be well intended, doesn’t 

meet the expected outcomes or the desired outcomes, for that 

matter. And so I hope, Mr. Speaker, that in looking at what 

occurred in the different jurisdictions, that appropriate attention 

was paid to what has been working well in different areas. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do thank you for the opportunity to join in 

on the debate on Bill No. 16, An Act respecting Correctional 

Services and making consequential amendments to other Acts. 

As I said before, there are many, many factors that contribute to 

the quality of life that people appreciate here in the province. 

There are many different components. There’s things like 

health care. There’s things like an educational system. There’s 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

things like the beautiful environment that we have in our 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our quality of life is determined by the sense 

of security and the sense of peace that we have in our 

communities. And, Mr. Speaker, when crime is a problem and 

individuals don’t feel secure in their communities, when 

criminals who are caught and convicted are treated poorly, and 

when the likelihood of rehabilitation decreases as opposed to 

improves, Mr. Speaker, I think that is a concern. And it’s my 

hope, Mr. Speaker, when looking at a piece of legislation, I 

hope that is the lens that members opposite took to developing 

the piece of legislation. It’s the lens that I have sought to bring 

in terms of examining some of the strengths but also some of 

the pitfalls and problems that may exist with this legislation. 

 

I look forward to hearing from more members on this side 

commenting on this piece of legislation. I look forward to 

hearing from other members in the community, from 

individuals involved with corrections, and sometimes from 

inmates themselves perhaps, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what 

their views are on this legislation — what is strong, what is 

weak, where the Minister may have it right, but also where 

there may have been some shortcomings. 

 

And as I said before, Mr. Speaker, based on comments from 

Corrections ministers opposite, there have been concerning 

comments and concerning actions that have been made by 

members opposite. And I think it’s because of those comments 

that we need to be very careful when looking at any piece of 

legislation to do with corrections here in the province of 

Saskatchewan that comes from the Sask Party. So with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I will thank you for the chance to contribute to 

this debate, and I would at this time adjourn debate on Bill No. 

16. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 

moved adjournment of Bill No. 16, the correctional services 

amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 17 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 17 — The Child 

Care Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to enter 

into debate here this evening as it relates to Bill No. 17, The 

Child Care Amendment Act, 2011. Now to be frank, Mr. 

Speaker, when we saw this piece of legislation put forward and 

saw the title on the order sheet, Mr. Speaker, we anticipated 

something significant, Mr. Speaker. We looked forward to a 

bold plan that reflected the needs and reality of Saskatchewan 

people and families, and we hoped that it would be a response 

to the significant challenges that so many families face across 

our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we saw, Mr. Speaker, was that in fact these are small 

changes to an Act for which we’ll certainly analyze and engage 

in full consultation with the child care stakeholders, Mr. 

Speaker. But we’re disappointed that we’re not seeing 

something more bold, more significant by way of a vision and a 

plan from this government as it relates to child care and early 

learning in this province, something that we know is so vital to 

the future economic and social well-being of individual 

children and people, but also of course as our province as a 

whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ll look at the Bill that has been put forward, and there’s 

been a couple of changes, Mr. Speaker, that have been put 

forward by the minister, spoken to by the minister. And 

certainly it’s going to be our goal to make sure we fully 

understand the intent of this piece of legislation as put forward 

by the minister to make sure we’re clear of the objectives that 

they’ve put forward here, and making sure that we’re seeking 

that broad-based consultation to understand any consequences 

that are not desirable, that are unintended, and that in fact aren’t 

in the best interests of Saskatchewan people or families. 

 

One of the changes that we see is as it relates to decisions 

regarding a child care facility’s licence and what occurs in the 

review process that will occur if a disagreement occurs between 

a provider and the ministry on a decision that’s been made. 

Now what I see here is a change to remove the Family Services 

Board, and that that will be dealt with fully and completely by 

the minister or by the ministry. 

 

Now what I understand too, as I’ve read a little bit from the 

minister’s statement and taking those statements at face value, 

is that that Family Services Board has never been utilized as a 

function in these debates or to resolve these circumstances or 

these reviews. So certainly we have a little bit more to learn 

about why that board was never utilized in its function that it 

could have been, but also to understand and make sure that it is 

in fact a fair and transparent process that will occur by shifting 

that full and whole responsibility, not just by way of practice, 

but by way of legislation now, Mr. Speaker, to the minister’s 

office. 

 

Is this the best course of action? Is this fair to those providers 

and to children and to families? Those are questions we’ll be 

seeking as we engage in our consultations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another change that we see is, as it relates to this legislation, is 

bringing forward a change as it relates to retroactive regulations 

establishing fee schedules or payments to providers. And as I 

understand in reading through this legislation, and a little bit of 

historical context but also the minister’s statements, is that 

historically that would have to be made by order of the minister 

or by an order in council, an OC. And this process here for 

changing what could be fee schedules for providers, Mr. 

Speaker, has been described by the minister as a process for 

which we’ll be more efficient in implementing that change, an 

increase to fees. 

 

So that’s something we need to verify with the child care and 

early learning sector, Mr. Speaker, folks like the Saskatchewan 

Early Childhood Association and the Saskatchewan Association 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

of Child Care Homes. Those are the kinds of discussions, many 

other stakeholders across this province. And we invite that 

input, Mr. Speaker, and those perspectives, that learned 

perspective from individuals who are operating in the system 

under the current structure, and making sure that changes we’re 

making are in fact serving the greater good and enhancing 

supports to the child care sector. 

 

But when I look at a couple of these pieces here, what it just 

really speaks to, Mr. Speaker, is that a government given an 

opportunity to act in child care has fallen far short of meeting 

the demands that exist across communities, across 

neighbourhoods within our province. I know in my 

constituency there’s hardly a matter of greater importance to so 

many young families, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about 

child care. And I know that’s to be true in other constituencies 

across this province, and not just in urban Saskatchewan but in 

rural Saskatchewan as well and even, you know, in some of our 

vibrant, smaller urban centres such as Estevan, I know that 

there is great demand and great pressure on families as it relates 

to inadequate access and affordability of child care. 

 

If we’re talking about child care, we need to make sure that 

we’re speaking about facilities that are safe and healthy and 

rich environments where children can play and learn and grow, 

become as strong as they can be. And of course this is very 

important for so many young families that are seeking child 

care spaces for their children. And in many ways it’s impeding 

our economy and economic activity as well and can certainly be 

viewed through the lens of an economic plan, not just one of 

social development, but one of economic development as well, 

Mr. Speaker. So what I think when we look at this, is we first of 

all need to implore the government to look to the research that 

exists across — I mean, international research — and certainly 

that that exists here in Canada that puts out best practice and 

examples of why this is in our economic and social best 

interests. 

 

I found it interesting to — and I don’t have it here with me 

tonight, Mr. Speaker, — but I found it interesting recently to 

read a report from PISA [Programme for International Student 

Assessment], an organization that provides educational 

assessment and outcomes; assesses educational programs, 

literacy, numeracy. And they put out a report just, I believe, in 

January of this year that stated the incredibly strong correlation 

to well-developed early learning and child care strategies and 

plans and programs in a respective jurisdiction or country and 

that direct correlation to significantly improved educational 

results, literacy, numeracy — significantly improved results. 

 

I know recently we’ve had a couple of MLAs travelling the 

province talking a little bit about math. I know that it’s also 

maybe as part of their considerations. And the government 

opposite, they should reference that article as well, and that 

those results that highlight and substantiate that, when we put 

forward a strategic plan that supports young families and 

children as it relates to early learning and child care, that we see 

the return in those educational outcomes. We see the direct 

positive impact in the literacy and numeracy, the maths and the 

reading, and that children experience later on as students. And 

of course we see then that impact manifest itself in a positive 

way many years forward as it relates to economic involvement 

of those young individuals as they grow through the educational 

system and then contribute so mightily to their communities, 

but also by way of the employment and careers that they’ll be 

able to fulfill. 

 

It’s a great equalizer in life, Mr. Speaker, and an area of 

inadequate service right now in this province. And so I take the 

opportunity to speak to this Bill and to point to the fact that 

there’s a couple of changes put forward by the minister. And 

we’ll certainly examine those changes with the stakeholders 

who are relevant and on the ground delivering these services. 

But I take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to point out a failed 

opportunity of this government for many years now, Mr. 

Speaker, into a second term to put forward an adequate and 

responsible plan to the needs of and realities of families across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[22:15] 

 

And when we talk about a plan, we’re not just talking just about 

the discussion just of a few more spaces, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know this government’s made some gesture where they’re 

going to get Saskatchewan to a total of around 13,000 child 

care, licensed child care spaces. And they speak as if this is 

some sort of great achievement. But we need to measure 

ourselves in relation to others, Mr. Speaker. And if we compare 

ourselves, as one of my colleagues highlights, to our neighbour 

in Manitoba that has set forward a plan and a five-year plan and 

has achieved some results, right now they’re well over 30,000 

licensed child care spaces. 

 

But when we’re thinking about that plan, it’s not just about 

spaces, Mr. Speaker. And I know the member from Riversdale 

articulates this so well around our caucus table routinely, that 

it’s not just about how many thousand new spaces that are 

required, but what else is in that plan is so important, aspects 

such as looking at the dynamics of Saskatchewan families and 

the pressures and the demands and the non-traditional work 

arrangements that so many are forced to engage in, Mr. 

Speaker, have limited opportunities to engage in other 

opportunities at a given point in time in their life. And we need 

to be making sure we’re looking to solutions that provide 

non-traditional hours for families working all sorts of shift 

work and hours that are outside what’s been seen as traditional 

work schedules, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And this is the reality that so many Saskatchewan families face, 

so we need to look at that. We need to make sure that we’re 

looking at recruitment and retention within that sector, Mr. 

Speaker, and making sure that we’re able to retain those 

individuals who have taken training, taken training, Mr. 

Speaker, and then are there to provide a service within our 

communities. 

 

And I know in lots of consultations across the province this is 

one area that I hear from so many communities that this a great 

challenge. And I know down in the southeast corner of the 

province, down in Estevan this was something that routinely 

gets reflected to me that’s of a great challenge: not only that 

there’s not the adequate number of spaces, not only that young 

families can’t find those spaces, but that the providers 

themselves struggle so significantly to retain and to recruit child 

care workers to those facilities to provide the dignified and 

important service that they do to the public and at such an 



March 5, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

important and vulnerable and influential time in a child’s life. 

So we need to make this a larger part of that plan, a plan for 

which right now doesn’t exist in our province. 

 

We need to make sure part of that is adequacy of wages and 

respect for the training that one that enters child care engages 

in, certainly takes certificate and diploma programs, all of 

which come at a cost to an individual as well, and then are 

challenged in many ways with some pretty paltry wages, Mr. 

Speaker, with some pretty exorbitant living expenses. And it’s 

rather common sense why we can’t fill some of these spaces 

that providers are challenged to meet the needs of communities 

with. So it all fits into that recruitment and retention strategy, 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s simply not, it’s not part of, it’s not on the 

radar with this government. We urge them to put that onto their 

radar. 

 

And we need to make sure that we have some cultural 

sensitivity built into our facilities, Mr. Speaker, to make sure 

that it’s representative of the province that we are and the 

individuals that enter into those facilities, the families that are 

engaged. And we need to make of course, Mr. Speaker, make 

sure that those facilities are safe and healthy. And there was a 

discussion earlier about code and building codes and these 

different pieces. And certainly we need to make sure that we 

have high standards and a strong level of accountability to 

make sure that we’re putting forward solutions that 

Saskatchewan families can trust and that they can rely upon, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I was doing just a little bit of research on this Bill, I took 

a little look at the OECD, Mr. Speaker, the Organization for 

Economic Co-operation and Development’s website. And I’ll 

just read and quote from their web page, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Early childhood education and care (ECEC) has become a 

policy priority in many countries. A growing body of 

research recognises that ECEC brings a wide range of 

benefits, including social and economic benefits; better 

child well-being and learning outcomes; more equitable 

outcomes and reduction of poverty; increased 

intergenerational social mobility; higher female labour 

market participation and gender equality; increased 

fertility rates; and better social and economic development 

for society at large. 

 

Well these are admirable outcomes, Mr. Speaker, and outcomes 

that we should be learning from as a jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s why I reference an international economic 

organization, OECD, Mr. Speaker, and some of the findings 

that they have. 

 

And when we’re looking at a plan that brings forward economic 

development, social development, and then has a direct impact 

on quality of life and well-being, Mr. Speaker, these are the 

kind of plans that should be a priority of this government and to 

meet the needs of Saskatchewan people. We need to make sure 

that there’s consultation across the province on any changes and 

developments of plans, and a plan should come from 

Saskatchewan families and child care workers informed by 

Saskatchewan values, Mr. Speaker. So while we need to 

certainly be mindful of the research that exists, the body of 

research that says that this is in our best interests to be 

addressing this critical need for so many families, we also need 

to make sure that our Saskatchewan values are reflected in the 

delivery of child care and early learning in this province. 

 

When we look at some of the results that were there in the 

OECD’s report and those outcomes, Mr. Speaker, these are the 

kinds of goals we should be pursuing — the stronger economic 

outcomes that we see as it relates to employment, as it relates to 

jobs, the educational outcomes. And we look at information 

that’s highlighted not enough, Mr. Speaker, but Aboriginal 

education gaps, Mr. Speaker, and certainly learning outcomes 

for all students, Mr. Speaker. And certainly this is an important 

tool and strategy for both, Mr. Speaker, something that’s 

certainly in our best interest as a province and certainly in the 

best interests of the individual lives of children across this 

province, Mr. Speaker, in all communities — rural, First 

Nation, and urban, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at the body of data that exists out there of 

supporting early learning and care and child care and the 

enabling of circumstance for families, Mr. Speaker, these are 

the kind of policies that we should pursue, the kind of policies 

that we should double down on, Mr. Speaker, and they should 

be a top priority of a government, Mr. Speaker. And 

unfortunately this Bill sets to do none of that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s much work to be done on this front. 

It’s certainly my pleasure to enter in on discussion here this 

evening. We’ll continue our consultation but, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to make a priority, a strategy, a plan, and make real the 

kind of economic opportunities and social opportunities that we 

should be achieving in this province, Mr. Speaker. But at this 

point in time, as it relates to Bill No. 17, The Child Care 

Amendment Act, 2011, I move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 17, The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 18 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 18 — The Degree 

Authorization Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

pleasure that I rise this evening to enter into the debate on Bill 

18, The Degree Authorization Act. This is an interesting Bill. 

It’s a new Bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s not an amendment. It’s a brand 

new idea that’s been put across . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Do you think I can do it? This Bill puts across a brand new 

idea, and it’s the idea that there’s a need to enhance 

post-secondary education in Saskatchewan by offering the 

opportunity to potentially expand degree-granting authority to 

post-secondary institutions other than the two universities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not clear what the huge public policy 

void is, that the minister mentions a couple of times in his 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2012 

comments, and the need to actually implement a Bill of this 

sort. So we have some serious concerns about this Bill. And 

first of all, we’re not exactly clear what’s being fixed because 

we’re not sure what’s broken, Mr. Speaker. There are two 

quality degree-granting authorities and universities in 

Saskatchewan, and indeed the minister went out of his way to 

exempt these two institutions from this proposed Bill. So our 

biggest concern is, why is this necessary at this point in time? 

And we need to understand better the public policy void or, as 

the minister said, the public policy gap that exists, although he 

wasn’t clear on exactly what that was. 

 

There’s a number of concerns about this particular Bill. He 

holds out that there are three key tenets to the Bill, and first is to 

bolster accessibility for students in this province. He also 

identifies that because the population is continuing to grow in 

Saskatchewan so are the needs of the province to meet an 

increasingly vibrant labour market demand. And yet we find 

that the same minister is currently in Ireland seeking out the 

same types of people when he’s identifying that the population 

here in Saskatchewan is growing and that the labour market 

here is vibrant. So it’s not clear to us what the need is to seek 

trained people from outside Canada when he states in this 

particular introduction that there is a sufficient population here 

to meet the demand. So it’s a bit of a contradiction, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s unfortunate that he’s not here to seek that 

clarification, but I’m sure we will be able to ask him that 

question at some point. 

 

He says it’s important to stay receptive to the needs of students 

and their aspirations and the opportunities that await them in 

the new Saskatchewan, so he’s saying it’s providing a 

framework to acknowledge those needs. But again it’s not clear 

what needs are being met by this Bill. In fact some of the 

commentary that we’ve received from our research in the past 

while identifies that they felt that when the consultation was 

going on it was kind of a backwards approach, and that in fact 

the solution had been identified before the problem, and that 

there seems to be a need to introduce this kind of legislation for 

reasons other than the fact that there is a problem with the 

degree-granting institutions of this country . . . or of this 

province. I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. So it’s not clear about that. 

The information we got also indicated there’s a number of other 

concerns about the Bill. 

 

But I’ll go on at this point to talk about the second tenet that the 

minister identified as being important, and it’s the robust 

quality assurance process. Again, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

robust quality assurance process in the institutions in 

Saskatchewan that are granting degrees. They’re exempted 

from the Bill, so the implication is that that quality assurance 

process is adequate. And yet we have the minister creating a 

brand new body instituted through appointment through 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. And he’s identified as arm’s 

length but is certainly appointed by the ministry and not by the 

universities or the degree-granting institutions that currently 

exist in Saskatchewan. So there’s a problem there. 

 

He says that the robust quality assurance process will help . . . 

and have the necessary expertise to help assess and evaluate 

new degree proposals. Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not clear what 

the issue is here. We already have that type of quality assurance 

process built into our universities. And in fact it’s through a 

bicameral governance scheme that the quality assurance is 

being maintained right now. It’s healthy. It’s robust, and it 

seems to be working. So we’re not sure what the issues are in 

respect to the quality assurance of the existing process. I don’t 

know, it just seems like maybe we’re creating a whole new 

body that is completely unnecessary and will cost taxpayers 

money. So we want to look at that closely. 

 

He points out the third tenet of the Bill is to protect the 

long-standing reputations of the University of Regina and the 

University of Saskatchewan. And to that end he’s assured us in 

the draft Bill that they’re the only ones who get to call 

themselves a university. And I guess that’s a good thing from 

my perspective because those are the two institutions that are 

doing the job here in Saskatchewan right now. So it’s not clear 

why we need other degree-granting authorities. 

 

One of the critiques of the Bill that we received was that 

establishing this quality assurance process and committee will 

include additional costs with setting up and maintaining those 

programs, and we’re not sure why that’s necessary at this point 

in time. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of adjournment, 

this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 294 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 6 — The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 297 

 Bill No. 7 — The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 

 Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 301 

 Bill No. 11 — The Court Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de justice 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 304 

 Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 305 

 Bill No. 13 — The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les questions constitutionnelles 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 307 

 Bill No. 14 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 308 

 Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 311 

 Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 313 

 Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 319 

 Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 321 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


