




















































Hansard: March 19, 2012


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 17A  MONDAY, MARCH 19, 2012, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 595 

 March 19, 2012 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to introduce, to you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly seated in your gallery, I 

would like to welcome President Robert Doucette. Give us a 

wave there, President, president of the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan. President Doucette, Mr. Speaker, has been a 

tireless advocate for Métis. And since his election in 2007, 

we’re pleased to work with him on such initiatives as the very 

successful Year of the Métis in 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our Chamber we have a daily reminder of the 

great relationship the government has and the contribution that 

the Métis make in Saskatchewan with the sash that sits on the 

table. Mr. Speaker, this government is proud of an excellent 

relationship with President Doucette. I look forward to meeting 

with him after question period. Vice-president Allan Morin and 

treasurer Louis Gardiner will be joining us in what will be a 

very interesting conversation, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker. With that 

I’d ask all members to welcome President Doucette to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the honourable minister in welcoming President 

Robert Doucette of the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan to his 

Legislative Assembly. I hope that the meetings are productive 

and again, I’d like to welcome President Robert Doucette to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

honourable Assembly, Mr. Kurt Seesequasis from Beardy’s 

Okemasis. Kurt previously worked as a youth counsellor and 

presently serves as a governing council member. He’s also a 

member of the sports and rec board for the First Nations Winter 

Games, and he’s chef de mission for Beardy’s for the winter 

games as well. 

 

Kurt is also part of a committee in Beardy’s that’s working 

extremely hard for the Beardy’s Memorial Arena in the Kraft 

Hockeyville competition. This past Saturday, Kurt and his 

community had some good news as they were recognized as 

one of the top finalists in the Kraft Hockeyville competition. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 

welcoming Mr. Kurt Seesequasis to his Legislative Assembly. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

behalf of the official opposition, I want to take the opportunity 

to welcome Mr. Seesequasis to the Assembly as well and to tell 

him that we are very, very proud of the work that he and all his 

team have done. And certainly we wish him the very best in 

their endeavours and go, go, go and win that for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, it 

gives me great pleasure to introduce in your gallery this 

afternoon, Dave Marit, the president of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities, SARM. 

 

Last week they hosted, Dave hosted along with his executive 

directorship, a great convention in Regina here. We had some 

great discussions about how to move Saskatchewan forward 

with the RMs [rural municipality] in this province, had some 

good fun as well with Dave and his executive. And the fact that 

he forgot to introduce me at the banquet, I’m over it; over it 

kind of, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure if it wasn’t for Ray Orb, we’d 

have a discussion of revenue sharing later on, but we’re not 

going to do that. So it’s good to see you, Dave. Welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the opposition, we’d like to welcome the president, Dave 

Marit, as well to this Chamber and wish him well in the future 

with SARM, the great organization. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for a leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to rise today to introduce to you and through you 

to this Assembly, a number of visitors that are seated in your 

gallery. There are nine articling students seated in the gallery. 

Three are articling with the Ministry of Justice, and the 

remaining six are clerking at various levels of the three courts in 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

They are: Lana Morelli, Macrina Badger, and Alex Shalashniy, 

who are currently articling with the ministry. Lana Morelli 

studied law at the University of Saskatchewan after majoring in 

criminal justice and sociology at Minot State University. She’s 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

been an active volunteer with the Pro Bono Students Canada. 

Macrina Badger studied law at the University of Saskatchewan. 

Before that she studied in Fredericton at the University of New 

Brunswick with a double major in history and political science. 

Alex Shalashniy studied law at the University of British 

Columbia. He also has an interest in government relations, 

community involvement, and travelling. 

 

Joanne Colledge, Theodore Litowski, and Jade Buchanan are 

currently clerking with the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. 

Joanne Colledge graduated law school with great distinction 

from the University of Saskatchewan. As a student, she was the 

recipient of numerous awards and was involved in various 

activities. Theodore Litowski graduated with great distinction in 

law and commerce from the University of Saskatchewan. Based 

on academic merit and community service, he has been the 

recipient of several scholarships. Jade Buchanan comes to us 

from Dalhousie law school in Halifax and has also studied at 

the University of Saskatchewan. He brings several years of 

volunteer and leadership experience to his role with the Court 

of Appeal. 

 

Nadine Barnes has been working as a clerk providing research 

to the Court of Queen’s Bench in Regina. She studied law at 

Dalhousie University and before that received her Bachelor of 

Music from the University of Manitoba. Carolyn Manness has 

been working as a clerk with the Provincial Court in Regina. 

She studied at the University of Saskatchewan. Prior to law, she 

developed curriculum and taught English in Taiwan. Ammy 

Murray is also clerking with the Provincial Court in Saskatoon. 

She studied at the University of Saskatchewan law school 

where she was an active volunteer, particularly with the 

Saskatoon Community Mediation Services and the Legal 

Advice Clinic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the 2003 election, I was the only lawyer at 

our caucus. And the member from Swift Current, as he then was 

referred to, said that we had roughly the right number of 

lawyers in our caucus, perhaps one too many. Mr. Speaker, I am 

always glad to welcome more lawyers to the province and more 

lawyers to this Assembly. I am proud that we have such a 

diverse group of articling students and clerks in our province, 

and I wish them all the best. Please join me in welcoming them 

to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a great 

pleasure to welcome the students to the legislature. And it’s 

been a few years since I had the job of the formal welcome, but 

it’s always pleasant to talk to the people and see what kind of 

very accomplished roles that they have taken up 10 years or 15 

years later. I, on behalf of the opposition, welcome all of you to 

your roles within government and within the courts. 

 

And I was very pleased to see that we have a graduate from 

Dalhousie and a graduate from UBC [University of British 

Columbia] but all with connections to Saskatchewan. And I 

have a special point of welcoming the fellow graduate from 

UBC law school as that’s my alma mater. 

 

Everybody who goes to UBC law school knows that the law 

school building is named the dean George Curtis law school. 

And he’s an important person in Saskatchewan history because 

he was the ministerial assistant to the Attorney General of 

Saskatchewan, M.A. MacPherson. And he told me this a 

number of years ago that he didn’t like to come back to this 

building because the office that he had was turned into the 

washroom for the cabinet room. But that’s where he worked 

because that was the Attorney General’s office. So I think 

you’re going to get much better accommodation where you’re 

working in the courts and in the Attorney General’s office. 

 

But really like to welcome you and look forward to good advice 

for the government. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, it’s my pleasure to introduce in your gallery some guests, 

some dedicated child care professionals who are looking 

forward to the proceedings. I would just like to introduce them 

by name, and if they could all give a little wave. 

 

Today we’ve got Anita Burkell, Mardi Bley, Naren Jurgens, 

Belinda Helstrom, Joy Bergstrom, Traci Thomson, April Berg, 

Debbie Mercier, Jennifer Pirot, Lisa Leibel, Bernie Thomas, 

Kim Randall, and Maxine Hanofski. 

 

With that I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

lovely women to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to present a petition calling for protection for late-night retail 

workers by passing Jimmy’s law. And we know in the early 

morning hours of June 20th, 2011, Jimmy Ray Wiebe was shot 

two times and died from his injuries. He was working at a gas 

station in Yorkton, alone and unprotected from intruders. And 

we know that positive statistics show that convenience store and 

gas station robberies are down by one-third since 1999, largely 

due to increased safety practices, including two people working 

together on late-night shifts. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately enact Bill 601, Jimmy’s 

law, to ensure greater safety for retail workers who work 

late-night hours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Wadena, Christopher Lake, and Saskatoon. I do so present. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the management and reporting of our provincial finances. The 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the Sask Party 

government to provide Saskatchewan people with the fair, 

true state of our finances by providing appropriate 

summary financial accounting and reporting that is in line 

with the rest of Canada in compliance with public sector 

accounting standards and following the independent 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations; and also to begin 

to provide responsible, sustainable, and trustworthy 

financial management as deserved by Saskatchewan 

people, organizations, municipalities, institutions, 

taxpayers, and businesses. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Saskatoon and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling on the Sask Party government to 

support the seniors’ bill of rights: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: 

 

That many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed incomes 

and are victims of physical, emotional, and financial 

abuse; that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to social and 

economic security and a right to live free from poverty; 

that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to protection from 

abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of the trappers of Saskatchewan. The current 

regulations being enforced are creating challenges that are a 

concern for our traditional trappers. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize that the experience gained 

through practical experience be valued; and in so doing to 

cause the government to review the current legislation and 

regulations with respect to trapping regulations and 

firearm use in consultation with the traditional resource 

users. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Community-Building Event 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week on 

Thursday, March 15, I had the pleasure of attending an exciting 

event. This event has gathered people for many years. People 

from the four constituencies of Saskatchewan Rivers, Prince 

Albert Northcote, P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton, and Batoche all 

gathered to create an event that displays a value held dearly by 

Saskatchewan people, that of working together to achieve a 

common dream. This community mindedness is what builds 

and continues to build the foundation started by our pioneers. 

 

The energy and excitement in the jam-packed room in one of 

Prince Albert’s beautiful buildings was enhanced by our MC 

[master of ceremonies] David Halstead, a passionate educator 

and environmentalist. Reverend Sandy Scott, publicly 

recognized for his work overseas ministering to our troops, said 

grace and helped all of us to be thankful. Our guest speaker, the 

Premier, shared our government’s vision of a province moving 

forward. Bryan Hadland, president of Agribition, highlighted 

the excitement and thanked our guest speaker. 

 

The meal was produced by one of Saskatchewan’s 

entrepreneurs and served by future leaders of our province. The 

teams from the four hosting constituencies contributed months 

of planning, phoning, talking, and gathering to bring this event 

to fruition. Please join me in thanking all participants, workers, 

and volunteers for creating a fun, exciting, and 

community-building event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Support for Hockeyville Finalists 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 

most prominent hockey player in our caucus, I want to stand 

today to congratulate the community of Beardy’s and Okemasis 

First Nation as they erupted in celebration last night because of 

one big announcement. It was announced Saturday night on 

Hockey Night in Canada that the community will be 

representing the West as one of the top five finalists in the Kraft 

Hockeyville 2012 challenge. 

 

The community of Beardy’s and Okemasis has a rich culture in 

hockey. The game helps encourage and promote hockey values 

of winning; losing with dignity, honour, and humility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are honoured to have Kurt Seesequasis here, a 

member of the Kraft Hockeyville committee for Beardy’s. And 

he’s here with us today in the Assembly, and I welcome him. 

Kurt hosted the evening as members of the community packed 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

in at the local gymnasium to watch the live broadcast online. 

And after the announcement was made, everyone rushed to the 

computer lab to begin the voting process. People even took time 

to sleep on mats in the gym, waiting for a chance to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we encourage all members and the people of 

Saskatchewan to log on to krafthockeyville.cbc.ca or call toll 

free by phone 1-866-533-8066 to cast their vote for the 

community, as voting will close tomorrow, March 20th. The 

winner of the Kraft Hockeyville 2012 will host a 2012-13 NHL 

[National Hockey League] pre-season game and receive 

100,000 in arena upgrades courtesy of Kraft Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to stand up to congratulate 

Beardy’s and Okemasis as well as their hard-working 

volunteers. And get out, please get out and vote as often as you 

can. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Social Work Week 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

inform the House that the government has officially designated 

March 18th to 24th Social Work Week in Saskatchewan. This 

year’s theme is Social Workers: Building Relationships, 

Strengthening Communities, Partnering for Change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, social workers play a vital role in ensuring the 

safety and well-being of our most vulnerable citizens. Their 

hard work and commitment makes our province a better place 

for all Saskatchewan people. Social work is not an easy job, in 

fact it is one of the most complex and challenging occupations 

imaginable. Workers are faced with difficult situations on a 

daily basis and have to make tough decisions that impact the 

lives of others. 

 

Despite all of this, social workers continue to serve those in our 

society with the greatest need, and they serve them well. They 

perform their duties professionally and proficiently even in the 

face of constant scrutiny and criticism. Social workers work in 

child and family service agencies, youth facilities, hospitals, 

schools, correctional institutions, administration, and federal 

and provincial government departments, providing compassion 

and support to those who face the devastating circumstances of 

poverty, violence, and abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank social workers across this province 

for their dedication to children, families, and other people in 

need. Thank you for making a difference. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

2012 Z99 Radiothon 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in just 36 hours, the 25th 

annual Z99 radiothon raised just under three-quarters of a 

million dollars to support the Regina General Hospital’s 

neonatal unit. 

 

Z99’s CC, Lori, and Buzz were on the air from 6 a.m. Thursday 

until 6 p.m. Friday. Their personal dedication must be 

recognized. I was pleased to join them on Friday and make a 

donation on behalf of our NDP [New Democratic Party] MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as always, the proceeds support the NICU 

[neonatal intensive care unit] staff as they provide a high calibre 

of care to Saskatchewan’s youngest patients and peace of mind 

to parents. This year’s proceeds will go towards purchasing an 

MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] compatible monitor, a 

neonatal ventilator package, as well as increasing bed capacity 

and upgrading other equipment. 

 

The radiothon raised $714,634 during its broadcast, thanks to 

donations from the public and a $100,000 matching donation 

from PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan]. The 

radiothon is a prime example of how the people of our province 

rally behind a great community cause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the listeners, to those who donated so 

generously, to the volunteers who ran the phones, to the other 

support staff, and of course to CC, Lori, and Buzz, we simply 

say thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Support for Hockeyville Finalists 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although I enjoy to play 

hockey, I’m not going to make any assertions as being the most 

noted hockey player on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Kraft Hockeyville 2012 is on its way to finding 

this year’s most committed hockey community, and the winning 

community will receive $100,000 in local arena upgrades as 

well as the opportunity to host a pre-season NHL game. 

 

Kraft Hockeyville is in its seventh year, and our province has 

yet to finish first. Two Saskatchewan communities, Rosthern 

and Duck Lake, were able to crack the top 15 this past year, and 

there have been nearly 6 million votes to that point. 

 

As of this past Saturday evening, Duck Lake and the Beardy’s 

Memorial Arena were selected as one of the top five 

communities in Canada. This was possible by the effort of 

many voting online at krafthockeyville.cbc.ca, and voting is 

open until tomorrow night at midnight. And the winner will be 

announced on March 31st, so be sure to watch Hockey Night in 

Canada as CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] will 

broadcast live from all top five communities, including the 

Beardy’s Memorial Arena at Duck Lake. 

 

The communities of Duck Lake and Beardy’s have worked hard 

to get the Beardy’s Memorial Arena to the top five. I would 

now humbly ask all people in the province, when you log on to 

your computer today and tomorrow, take a moment and visit 

krafthockeyville.cbc.ca and vote for our Saskatchewan 

community to be successful at this year’s event. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

Celebrate Success Business Awards 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 14th I 

had the opportunity to bring greetings and represent the 

Government of Saskatchewan, as well as represent the ministers 

of SaskTel and SaskPower, by presenting awards on their 

behalf at the 2012 Yorkton and District Chamber of Commerce 

Celebrate Success Business Awards. 

 

The evening has been held by the chamber since 1998 and was 

a huge success in that capacity. As a business person, long-time 

chamber member, and former board member, I am proud of the 

job they do, not only in supporting local business and 

representing local business, but also celebrating their successes 

and contributions to this event. 

 

The award winners were as follows: customer service, Farrell 

Agencies; work and balance, Yorkton Co-op; community merit 

recipients were Access Communications, Yorkton Exhibition 

Association, and the Yorkton Terriers; community involvement, 

TD Canada Trust; diversity leadership, McDonald’s Restaurant; 

property restoration, the Yorkton Hotel; new business venture, 

Richardson International; business expansion — friends of mine 

— Crusader Drilling. Young entrepreneur was Justin Yawney 

of Yorkton Plumbing & Heating who was also recognized by 

the provincial chamber this year. 

 

Awards of excellence recipients were Harley Davidson of 

Yorkton, Rusnak Balacko Kachur Rusnak Law, and Yorkton 

Aircraft Services. And the big winner of the night, the business 

of the year went to Ram Industries. 

 

Although fewer awards were allocated, truly all nominees are 

winners and should be proud of their contribution for our 

community and the province in helping create a strong and 

growing Saskatchewan, improving the quality of life for 

everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Business Builders Awards 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The North Saskatoon 

Business Association held its 15th annual Business Builders 

Award gala last Thursday evening at Prairieland Park. About 

500 business and community leaders gathered for the evening, 

and greetings were brought by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone as well as mayor of Saskatoon. 

 

Thirteen awards were handed out. “These businesses, small and 

large, are honoured in their various categories for their 

creativity, commitment, and hard work,” said the NSBA [North 

Saskatoon Business Association] president Alun Richards. 

“They stand out as examples of the impressive business people 

we have in Saskatoon, showing values that we can all learn 

from and respect.” 

 

The big winner of the night was Jim Nowakowski and JNE 

Welding who took home two awards for employment retention 

and development as well as the Shirley Ryan Lifetime 

Achievement Award for outstanding long-term contributions to 

business and community. 

This year’s NSBA team highlighted the evolution of the 

Saskatoon business community. The awards were designed to 

provide a venue for Saskatoon entrepreneurs to honour their 

own, to celebrate success, leadership, ingenuity, and 

persistence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all winners and 

encourage them to keep up the good work in their businesses as 

well as their communities. I would like to ask all my colleagues 

to join in, in applauding all the hard-working Saskatchewan 

entrepreneurs and in particular those winners of the NSBA 

awards. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Child Care 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the government 

wants to talk about Saskatchewan being the best place to live, 

work, and raise a family, then it has the responsibility to ensure 

families receive the services and supports they need. Child care 

is about supporting families and providing educational 

opportunities for children, but it’s also about economic 

development. How are those who have children supposed to 

engage in our workforce or train to be in the workforce if they 

don’t have high-quality care that they can rely on, afford, and 

feel good about? 

 

To the minister: when is she finally going to get serious about 

the child care crisis looming in this province and provide a 

long-term plan with a vision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our 

government’s vision and our government’s plan, quite frankly, 

is to try to meet the void that was left by the NDP government. 

It was absolutely shameful what we inherited when we formed 

government. Saskatchewan at that time, Mr. Speaker, had 8,850 

child care spaces. Do you know what Manitoba had at the same 

time? 26,000 spaces, child care spaces. So our government 

made a commitment that we’re going to increase child care 

spaces, and we have done so in our first term of government by 

35 per cent. We are going to increase by an additional 2,000 

spaces or more in our next term of government, is our promise. 

Mr. Speaker, we are working towards this. 

 

But you know who agreed that there was a shameful disaster 

left behind by the NDP? Why it was a senior of the NDP, Ms. 

Pat Atkinson, who said: 

 

Saskatchewan has the poorest record when it comes to 

child care. And, Mr. Speaker, I take some responsibility 

for that because I was part of a government that did not 

put a lot of . . . resources into child care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well there’s no 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

point in adding spaces if the centres can’t find the staff to be 

able to support those spaces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If a family with one child has an income that exceeds $1,640 a 

month by even $1, they are not eligible for the full child care 

subsidy. This has not changed in a very long time. Bureaucracy 

for everyone involved with the child care subsidy system is 

onerous, wasteful, and not a good use of time and resources. It’s 

hard on those who run the child care centres, it’s time-sucking 

for ministry staff, and creates unnecessary hoops for families to 

jump through on a monthly basis in order to secure quality, 

affordable child care. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it could be better. It is in other provinces. 

Alberta bases child care subsidies on annual income, not 

monthly income. Manitoba, PEI [Prince Edward Island], and 

Quebec cap child care fees for families. These provinces invest 

money in services, not bureaucracy. Will the minister commit 

today to a complete review of the child care subsidy system so 

her government can start investing in families instead of in 

shuffling paper? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, since 2008 when we 

became government, there is now 5,600 more women working 

in this province than there was before. And in lots of cases that 

means that there is more daycare spaces needed. Right now in 

Saskatchewan, we have 3,500 families that receive a child care 

subsidy. And we know that the minimum wage increases in the 

last four years, since we became government, has been over 15 

per cent. 

 

Minimum wage earners are clawed back at the rate of $1.50 per 

month, Mr. Speaker. So that means they can earn $268 a month 

more because of our minimum wage increase, and that’s over 

$3,200 a year more to cover 18 months worth of clawback, Mr. 

Speaker. We understand there’s always more work to do when 

it comes to simplifying government processes. That’s 

something that we’re working on all the time. But what the 

important thing is right now is that people have money in their 

pockets, and what we’re doing is making sure that the subsidy 

goes to the families that need it. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Perhaps both those ministers should take 

even a half an hour to sit down with the people who are on the 

front lines of child care to find out exactly what’s going on, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The gallery is filled with those who’ve worked 

in early learning and care in Saskatchewan for many, many 

years. These dedicated women are here today because they fear 

for a child care system they believe is not sustainable. These 

individuals do not see a workforce coming behind them. Instead 

they see young people choosing other careers. As one of them 

put it, “No one can afford to work in child care.” 

 

With the cost of living today, who would go to school to 

educate themselves and take on debt to earn a little more than 

$20,000 a year? Child care workers often have families 

themselves that they must support. Even those who get the 

education and start out in the field end up moving up to better 

paying and less stressful employment after a short period of 

time. 

 

So to the minister, I do have a question in fact. These child care 

directors . . . This is very serious. These child care directors 

want to know how they are supposed to recruit and retain 

qualified staff when the average wage they can afford to pay 

their employees is comparable to working at a fast food outlet 

that requires no education and no student debt. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the 

member opposite’s sarcasm is lost on me because the answer to, 

who would do that: my daughter, who is presently taking the 

course right now because she’s interested in working with 

children and being a part of child care. 

 

It’s an extremely important job, and I totally agree. And we 

have committed, not just to child care workers, but we have 

committed to additional funding for community-based 

organization workers. And in doing so, in the last term we have 

increased funding to the community-based organizations that 

manage daycares and that decide the wages, an increase of 17.8 

per cent over the last four years. In addition, in February of 

2011, we have increased the tuition reimbursement grants from 

150 per individual course to $500, and from 450 to 1,500 for 

the early childhood orientation course, equivalent to an early 

childhood educator 1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agree that these are very valuable workers in 

our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I think that I would take 

the word over the people who are working in the field and know 

exactly what’s going on. There is much, much, much more 

work to do on this front. And we might add that you could 

check back with the minister’s daughter in five years to see if 

she’s still working in the field. 

 

There are staff setting . . . Mr. Speaker, there are staff setting 

ratios of level 1, 2, and 3 early learning and child care 

professionals that must be maintained in child care centres. The 

government rightfully has high expectations for child care 

facilities, requiring them to provide more for children, like the 

new play and exploration program. But government is not 

providing the supports these professionals need to carry out 

their work. You can talk to them afterwards and find out for 

yourself. 

 

Early learning and child care professionals are encouraged by 

the government to take professional development days to keep 

up their skills and stay current. But because child care centres 

need to remain open every weekday and finding substitute staff 

is next to impossible, these have to be scheduled on weekends 

— not always possible when you’ve got a family yourself and 

are making such low wages. So not only is affordable child care 

out of reach for many families; it is becoming harder and harder 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

for centres to sustain quality early learning and child care. 

 

To the minister: what is her long-term plan, the long-term plan 

to make quality early learning and child care not only affordable 

for families but sustainable for the people providing the care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the one thing that the 

member opposite and us can agree with is that there is much 

more that needs to be done. But I’ll tell you what’s not going to 

happen. We’re not going to go back to what the NDP did, 

which was absolutely ignore this file entirely while other 

provinces had three, four, five, six times more child care spaces 

per population than we did. We’re also not going to go back to 

where the increases to CBOs [community-based organizations] 

was disgustingly low so that there was no wage increases that 

they could offer to their workers. 

 

Do we need to do more? Yes, Mr. Speaker, we need to do more. 

We need to have more spaces available, and we need to support 

the community-based organizations that run our daycares. And 

we need to do it in a sustainable manner in the fiscal capacity of 

our province so that we will have these child care spaces going 

forward. But we’re not going to go back where Saskatchewan 

only has 8,000 spaces for the entire province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Arrangements for Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dr. John Loxley is a 

professor at the University of Manitoba. For 13 years he served 

as the department head at the University of Manitoba. He 

recently completed an assessment of the Sask Party’s Amicus 

deal. 

 

Amicus is a new long-term care facility in Saskatoon that has 

been financed through an approach that has never been used by 

the provincial government before. The opposition raised 

concerns that this approach was not in the best interest of 

patients or in the best interest of taxpayers. The Provincial 

Auditor has also raised concerns, and now Dr. Loxley is raising 

concerns. In fact he concluded that this approach with Amicus 

will cost the taxpayer between 11 and $20 million more than 

they need to pay. My question to the minister: does he agree 

with Dr. Loxley’s assessment of the Amicus deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this is not the first time that I’ve had the opportunity to 

stand in the House and defend this government’s decision to 

enter into an agreement with the Catholic Health Ministry to 

ensure that we have 100 more beds in the Saskatoon area so that 

citizens in Saskatoon, seniors that are living in acute care 

centres such as City Hospital, can move out of that and call a 

place like this their home, Mr. Speaker. I will stand many more 

times, I’m sure, to defend this decision, Mr. Speaker, because 

it’s the right one for seniors in this province; it’s the right one 

for citizens in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an agreement that was set up through the 

Catholic Health Ministry as a pilot project. It looks at a 

different funding model. I have just received this morning the 

report done by Dr. Loxley, Mr. Speaker, and as I have said, I’m 

looking at that and reviewing it, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 

necessarily agree with all the assumptions made, Mr. Speaker, 

because what I do know is that when a senior is in an acute care 

centre, for example in Saskatoon, it’s $1,200 a day. We are 

paying far less than that per bed per day, Mr. Speaker, in 

Amicus. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased the 

minister is talking about some of the details because in the 

details there are a number of concerning aspects. Dr. Loxley 

identifies six things that are unusual about this approach: (1) the 

construction wasn’t tendered, (2) there are higher borrowing 

costs, (3) government is financing the full cost of borrowing, 

(4) government is paying a higher rate per bed, (5) government 

is guaranteeing per diem payments, (6) government assumes the 

financial risk. 

 

Dr. Loxley says when all these factors are combined, 

Saskatchewan taxpayers will be paying between 11 to $20 

million more than if the funding had been done through the 

traditional route, Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t sound very lean to 

me, spending 11 to $20 million unnecessarily. My question to 

the minister: how does he justify spending up to $20 million 

unnecessarily when there are great needs for long-term care in 

the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the agreement that we 

entered into through the Catholic Health Ministry to construct 

Samaritan Place was a fixed contract, Mr. Speaker, that would 

not see the government exposed to any cost overruns. There 

were no cost overruns on the project, Mr. Speaker. It was on 

time; it was on budget, Mr. Speaker. And as I speak today, just 

under 50 people have moved into this facility and are now 

calling that facility home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won’t take advice from the opposition who for 

many, many years completely underfunded long-term care. 

We’ve replaced, are in the process of replacing 13 new 

long-term care facilities under our government, Mr. Speaker. 

This was one that’s outside. You could call it the 14th, Mr. 

Speaker, adding beds to the system, much needed beds in 

Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I can assure you, those people that 

have moved into this place are very happy to call it home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The concerns being 

raised are from outside of the official opposition. The 

Provincial Auditor has said there’s no cost-benefit analysis that 

was done. We have independent analysis saying now, Mr. 

Speaker, that this approach is going to cost between 11 to $20 

million beyond the normal expenditure for the people of 

Saskatchewan, for the patients of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

another example here where the Sask Party is simply ignoring 

common sense. 

 

Dr. Loxley says in his report: 

 

. . . there are many reasons the government should not 

pursue this new funding model for long-term care. The 

bottom line is it is too expensive. And the government is 

shouldering all the risk. 

 

When it comes to health care, Mr. Speaker, $20 million could 

help many patients in the province. My question to the minister: 

how many more deals will the minister be signing, Mr. 

Speaker? How many more deals will the minister be pursuing 

that will unnecessarily spend up to $20 million of taxpayers’ 

dollars here in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we move 

forward, Mr. Speaker, we’ve entered into agreements with 

communities, health regions to make sure that we have 13 

replacement of long-term care facilities. We listened to 

communities. At that time under the NDP, it was a 65/35 split 

for funding. We listened to communities, moved that to an 

80/20 split, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing those facilities move 

forward. 

 

And as we see the need, as we see the need for more long-term 

care facilities or more long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker, within 

the province, and especially in our two major centres, Regina 

and Saskatoon, where at times we see backlogs in the hospital 

and overcrowding in the hospital . . . And some of it is because 

of the very fact that we don’t have beds for long-term care 

patients that shouldn’t be spending time in acute care, but 

should be spending time in a proper facility like Amicus. 

 

We’ll continue to look at opportunities as we move forward, 

Mr. Speaker, and we’ll continue to look at funding models that 

make sense so that we have people living in appropriate living 

conditions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Water Supply and Plans for the Potash Industry 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that, once 

given approval by this government, Vale is planning on the 

construction of a 70-kilometre pipeline to pump water from 

Katepwa to their solution mine at Kronau. However, some of 

the details surrounding the pipeline plan have been difficult to 

ascertain, specifically regarding the pumping station at 

Katepwa. 

 

Katepwa and the surrounding area is a resort community. 

Large-scale projects like the one Vale is proposing can change 

the landscape of the area dramatically. Local citizens are very 

concerned about the impact of the pipeline on the lake and their 

properties. For those citizens, my question to the minister is 

this: where will the proposed pumping station be built for the 

Vale project and how loud will it be and how big will it be? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to thank the member for her question. Mr. Speaker, I think 

this is along the same lines as the questions that the member 

had on Thursday. Mr. Speaker, at that time the member had 

indicated that officials of the Government of Saskatchewan, be 

that SaskWater and the Watershed Authority, met with the 

community leaders at Katepwa. I believe the meeting date was 

about February 12th or 13th. 

 

Subsequent to that, which wasn’t in the member’s question, was 

a list of 40 questions were sent to both agencies on or about 

February 23rd or 24th. Both agencies are at the closing end of 

finishing answering all those questions, and those answers will 

be delivered, if those specific questions were a part of the 40 

that were asked specifically, those will be answered in the 

coming days. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Solution mining 

potash operations at Findlater, Kronau, and Sedley will need to 

extract fresh water from the Qu’Appelle River system. This 

water will be turned into brine and restored to the environment 

over a long period of time through evaporation. All of these 

mines will require water extraction from Lake Diefenbaker 

through the Qu’Appelle River system. Diefenbaker is fed by 

spring runoff from parts of southern Alberta and the Rocky 

Mountains, but significant amounts also come from a 

non-renewable fossil glacial water, which is a depleting source. 

 

To the minister: regarding the Vale project, how many litres of 

water per day are expected to be pumped out of Katepwa Lake 

for the project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, these are certainly some very timely and important 

questions for our province to be able to answer. That’s why we 

are taking our time to address all 40 concerns that were raised 

by the people of Katepwa and area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this frankly is a process that we haven’t gone 

through in a great many years. Mr. Speaker, as members will 

know, they didn’t have to go through an allocation for a new 

potash mine in the entire 16 years that they were in government, 

Mr. Speaker. So it’s a new challenge that we have, and it’s one 

that we won’t take lightly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have identified is, through the requests 

for the water for this particular, not just this particular 

development but other developments on that chain, Mr. 

Speaker, we do have infrastructure in place. The upper 

Qu’Appelle conveyance was designed for a specific amount of 

water that it could deliver into Buffalo and throughout the rest 

of the Qu’Appelle chain, Mr. Speaker. And we are looking at 

what work would need to be to increase the capacity back to, 

closer to its original design capability. And that work is being 

done now, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 

minister for that answer. 

 

Saskatchewan’s reserves of potash have been attracting 

ever-increasing attention and investment from both Canadian 

and foreign enterprises, and the NDP supports this great 

investment in Saskatchewan. However, the government is 

responsible to manage the environment properly when 

resources are being developed, especially to this magnitude. We 

all know these large-scale projects impact our environment, and 

we must not allow a red-hot industry to drive the proper 

management of the resource and the plan for surrounding 

environment. The cumulative impact must be considered. Ten 

mines or 40 mines — these are very different scenarios. 

 

To the minister: does the province have a plan for the overall 

sustainable development of Saskatchewan’s potash resources? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell . . . And I want to assure the public and 

the members of this House that the Watershed Authority and 

other government agencies that are involved in approval 

process for new developments do not look at these 

developments in a silo, Mr. Speaker. We look at them over the 

entire piece of government, Mr. Speaker, in terms of not only 

this development that is before us right now but other ones that 

are in earlier stages, Mr. Speaker — what the impact would be 

not only if this project were to go ahead but others that would 

come after, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of 

Saskatchewan, we are at work right now on renewal of our 

water management strategy in this province that will look at all 

aspects of this issue, Mr. Speaker, look at the important aspects 

from source water protection all the way to drinking water, Mr. 

Speaker. And that work is happening concurrently, as we look 

at specific developments like the one that the member opposite 

talks about. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Finances and Policing Costs 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the budget is being 

released on Wednesday, and the Sask Party has been sending all 

kinds of mixed messages to Saskatchewan people. In one 

sentence they talk about prosperity in the province, and in 

another sentence they are telling families to brace for cuts. On 

one hand the Sask Party is off-loading RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] costs onto families, making people pay more 

for safe communities, and on the other hand they’re spending 

millions of dollars adding three more politicians. When can 

Saskatchewan people expect to get some straight answers from 

this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. If 

the member wants to talk about policing costs, I can assure the 

member that what we believe in in this side of the House is 

safety for our communities. And with that we have added 120 

police officers that we said that we were going to. We added an 

additional 42 as backup police officers. It’s a little bit different 

than what the opposition did when they promised 200 new 

police officers. And how did they make out? They never 

delivered. In 2003, they didn’t deliver on that again. So that’s 

not our plan at all. Our plan is to deliver, which we have done. 

 

As far as the costing goes, our costs have gone up 57 per cent 

for policing in this province over the last six years. None of that 

has been transferred to any of the municipal governments. We 

felt this year was the time to look at sharing the cost, and that’s 

what we’re doing now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Reporting Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said the 

government is looking at separating operating and capital 

spending in the upcoming budget, to which business columnist 

Bruce Johnstone stated, I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan’s budget is one of the most complicated 

financial documents in Canada, with a welter of funds 

(General Revenue Fund, Growth and Financial Security 

Fund, debt retirement funds, sinking funds, rainy day 

funds, etc.) and different methods of accounting (GRF 

versus summary financial statements) . . . 

 

Johnstone also goes on to say, I quote, “In all likelihood, it’s 

going to make budgets more opaque, complex and hard to 

understand . . .” 

 

How does adding more complexity to books that are already 

improperly accounted for and already too complicated make it 

more transparent and more open for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

for many years now we’ve been talking about clarifying for the 

people of the province the need to ensure that we move forward 

with operating and that capital for all infrastructure means that 

you will spend that kind of dollars if those dollars are available, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ve looked at other provinces. We’ve looked at some 

eastern provinces that have a capital plan where, long before the 

budget, they release a capital plan which is not necessarily their 

total amount of infrastructure capital that they’re going to do 

that year, but they provide a clear indication to their third 

parties — in many cases health authorities, school boards — 

that indeed you’re going to be looking at a capital plan and 

projects. The Highways ministry in this province has long had a 

five-year plan, Mr. Speaker, so that people can see ahead as to 

when those projects are going to move forward. 

 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s not going to cause any complex situation. 

We’re just going to make sure that people understand how 

we’re going to move this province forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Adding more 

complexity at a time where they need to be adding more 

transparency to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In December the Provincial Auditor clearly stated, I quote: 

 

Simply put, the way Saskatchewan publicly reports its 

annual surpluses and deficits to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan is out of sync with the rest of Canada. It’s 

time for public reporting to focus on the summary 

financial statements. 

 

The Sask Party has ignored the independent auditor and now 

wants to confuse reporting further. Saskatchewan people 

deserve nothing less than the full and true state of their finances 

to be reported. Enough is enough, Mr. Speaker. It’s past time 

that this government be straight with Saskatchewan people in 

reporting our finances honestly. How can this minister 

disagree? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — The answer is, Mr. Speaker, we provide 

both, Mr. Speaker. We provide a summary, and we provide a 

GRF [General Revenue Fund]. The people in this province 

know more than anywhere else in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One thing I also want to straighten out for the member, 

especially the member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that member has suggested that there has been no 

reduction of debt because the NDP left such a massive amount 

of dollars. I want to clarify, Mr. Speaker, for that member: the 

debt was $6.8 billion. The GFS [Growth and Financial Security] 

balance when we took over was $1.2 billion in the bank which 

meant that there was a net position of 5.6 billion. Mr. Speaker, 

on March 31st this government is going to end with $3.8 billion 

worth of debt, $709 million in the fund, Mr. Speaker, for a total 

of $3.1 billion. You know, Mr. Speaker, that’s a $2.5 billion 

improvement. That’s the honest answer. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s 

Bench Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 

1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and make some comments with respect to Bill No. 1, An 

Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 respecting an 

Associate Chief Justice. Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 

relatively straightforward, but it still has that official 

designation as Bill No. 1. And I guess in some sense it’s 

symbolic of this session and of the government’s agenda that 

An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act respecting an 

Associate Chief Justice is Bill No. 1 for their legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s often that what you want to do is, in your 

first Bill, set out the sort of signature piece that you’re going to 

use to tell the public what it is that’s most important for you as 

you proceed with legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that 

this Bill has done that in this particular session and in fact, as 

we’ve seen in other Bills, there are quite a few that end up 

showing that the government doesn’t really have a plan for this 

session or for this four-year period as government. 

 

Now this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, effectively adds the 

definition for Associate Chief Justice at the Court of Queen’s 

Bench. And the purpose of this is to effectively provide for an 

administrative structure within the Court of Queen’s Bench that 

provides assistance to the Chief Justice and makes sure that 

there are no difficulties in managing certain parts of the duties 

that are assigned to them by the Chief Justice. So effectively, 

what this Bill does is say when the Chief Justice is not around 

or not able to handle a particular task, he can assign those duties 

to the Associate Chief Justice. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we think this is a very practical suggestion. 

And albeit, it’s got the title Bill No. 1, it really doesn’t have a 

great dramatic affect on ordinary people in Saskatchewan. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, I move that we send this to committee. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 1, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that this Bill be referred to 

the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved that this be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 2 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and make a few comments about Bill No. 2, An Act to 

amend certain Statutes with respect to matters concerning 

Collaborative Law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these clauses in this particular Bill are here at the 

request of the legal profession and make a fair amount of sense. 

Effectively what they say is that if there’s a matter that’s going 

to be dealt with under The Children’s Law Act or The Family 

Maintenance Act or The Family Property Act, there’s a duty of 

every lawyer, and I think it’s important that we actually look at 

what the clause says, and effectively it says it’s the duty of 

every lawyer who undertakes to act on behalf of a spouse or a 

parent or somebody who’s involved in, depending which Act 

you’re in, in an application pursuant to this Act to (a) discuss 

with that person the advisability of using alternative methods to 

resolve the matters that are the subject of the application; and 

(b) inform the person that collaborative law services and 

mediation services are available that might be able to assist 

them in resolving these matters. 

 

And now it is interesting that the one clause that is put in here, 

which is an obligation on the lawyer, is that it says, services, 

collaborative law services and mediation services known to him 

or her. So that’s known to the lawyer. So it is possible that 

somebody could say, well I don’t know of any, and therefore 

not have to work with this particular clause. But I think it’ll be 

the role of the Canadian Bar Association and the Law Society to 

make sure that every lawyer who practises in Saskatchewan 

knows about this particular obligation. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting way to draft this particular 

clause. And I’m fairly certain that this clause comes from the 

history of the 1968 Divorce Act. As many people in Canada 

know, the whole issue of, well, divorce and marriage are 

constitutionally the responsibility of the federal government. So 

therefore provinces could not proclaim laws relating to divorce. 

Now they could deal with matters surrounding marriage or 

divorce, but they couldn’t deal with those specific issues. 

 

And so up until 1968, when Mr. Trudeau, Pierre Trudeau, was 

the Attorney General in the Pearson government, there wasn’t a 

situation where it was very simple to get a divorce. And there 

was much debate as that particular piece of legislation was 

introduced into the federal parliament around divorce. 

 

One of the clauses that was placed in that particular legislation 

was a clause that was very similar to this that put an obligation 

on the lawyers who were handling the divorce case to make 

sure that their client knew about all the possibilities for 

counselling before they actually went through the final process 

of getting the divorce. And that clause, I think probably is still 

in the legislation, but it was always one that was a bit of a 

mystery to many lawyers involved in court. Now it’s my hope 

that these clauses that are in these pieces of legislation around 

collaborative law don’t have the same history as that clause in 

the 1968 Divorce Act had. And the reason for that is that 

lawyers have become much better at understanding how to 

resolve issues relating to children, families, divorce, and 

marriage and have provided a whole different set of services 

which are now designated as collaborative law services. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill effectively acknowledges 

those skills and obligates the lawyers who are involved in this 

type of a case in the courts, it obligates them to make sure that 

individuals know when the whole issue that’s at the subject of 

the litigation is such that it should probably be dealt with or 

resolved in another manner. Now ultimately you will need the 

court order to end the marriage if it’s that, but practically all of 

the related issues under The Children’s Law Act, The Family 

Maintenance Act, or The Family Property Act will have been 

sorted out through a process of collaborative law. 

 

People often wonder what that means. And I guess what I 

would say is that many, many years ago — I guess it’d be 27 

years ago — I was qualified as a mediator and a lawyer, first 

lawyer in Regina and southern Saskatchewan to do that. And it 

was quite a dramatic shift in how you dealt with cases. And 

slowly but surely there were other lawyers who practised in 

Saskatchewan who also understood that this was a part of the 

process that you could end up with a better result. And often 

what would happen is people would be referred to lawyers who 

also would work with other lawyers in a more conciliatory 

fashion, if I could put it that way, but preserving the rights of 

the parties. 

 

Collaborative law has over the years ended up making sure that 

this particular area of the law is becoming less of a problem for 

people. There’s no question that the expense of traditional 

battles in the family law area are prohibitive and that this allows 

for a more reasonable budget as it goes. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that this legislation does make 

sense. We’ll have some questions when we get into committee, 

but at this point I would move that we send this particular Bill 

to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 2, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that this Bill be 

referred to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill then refers to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Why is the Leader of the Opposition on his feet? 

 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce Mr. Rick Swenson, who is sitting behind the bar this 

afternoon. Mr. Swenson is the leader of the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and he served in this 

Chamber for many years. I think with . . . I guess there aren’t 

too many left that were here when he was serving but, Mr. 

Speaker, he served the province well. He continues to work in 

political circles, and I know there are a number of unresolved 

issues around Saskatchewan politics in which he’s intimately 

involved, but I ask all members to welcome here this afternoon. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 3 — The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to rise 

and speak to Bill No. 3, An Act to amend The Summary 

Offences Procedure Act, 1990. And this once again is 

legislation that provides amendments to The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act. The Summary Offences Procedure Act in many 

ways is the workhorse legislation for the small crimes or small 

criminal law area, as many offences that are provincial offences 

are dealt with by this particular legislation. The importance of 

this particular piece of legislation is that it allows for methods 

to serve people with the summonses and then set out a 

procedure for default convictions if people do not respond. 

 

I think a traditional problem with summary offence charges was 

that people would ignore them and they would sit somewhere or 

they would cause some difficulty. And this legislation is 

brought to bear here to attempt to make the whole summary 

offences procedure Act more workable for the police, for the 

courts while at the same time protecting the rights of those 

people who have been charged. 

 

So for example, some of the things that are going to happen 

with this legislation that we don’t have now include getting 

warrants, summary offence warrants, by telephone. Now it’s the 

same process that’s used federally under the Criminal Code to 

get warrants, so the police are quite conversant with how to do 

this. But it does allow for the full protection of the people who 

may be accused. But it deals with the fact that in Saskatchewan 

we often have long distances, and presently to get a warrant, 

one would have to travel to a place where there was appropriate 

official or judge who could issue that warrant. What would 

happen with this new legislation is that these types of warrants 

could be obtained over the telephone. 

 

And the whole process of the electronic summary offence 

tickets, that’s another part that’s in this, will allow for the use of 

hand-held ticket machines, if I could put it that way. And as one 

who has seen these in use in other countries, especially in 

Europe, I think we may eventually get to the point that some of 

those countries do, where they issue the ticket and if you accept 

the fact that you made a mistake and the charge is accurate, you 

can end up paying the fine with your Visa or MasterCard right 

on the spot, and it saves all kinds of administrative difficulties. 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation appears to be the 

first step or the enabling step that will allow us to have a fairly 

rapid resolution of a number of infractions, if I can put it that 

way. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think there may be some interesting 

questions about what actually happens as the legislation moves 

forward in some of these areas, especially I think the electronic 

ticket and subsequent systems set-up, but that practically there 

isn’t anything here that has a major problem. But we will be 

asking questions as it moves to committee. But at this point I 

would ask that this Bill be moved to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 3, 

The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that this Bill be 

referred to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 4 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 4 — The Pension 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to make some comments about Bill No. 4, An Act to amend 

The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. Now, Mr. Speaker, this 

particular legislation has as its main purpose to enable the 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

further use of multijurisdictional plans, multijurisdictional 

pension plans, and make sure that they can be properly 

supervised within our federal country. 

 

And so effectively what happens right now is that the pensions 

regulators from across the country, all the provinces and 

territories and the federal government, meet and look at 

legislative changes that address the mobility of workers in our 

country and also addresses the whole area of making sure that 

people do not lose pension rights if they happen to move 

between jurisdictions. And so what this particular legislation 

does is make sure that our pension benefits Act, which applies 

to only a certain segment of the pensions in the province — 

quite a few pieces of pension legislation in our system are in 

other Acts and so it doesn’t apply to all of those — but it does 

apply to those kinds of pensions that are available across the 

country. 

 

So the legislation is itself primarily enabling of some of the 

changes and concerns that are there. And it allows for reciprocal 

treatment between Canadian jurisdictions, and it allows for the 

minister to sign agreements that bind Saskatchewan and make 

sure that the promises are upheld on these particular types of 

pension plans. 

 

Now, I think, otherwise the basic rules and regulations are in 

place. They allow for the flexibility that we in Saskatchewan 

have been used to. The only thing that we would get concerned 

about, Mr. Speaker, is that individuals are protected as we move 

forward with the legislation. We do note that this particular Act 

does not apply to provincial government employees’ pension 

plans, so there’s a different place where some of these things 

are dealt with. But practically the issues are dealt with in an 

appropriate fashion. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the whole Act itself is based on the premise 

that individuals will have a pension that enables them to 

provide for their retirement. Often it’s forgotten that pensions 

are really just deferred income but deferred income that’s 

rewarded through a tax structure. And that deferred income is 

an asset that each person has or maybe each family has, if I can 

put it that way. And it’s important that there are rules there that 

protect that asset for the long-term future of the individual or of 

the family, but it’s also important that there be sufficient 

flexibility. 

 

Now over the last 10 years, we’ve seen some fairly dramatic 

discussions about pension plans in about three different areas. 

One is that people who have defined benefit plans, in other 

words, their plans are based on a certain amount based on the 

number of years of service and then comes up with, say, 70 per 

cent of your last three years of your salary in whatever job you 

have, those kinds of plans were . . . I guess people rued the fact 

they had those, maybe six or seven years ago, because they 

seemed to be worth substantially less than those plans where 

people made defined contributions, and they had this asset that 

was based on the very healthy stock market and investment 

market. And so often they would compare notes with their 

friends or even within their own family and say, oh, I wish I had 

this big fund under a defined contribution plan. And you know, 

or if you’re on the defined benefit plan, woe is me. I’m getting a 

low payment based on all the years I’ve paid into the system. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the year 2008 changed all that. And now the 

people who have the funds, after taking some fairly substantial 

losses in that whole adjustment of the valuation of all of the 

assets in plans and in people’s individual investment portfolios, 

are saying, well maybe some of these defined benefit plans are 

way better than what we thought. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

particular legislation builds on top of that, and so we have to 

remember that. 

 

The third area, as I mentioned before, related to pension plans, 

is what happens to the assets of a plan when a company gets 

into financial difficulty or into bankruptcy. And we’re still in 

the process in Canada of clearly defining the rules and the place 

that the pension plan has in the whole debt hierarchy of a 

company that has gotten into trouble. And often that becomes a 

major bargaining issue in collective bargaining, but it also 

becomes an issue when you look at, well who is going to pick 

up the pieces if somebody’s plan is no longer there. Once again 

this particular legislation builds on top of some of these rules 

and allows for the multijurisdictional pension plan agreement to 

clearly define some of these issues. 

 

But what it does mean is that everybody who becomes part of 

one of these agreements through whatever process is required, 

but often it’s the signature of the minister, they need to be told 

exactly what type of risk they are incurring if they get into a 

multijurisdictional plan versus the plan that they might have had 

that was solely a Saskatchewan-based plan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, some of these kinds of questions will have to 

be asked in the committee. But I think at this stage the 

legislation is legislation that should move forward to committee 

so that that discussion can take place. And I therefore move that 

this legislation go to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 4, 

The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that this Bill be referred to 

the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 5 — The Credit 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

Union Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise and 

make a few comments about Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The 

Credit Union Act, 1998 and to repeal The Credit Union Central 

of Saskatchewan Act, 1999. And so, Mr. Speaker, the legislation 

that we have here today is legislation that comes forward at the 

request of the Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan, and also I 

think the people involved with credit unions in the province. 

 

And I think it’s important to understand what this legislation 

does. And effectively what it says is that we don’t need The 

Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act any more as our 

credit union — or SaskCentral, as it’s called for shorthand — 

will now become a federally regulated or a national 

co-operative of credit unions if I can put it that way, and that 

their legislation will be based under the federal legislation 

which is dealt with similar to all of the national banks. 

 

And this is an interesting move, but it’s part of a long-term 

evolution of the credit union movement in Canada which 

recognizes that the roles of a credit union are local — there’s no 

question about that — but they also have ways that they operate 

nationally and in some cases even internationally. 

 

What this particular legislation will do will allow SaskCentral, 

as a federally regulated body, move towards some more 

connections nationally. And it will be of benefit to all credit 

unions because it will increase the size of the pool involved and 

increase the financial leverage that they have. As we know, as 

the business gets bigger and bigger, it’s important that all the 

institutions are backstopped, if I can use that term, but have 

behind them some substantial amount of assets. 

 

Now the good news is that in Saskatchewan our credit unions 

are very strong. Their administration is very strong, and we 

continue to provide leadership across the country. I think this 

particular legislation is further evidence of that good 

relationship between the credit unions and the people within the 

Ministry of Justice who are working on this area. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we may have some more questions when 

we get to committee about this legislation. But it appears to be 

of benefit to all members of credits unions, to the credit unions 

themselves, and to the general public. And so therefore I move 

that we move it to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 5, 

The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that this Bill be referred to 

the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 35 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 35 — The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée 

législative et le Conseil exécutif be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 

that I rise today to speak to the Bill No. 35, The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

This Bill deals with election dates, Mr. Speaker. It’s a fairly 

short piece of legislation. And there’s only actually one section 

that’s being proposed to be changed, and that is section 8.1(2) 

of the original Act in 2007 — The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 2007 — which is repealed, and the 

proposal in this Bill is to substitute a following clause which 

reads: 

 

“(2) Subject to subsection (3), general elections following 

the general election held in accordance with subsection (1) 

must be held on the first Monday of November in the 

fourth calendar year after the last general election. 

 

And the subsection (3) now reads, if the writ period is held in 

accordance with subsection (2) and if it overlaps for a general 

election held by the Dominion of Canada under the Canada 

Elections Act, then that fixed date would be moved to the first 

Monday in April in the calendar year following. And there’s a 

further definition of the writ period. 

 

So in and of itself, this is a fairly basic change to the Act that 

existed and was introduced by the government in 2007, at 

which point they were following in the trend across Canada to 

set fixed election dates. This is not a new trend. It’s been 

around since the beginning of the 2000s, and I think it was 

appropriate for this government to follow suit. 

 

I know my colleague has, some of my colleagues have spoken 

to this Bill already and have commented on the minister’s first 

paragraph and his comments when introducing the Bill. And 

particularly he’s removing uncertainty that had traditionally 

existed regarding when provincial elections would be held, and 

in particular to avoid gamesmanship in the choice of an election 

date. 

 

And I think that’s entirely appropriate, and obviously it has 

been the pattern that has been followed by all jurisdictions in 

Canada in order to remove some of that uncertainty. It certainly 

helps the public because they have a fair idea of when the 

election will be held. And I think generally for the press and for 

educators and certainly politicians but also academics and 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

instructors and political science enthusiasts, perhaps it is 

unfortunate to lose some of that suspense, but I think overall it 

just helps people plan their lives accordingly. We know that 

municipal by-elections are held every two years. I know First 

Nations, their elections are normally set on a specific cycle, 

either through the provisions of the Indian Act or through their 

own custom election codes. So it just really assists the people 

and, I think, bureaucrats and civil servants and academics and 

even people who are just fond of following politics, to just 

know generally when the next election is going to be. 

 

Unfortunately, with gamesmanship I think we are concerned 

about some other Bills that are on this legislative agenda, 

including the one that’s coming up next, Bill C-36 . . . or not 

C-36, Bill 36 — I keep speaking in the federal vernacular — 

because that, I think, is something that is of concern to the 

public and certainly to the opposition, Mr. Speaker, because it 

does raise questions about what the real underlying motive is 

for that particular Bill. I know the government is holding forth 

that it’s population growth, but it really . . . Mr. Speaker, our 

averages are way lower than many, many other provinces. So 

the population growth doesn’t seem to be the true reason why 

that Bill was being introduced. And I think the gamesmanship 

that the minister is speaking about in his comments on this Bill 

really need to be shifted over to that piece of legislation. 

 

[15:00] 

 

At any rate, the minister went on to indicate that he was 

convinced that fixed-date general elections are the right thing to 

do. I don’t think there’s any disagreement with that in the 

public or with other provinces. And it’s apparent there’s a little 

problem now, though, because of the way the last election went 

and the changes that the federal government made. Because the 

first time the federal government introduced it, in 2006, it was a 

minority government. And when it was introduced in 2006, 

there were a number of goings-on, including some action on the 

behalf of the Senate. So we had the unelected senators making 

an effort to improve the Bill on a number of counts. There were 

problems with it in terms of religious holidays and potential 

conflicts and clashes with other dates. So they tried to amend it 

in order to avoid those clashes. But given the heavy-handed 

style of the federal government right now, they just overruled 

the Senate and introduced the Bill as it was. 

 

It’s indicated in that Bill there is still room for the Governor 

General to dissolve parliament. And indeed we saw that in 2008 

when things weren’t going very well for the Government of 

Canada and the Prime Minister of the day spoke to the 

Governor General and asked for a dissolution, the prorogue. 

And we all know that that was highly disapproved of by many, 

many people in the public as an abuse of the democratic 

authority of the Government of Canada and certainly still has 

reverberations throughout Canada. And it’s been going on 

further with other actions of this Prime Minister and the 

Government of Canada in many different ways. So it’s of 

concern to many people. 

 

So at that point, the federal government was able to move the 

Bill to change the date but they weren’t able to ever really get to 

it, because what happened with the minority government is, first 

of all there was the prorogue, and then there was two 

subsequent elections after that. And so they weren’t able to 

actually get to the fixed date. 

 

Now with the majority government that was elected in May of 

2011, it looks like this will actually go the full term for the first 

time in a long time. So what’s happened then is that the likely 

date — the legislated date — of the next federal election will be 

October 19th, 2015. Obviously our minister is paying attention 

and realized that that would be just a few short weeks before 

our legislated election. So I’m sure he and his officials quickly 

realized that, and that’s one of the reasons why this Bill came 

into being, that we needed to have some flexibility so that we 

wouldn’t be having a provincial election a few short weeks after 

a federal election in 2015. 

 

So what he’s proposing is that, rather than leaving it as it was, 

the provincial election will now follow the . . . will go to the 

calendar year next following that Monday in November and 

would be in the April, the month of April. So I think this is 

something that will make a lot of sense in the electoral cycle. 

 

It’s somewhat interesting to me that the governments, all the 

provincial attorney generals haven’t gotten together to sort this 

out a little bit because all other jurisdictions have introduced 

similar legislation. Alberta introduced theirs in 2011, so just last 

year, and they chose the month between March and May. So 

they have some flexibility in terms of when they can call it. It’s 

between March 1st and May 31st so there’s a three-month 

period rather than a fixed date. I’m not certain why the province 

of Alberta felt that was a better choice, but we all know that 

there’s an election coming up in Alberta shortly. So that is . . . 

One choice was spring. And they’re a year ahead of us now in 

their cycle so that’s a nice sort of balance. 

 

Then BC [British Columbia], the province of British Columbia, 

was the first to adopt the fixed dates in 2001, so a mere 11 years 

ago. So their cycle ends up being 2012 and then 2016, 

according to the information I have located. So they’re in 2012. 

We were in 2011. Manitoba introduced their Bill in 2008 and 

they’re also the first Tuesday in October. And so as we all 

know, they had a provincial election last year in October and 

their cycle will be the same as ours. I don’t have any 

information about whether the province of Manitoba intends to 

follow the minister, the Attorney General’s decision here to 

push it back to spring of the following year, 2015, if indeed the 

federal election is called. And I guess that’s something the 

province of Manitoba will likely want to follow suit. We’re not 

sure where they will choose, if it’ll be a spring election or a fall 

election, but they seem to have the same problem as we have 

here because of the electoral cycle federally. 

 

And Ontario introduced their Bill for the first time in 2005, and 

it would be the first Thursday in October. So October appears to 

be a popular month for some provinces, and they had their 

election in 2011 as well. So we had a whole plethora of 

elections last year. And they have some flexibility in their Bill 

to move it forward or backward depending if there are religious 

holidays. And I think that, if I recall correctly, did actually 

happen. The other provinces all have, as far as I can tell, 

introduced various Bills to deal with this. I’m sure this is 

something that attorneys general would probably talk about 

when they get together for their federal-provincial-territorial 

meetings. And I expect that this is something that we’ll keep 

watching with interest. 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

It’s very difficult to be specific because you can’t really predict 

the future, Mr. Speaker. And so with the federal cycle turning 

out as it did, it did put this government in a bit of a bind, and so 

they were forced to look at it, and I suspect this isn’t the end of 

it. There will be, all throughout the ages, varying kinds of 

problems with planning for the future. And we all know about 

that even when we think about raising kids or our own 

particular career trajectories. 

 

So it’s always good to keep an eye on the ball and an eye on 

what’s going to happen in the future, and I think this particular 

legislation is a small, short piece that was necessary, given the 

results of the federal election last year in May. And I think at 

this point . . . I’m looking for my comments. At this point I 

would like to move it to committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill 

No. 35, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that this Bill be 

referred to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 36 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 

36 is, I’ll say from the outset of my remarks, is not one we’ll be 

moving on to committee today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again if you’d reflect on the content of the 75-minute 

debate from last Thursday, you’ll be somewhat familiar with 

my opinion of this piece of legislation. But for those that 

weren’t paying close attention, Mr. Speaker, I will reprise my 

critique of this Bill. 

 

I think this Bill is wrong-headed on so many different fronts, 

Mr. Speaker. The two main sort of items in it of course are in 

terms of the content of the legislation, is (a) the addition of 

three additional politicians, moving the numbers of members of 

the Legislative Assembly from 58 to 61, and the second item of 

course is the changing of the calculation by which the 

constituency boundary quotient is arrived at. And of course the 

remarkable piece in this, Mr. Speaker, is the removal of 

everyone under the age of 18 for the purposes of the calculation 

by which constituency boundaries are made. So two things: (1) 

they want to add additional politicians, and (2) the changing of 

the calculation whereby everyone under the age of 18 is counted 

out by this government for the purposes of the construction of 

these constituency boundaries. 

 

And we in the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, think this is a 

really wrong-headed piece of legislation. We think that this 

takes the province, when it comes to counting out everyone 

under the age of 18, it puts us offside with our neighbours to the 

west in Alberta, it puts us offside with our neighbours to the 

east in Manitoba, and it puts us offside with the federal 

government in the way that they calculate the population for the 

constituency boundaries as well. 

 

And I guess the thing that’s interesting about it is, on the one 

hand, this government is arguing that there’s more population 

so you need more MLAs, and this in a broader context of when 

this government is stepping forward and saying that, oh it’s 

going to be a tough budget and folks better tighten their belts 

and, you know, there’s no need for this public service, or 

municipalities are going to have to pay more for RCMP, or we 

don’t have the funds to address the housing crisis, or pick your 

front on which this is going to go. And we’ll see these things 

get rolled forward in the days ahead with the budgets in 

particular. 

 

But it’s funny that they would be pleading poverty or austerity 

on the one hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and then on the other 

hand talking about what a great time we’re having in the 

province, in the growth and the this and the that. And how is it 

that they can talk about cutting public services on the one hand 

and adding three more politicians on the other? 

 

And of course we just came through a provincial election not 

very long ago, Mr. Speaker. And I get on a fair number of 

doorsteps in an election, and I’m out talking to the constituents 

on a pretty consistent basis. And as people raise their problems 

with me that each of the respective sides were seeking to 

address through their platform, nobody came to me and said, 

you know that problem I’ve got with housing or that problem 

I’ve got with the cost of living or the problem I want to see 

addressed in terms of, you know, where’s the high school? 

Where’s that at for the revitalized Scott Collegiate? Or this 

government was very quick to tear down Herchmer School, but 

what’s happening with the Herchmer/Wascana school 

conundrum? Or, you know, pick your issue. In all of our 

wait-lists in terms of health care or the attraction and retention 

of health care professionals or being able to afford 

post-secondary education or job training, on all of these issues 

nobody ever came forward on the doorstep, Mr. Speaker, and 

said, you know, I’ve got a problem, and I think the answer is 

three more politicians down at the legislature. I think that’s 

really going to get the problem on the run. 

 

And you know, nobody came forward saying that. I guess, for 

one reason, the party office didn’t talk about it in the campaign. 

And you’d think that for a government that likes to talk about 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

being ready for growth and on and on and on, you know, if they 

were going to be serious about a growth agenda for politicians, 

you’d think they’d want to talk about that at the doorstep. 

 

Or, you know, we’ve heard over the years about hope trumping 

fear from the members opposite. We’ve heard about the election 

platform being a sacred covenant with the people. And we’ve 

heard a lot of really rich language about the platforms that have 

been taken to the people or a promise made or a promise kept. 

And again that’s fine, Mr. Speaker, and that’s actually even 

laudable. 

 

But the problem that we have on this side of the House is that if 

that is a virtue on that side that they like to pat themselves on 

the back for, then where the heck was this promise about three 

additional MLAs, three additional politicians? And where was 

it, Mr. Speaker? Well it was nowhere. And they couldn’t be 

straight with the people at election time when it came to 

bringing that particular measure forward. And I guess it would 

be interesting to know, Mr. Speaker, if they had been straight, 

and they got a mandate to do that and if they talked about it at 

election time if it was in their platform — or perhaps even in 

their Throne Speech, which came, you know, mere days after 

the election — maybe that would be a different thing. But that 

of course was not the case. This was something that was 

brought in as Bill No. 36, of 36 pieces of legislation. It didn’t 

receive its second reading speech until the House reconvened 

this March. 

 

And for all intents and purposes, Mr. Speaker, it looks like they 

tried to, you know, sneak this one in as fast as, as sneakily as 

they could, as subversively as they could. And I guess, we in 

this Assembly, of course we go to the people, we ask for 

support and we get sent to the legislature to address the issues 

that people raise with us. And again, Mr. Speaker, I go back to 

the hundreds, if not thousands of doorsteps that I was on in this 

past campaign. I think about the seniors that were worried about 

living on a fixed income and health care. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I think about young people that were interested in making a life 

for themselves and getting the post-secondary education 

opportunities to take a job in the workforce or, you know, 

making sure that they could pay the bills in terms of keeping a 

car licensed and a roof over their heads. Or the people that were 

having a very hard time keeping up in terms of the housing 

situation in this province and the way that rent has skyrocketed, 

and people finding it harder and harder to make a go of it. In all 

those different kind of circumstances, Mr. Speaker, never once 

did somebody say, you know, I’ve got a solution for you. I’ve 

got an answer to this question. I’ve got a . . . You’ve got a 

problem with housing, or post-secondary education or with 

taxes or any of these sort of measures. I’ve got an answer: the 

answer is more politicians. 

 

And for the government to then bring that forward after the 

election when it’s a mere matter of days when they’ve been out 

there talking to people and saying, you know, we really value 

what you have to say and we really value your opinion. And 

particularly for those members, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we’ve 

heard a lot of guff over the years from certain members 

opposite about the virtues of smaller government. And certainly 

we’ve seen that when it comes to the public service being up for 

the four-by-four plan, the reduction by 16 per cent over four 

years that we’re in the middle of right now, and what that says 

to a province about being ready for growth and what that says 

to young people that are interested in serving as public servants. 

 

And I think it would have been great if they had said, you 

know, we think that 16 per cent reduction on public service, 

that’s a measure of this government. And they’d announced that 

before the last campaign so it was part of the campaign they ran 

on — fair enough. But I think it was glaring by its absence, this 

notion of they’re going to cut public service on the one hand by 

16 per cent but they’re going to increase the number of 

politicians by three on the other. And I think if they had come 

forward in different surroundings, Mr. Speaker, that that would 

have caught the interest of the public. I can almost guarantee 

you that. 

 

I had the opportunity to do a housing forum with the Minister 

Responsible for the Sask Housing Corporation, the member 

from Kelvington-Wadena, and when she was talking to people 

that were very concerned about the housing crisis in Regina and 

the fact that rental housing is at point six per cent vacancy and a 

lot of really hard circumstances, Mr. Speaker, you know, not 

once in that debate did she say, help is on the way. Don’t worry. 

We going to introduce three more politicians. 

 

And I think it would have been great if she had said that 

because I think that would have really connected with the 

audience in terms of just how out of touch that would have 

seemed. How, when these people are trying to advance 

solutions to the housing situation and are being told in many 

cases to wait or that there isn’t the money or there isn’t the will, 

I think it would have been really great for that minister to come 

forward and say, you know, on all those things we can’t really 

act or that the program’s not as advanced as we should have it, 

but one thing we’re going to do right off the hop is introduce 

legislation to bring in three extra politicians. I think that would 

have really seized the imagination of the people assembled. 

 

I know that in the local constituency debate against my Sask 

Party candidate, there were a lot of different things got brought 

up in that debate, Mr. Speaker, but that was not one of them. I 

know that that individual wanted to win and to serve the people 

in Regina Elphinstone-Centre — fair enough. But not once did 

the whole sort of, you know, let me tell you about the Sask 

Party platform and its virtues and the fact that we’d like to bring 

in three more politicians or that we’ve got a growth agenda for 

the number of politicians, that never came up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I guess we have a hard time just on the face of it, the way 

that this piece of legislation has been brought forward and the 

kind of being less than forthright with the people of 

Saskatchewan that is engaged in this piece of legislation. And 

not, you know, mere months after the election which was 

supposed to be the time when you go talk to people about the 

issues that they’re facing, about your plans to work with them 

and for them, that they couldn’t be bothered to bring this 

forward. Well that, we think that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess the other thing that we think that is wrong about, 

alongside the three politicians, the fact that they’re bringing 

forward this notion of eliminating everyone under the age of 18, 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

counting out young people when it comes to the construction of 

the basic boundaries of our constituencies. We think that’s, 

that’s hugely wrong-headed as well, Mr. Speaker. And you’d 

think that a province — for all the rhetoric we like to hear about 

the members opposite about growth and the future and how we 

value young people and on and on and on — you’d think that 

something as simple as this, where young people have counted 

for nearly two decades in this province when it comes to the 

construction of that basic building block of our parliamentary 

democracy here in Saskatchewan: the constituency. 

 

And you think about in my case, Mr. Speaker, my home 

neighbourhood is the youngest neighbourhood in the city of 

Regina. And it’s rich in potential and it’s rich in diversity. And 

we have a lot of different casework that comes through our 

office. And we have a lot of different people that their concerns 

are based on their kids and whether or not they’re getting a 

good school, whether or not the housing that they have is 

adequate, whether or not they’re going to have good job 

opportunities, whether or not they’re going to have the kind of, 

that step up the socio-economic ladder that we all wish for our 

children. 

 

And you know, we certainly like to hear a lot about, or we 

certainly hear a lot about that concern for that approach to 

public policy from the members opposite come election time. 

But what we didn’t hear was about their plan to count 

everybody under the age of 18 out, which is roughly 2,000, 

pardon me, 200,000, pardon me, a quarter of a million people. 

There we go, a quarter of a million people in terms of the 

population of this province. 

 

So it’s not even internally consistent with their argument, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of on the one hand they’re arguing more 

people so we’ve got to have more MLAs, you know, that at a 

time when they’re cutting public service. But they can’t even be 

consistent about it in terms of the legislation they’re bringing 

forward. 

 

They want to change something that has been in place for two 

decades. They want to change a practice that is in place to the 

west of us, to the east of us, and with the federal government 

and with many other jurisdictions throughout Canada. The 

majority of provincial jurisdictions practice this means of 

counting their population for building constituency boundaries. 

 

They didn’t come clear with the people about that. They didn’t 

say, you know, we’re going to do away with everybody under 

the age of 18 — that quarter of a million people — for the 

purposes of building constituency boundaries. They weren’t 

straight-ahead about that. And of course it’s no surprise because 

it wouldn’t have squared with so much of their own rhetoric, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the fact that, you know, at a time when a province is 

concerned about young people’s interest in the political process 

and young people’s interest in a democracy — and I know you 

yourself, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the great work that you do 

with not just the Youth Parliament but with the Fransaskois 

Youth Parliament as well — I mean, when we go into those 

rooms, we talk about the importance of democracy, and the 

importance of counting young people’s aspirations because of 

course we don’t inherit things so much as borrow them from the 

next generation in this province. So we hear a lot from the 

members opposite when it comes to decisions made about how 

this is looking to that next generation, but when it comes to 

counting them in in something as simple as the construction of 

our constituency boundaries, we see the members opposite 

counting them out, telling them that they do not count. And we 

think that that’s a step, that’s a solid step backwards, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And of course they didn’t come forward in the campaign 

saying, you know, we’ve got this great plan to go backwards. 

No, it was all about moving Saskatchewan forward together. I 

think that was the slogan that was one of their keynote slogans 

in the campaign. And I guess we should have read the fine print 

in that, Mr. Speaker, because when it turns out in their actions, 

moving Saskatchewan forward together was more about 

moving Saskatchewan forward except for all you young people 

under the age of 18 because we’re going to count you out. So 

it’s not really together and it’s not really forward because this is 

going back a couple of decades in terms of electoral law in this 

province. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we find this more than a little passing 

strange. We find it to have been less than forthright with the 

people of Saskatchewan. We find the members opposite . . . 

You know we wonder why it is that they couldn’t tell the 

people about this before the election instead, you know, slip it 

in just before Christmas in their legislative agenda. 

 

So on the question of three more politicians, I’ve yet to meet a 

person who’s come forward and said, I’ve got a real problem 

with housing. How about you bring in three extra politicians? 

That ought to get that problem on the run. I’ve yet to meet 

someone under the age of 18 that says, you know, make sure 

you do whatever you want with the province because the future 

doesn’t matter to me. And make sure you count out my 

concerns when you’re describing the basic building blocks of 

our democracy, when you’re putting those in place. Make sure 

to count my needs out. Make sure to count my hopes and 

dreams and aspirations, make sure to count them out. Or to 

make sure to count out the places in this province or to 

under-count the places in the province where you have a young 

population like my home neighbourhood, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Or I think about a great number of places throughout the 

province. You know, pick a First Nation in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, where there’s that young population that needs to be 

counted in as far as the process. But instead, the members 

opposite — in a very surreptitious, very sneaky way — are 

going to count them out. And that’s not right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on a couple of different levels, we find this legislation to be 

wrong-headed and worthy of being pulled. And I guess we’re 

not alone in that sentiment, Mr. Speaker. I turned to the 

editorial board of The StarPhoenix who, of course they’re not 

exactly, you know, an adjunct of the Saskatchewan New 

Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. But what they say is “Poor 

rationale for more seats” in the March 12th edition of The 

StarPhoenix. And I’d like to quote at length from that argument 

that they presented, Mr. Speaker. To start: 

 

The Saskatchewan Party’s plan to increase the number of 

MLAs suggests its motive isn’t to improve representation 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

as much as it’s to gain some partisan political advantage. 

 

Saskatchewan already easily boasts the fewest average 

constituents per riding among the western provinces and 

Ontario, so the Saskatchewan Party’s plan to add three 

more seats in time for the next election makes little sense. 

Padding the legislature by adding three MLAs at a cost of 

about $225,000 each per year flies in the face of the 

government’s preaching about fiscal restraint, and even its 

decision to trim the civil service by four per cent a year. 

 

If I might add here, Mr. Speaker, when governments do things 

that are so blatantly in their own self-interest and not in the 

public interest, people remember that. And it’s not too late, Mr. 

Speaker. My hope is that the members on that side that have 

worked with young people, the members on that side that have 

a sense of fairness, the members on that side who are 

committed democrats and who have demonstrated that through 

different actions over the years, or the members who have a 

basic sense of, if we’re going to ask people to tighten their 

belts, maybe there’s something that could be done on our side 

to tighten our belts. If they’re going to be consistent with what 

they’ve done in past, Mr. Speaker, which I know some of those 

members . . . I’ve seen them in action. I’ve had some time to 

observe who does what over there. And I know that there are 

some members that I’m sure this gives them pause for thought. 

I’m sure this makes them think, you know, where was that in 

our platform? Where was that in talking to the people as we 

went out on the doorstep? And why wasn’t I, you know, fully 

told about this business of taking out everyone under the age of 

18 for the purposes of counting and building the basic 

constituencies in our province? 

 

My hope, and maybe this is a naive hope, Mr. Speaker, but my 

hope is that there’s some decent members over there that see 

this for what it is — that it’s so blatantly against what is held up 

as the rules of fair play in our democracy where, if you’re going 

to do something for the province, you talk about it in an election 

and you bring it forward in your platform. That’s, you know . . . 

A promise made is a debt unpaid. These are all things that 

should be . . . to quote Robert Service, Mr. Speaker. Thanks for 

the help with the appropriate quotation. 

 

But in this instance, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t see this in the 

campaign. The members opposite had nothing to say about it in 

the campaign, which again is sort of a solid preview for the 

content of the legislation, which again we think is 

wrong-headed on both counts — more politicians, and counting 

out everyone under the age of 18 when it comes to the building 

of the basic building blocks of our parliamentary democracy 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And again, that is picked up on by the editorial board of The 

StarPhoenix and I’ll carry on to quote a bit more from that 

editorial: 

 

Saskatchewan’s number of ridings was reduced to 58 in the 

1990s from its heyday of 66 in the Grant Devine era, and 

there’s been no public outcry about poor representation.” 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve gotten a bit of grief over the years 

from members opposite about everything is Grant Devine this or 

Grant Devine that, and would we stop scaring the poor people 

about their affinity for the policies of Grant Devine. And, you 

know, fair enough. That’s all in the back-and-forth of a public 

discourse. But this one is like straight out of the playbook from 

Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. This is that, full stop, period. 

 

So the members opposite, when they don’t want to get compared 

to Grant Devine, well then don’t act like Grant Devine. Don’t act 

like the lessons you learned from Grant Devine are to get your 

fingers into the democratic process and mess around with it. Don’t 

try to manipulate the system for your own purposes. If those are 

the lessons that they’ve learned, Mr. Speaker, you know, God help 

us. 

 

To carry on from there in the article: 

 

Given its low number of constituents per MLA, 

Saskatchewan should be the envy of comparable provinces 

that have large geographic areas, growing cities and 

declining rural populations. 

 

Saskatchewan has an average 17,817 voters per riding 

compared to 21,198 in neighbouring Manitoba. The 

difference is even greater when compared to Alberta with 

43,919 voters per riding, British Columbia with 51,765, 

and Ontario, which has 120,110 voters per riding on 

average. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we look around the West and these 

are, you know, in the main, other jurisdictions that don’t count 

out the people under age 18 for the purposes of building 

constituencies, but rather count them in. And we’re off page 

with them. This is a government that likes to talk about the new 

Saskatchewan and the New West Partnership. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, you know, it’s a bold step backwards would seem to 

be the real action that this government is planning on taking 

with Bill No. 36. And I guess, you know, if you’re going to talk 

about moving forward together in the campaign and it comes to 

your legislative agenda and one of the first things you want to 

do is take a giant leap backwards, we think that’s a problem, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Carrying on from the article, and this is a direct quote so please 

bear with me in that regard, Mr. Speaker: 

 

In this light, Justice Minister Don Morgan citing 

Saskatchewan’s population growth as justification for 

increasing the number of MLAs to 61 lacks merit. He 

points to the legitimate travel difficulties faced by MLAs 

whose rural constituencies cover a large area. However, 

with the new seats expected to be divided among Regina, 

Saskatoon, and an unspecified rural area, adding one rural 

seat is unlikely to make a substantial dent in the problem. 

Technology such as Skype 2 has made distance less of a 

barrier. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I was at the SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] convention and I don’t know 

where this was at in terms of the members opposite agenda 

when they were standing in the bear-pit or presenting to the 

different panels. They didn’t have anything to say about this 

because, you know, there are big chunks of urban Saskatchewan 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

where there’s a young, growing population, Mr. Speaker. And 

you can see that as late as the Sask Trends Monitor’s last 

edition, Mr. Speaker, where it very physically represents where 

the growth is in this population. And again, Mr. Speaker, a lot 

of that growth is in urban Saskatchewan. A lot of that growth is 

on First Nations. And for them to be taking square aim at those 

segments of our population, we think, is bad for the province. 

We think it’s bad public policy and we think that measure takes 

this province backwards, not forwards. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that certainly, that certainly wasn’t 

their tagline in the campaign. You know, let’s go back. You 

know it wasn’t, you know, backwards, alone and apart, or 

backwards, dividing people as fast as we can. It was about 

moving forward together. And you know, the proof is in the 

pudding. So when it comes time for them to actually put flesh to 

bone and bring forward the legislative agenda that actually 

demonstrates what are the priorities to the members opposite in 

this session, in this new government, in this so-called new 

Saskatchewan that the members like to talk about, Bill No. 36 

doesn’t do that. It takes us backwards, not forwards. It divides 

people; it doesn’t bring them together. 

 

And you’d think that in a province with as many challenges as 

we’ve got here in this province and as many blessings as we’ve 

got in this province, Mr. Speaker, you’d think that this kind of 

message, this kind of plan would be nowhere on that agenda. 

But here it is, Mr. Speaker. It goes to the heart of our 

parliamentary democracy. And it goes to, you know, not just in 

the mechanics of it and how it’s built and constructed, but in 

how the members forward and gain a mandate to do something 

in this Chamber. 

 

And there is no mandate for this measure. There is no authority 

for this measure that you get when you go forward to the people 

and say, here’s our platform. Here’s what we think are the 

important issues of the day, and you can vote for it or not. And 

this measure, Bill No. 36 and the adding of more politicians and 

the eliminating of young people when it comes to building our 

basic constituencies in this parliamentary democracy, it was 

nowhere in their agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, you know, maybe they’re counting on the fact that 

this is early on and people will forget and that they can let it 

sink. Maybe that’s informing part of their approach to this 

measure, Mr. Speaker. But I hope that the people are paying 

attention. I hope that young people are paying attention and 

saying, you know, here’s a government that is willing to be so 

cavalier and hostile to my interests. Here’s a government that 

doesn’t think I count when it comes to the building of our basic 

constituencies. Here’s a government that’s willing to write off 

250,000 young people when it comes to the basic building 

blocks of our parliamentary democracy. Here’s a government 

that thinks the answer to the pressing problems of the day is to 

bring forward three more politicians. 

 

I think they’re going to look at that kind of action, Mr. Speaker, 

and they’re going to find it wanting. I think they’re going to 

find it disagreeable. I think they’re going to find it kind of 

ridiculous that this would be brought forward as a priority 

measure for this government so soon after an election where 

they said absolutely nothing about it. 

 

Back to the editorial, Mr. Speaker, continuing on with the 

quotes: 

 

The government cites concerns that when the province’s 

Constituency Boundaries Commission redraws ridings 

after the final 2011 census report is released, the number 

of rural seats will decline, due to growth in the cities. Yet 

this concern for protecting rural seats looks like the party 

is protecting its base at the expense of representative 

democracy. There’s already a huge disparity between rural 

and urban ridings. For instance, Saskatoon Silver Springs 

has 16,180 voters in the last election while 

Cutknife-Turtleford had 8,363 voters. 

 

Again, The StarPhoenix pointing out the internal discrepancies 

when it comes to the logic — or the lack thereof — of this piece 

of legislation. Carrying on with the quote: 

 

Premier Brad Wall’s plan to base future ridings on number 

of voters rather than total population also warrants some 

serious thought. With four years to go to the next election, 

it makes little sense to count only those who are already 18 

when those who are close to age 14 will be eligible to vote 

when the writ is dropped. Seats also could be shifted away 

from areas with a high First Nations population that 

consists mostly of young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again if we’re going to be concerned about the 

future, if we’re going to give proof to the rhetoric that so often 

is touched upon in this Chamber in terms of the young people in 

the province being the future of the province, and they should 

matter not just in the future but now, if that is going to be true, 

Mr. Speaker, then it demands some action. And it demands 

action that doesn’t count young people out when it comes to the 

construction of the basic building blocks of our democracy. 

 

It means you count them in. It means that if the practice for the 

past two decades has been to count young people in, that it’s 

then a huge step backwards for the province to go to a standard 

that’s needed to be changed two decades ago. It means that the 

province has taken a step backwards compared to the federal 

government’s election law and the practice in several other 

provincial jurisdictions, including our two neighbours, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again, that this is brought forward by a government that likes 

to preach moving Saskatchewan forward together, we think the 

practice demonstrates something entirely opposed to that 

proclaimed intent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The last sentence in the editorial says this, and I quote: 

 

These substantial changes being proposed just months into 

a new mandate carry a whiff of gerrymandering by a 

political party that didn’t make a campaign issue of the 

need for better representation. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we’ve taken pride 

in, in Canada and in Saskatchewan generally, is the practice of 

free and fair elections. And in a lot of ways we go around the 

country preaching the way that we practise democracy here in 

Canada. And when you see things come forward like this that 

take that pride that should be taken in our electoral practice, 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

when they take that and move it backwards, we think that’s 

totally wrong-headed, Mr. Speaker, and not needed, not needed 

at all. We think that for all, for all the ways that you could seek 

to move the province forward, the addition of three more 

politicians — again and how that contrasts with the whole 

problem this government has in terms of the mixed messages 

around prosperity or austerity and which is it and for who the 

austerity and for who the prosperity — we think that it draws 

that argument into pretty bold relief. 

 

And then on top of that, you take the fact that it takes everyone 

under the age of 18 and counts them out in terms of our basic 

building blocks of our constituencies, the basic building blocks 

of our parliamentary democracy, we think that’s wrong, Mr. 

Speaker. And we think that it’s particularly wrong when you’re 

going after the rules of our parliamentary democracy in such a 

fundamental way as this and you didn’t even have the decency 

to bring it forward in the campaign to say, here is something we 

are proposing; people of Saskatchewan, give it a fair hearing. 

And again, nowhere is that more important than when you’re 

dealing with the basic rules of democracy and the way that it is 

practised in this province. 

 

When you’re changing these . . . There are a lot of different 

ways this has been approached throughout Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of another sort of variant of electoral reform 

and the different sort of questions around the merits of electoral 

financing reform or be it changes in the voting practice to 

something like a single transferable vote or to a measure of 

proportional representation or all those different sort of variants 

on the basic mechanics of our electoral system. And in other 

jurisdictions, they’ve tasked citizens’ assemblies or independent 

third parties, and they’ve done that to examine these aspects of 

our system. And they’ve done that because there’s a view that 

it’s not the best idea to have individual actors in the system 

making changes to the system and sort of throwing their weight 

around when it comes to a majority. 

 

And I guess I’m reminded of that in very strong terms when it 

comes to this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, because this is a 

fundamental change to the way that our democracy is practised 

in this province. This takes us backwards, you know, two 

decades plus. This is reminiscent of something straight out of 

the Grant Devine playbook. This is telling young people that 

they don’t count, when we want to make sure that young people 

can count on the province and we can count on them for the 

secure prosperity and future of this province. 

 

It tells the people of Saskatchewan that, you know, while 

there’s going to be austerity on a number of fronts and we’re 

reducing public service by 16 per cent, but for politicians we’re 

going to increase the number by three. And then the fact that 

this was not brought forward in the campaign, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We think that on so many different fronts this is a 

terribly wrong-headed piece of legislation. 

 

And so in the opposition ranks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we oppose 

this piece of legislation and will continue to speak out on this 

with every opportunity that we can muster. So with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’m not wrapping up my remarks right now 

because I haven’t got more to say on this — because I certainly 

do — or that other of my colleagues, they certainly want to 

participate in this debate. 

[15:45] 

 

But again, on three fundamental grounds we think this 

legislation is worthy of being pulled, let alone being opposed: 

three more MLAs in a time when you’re preaching austerity for 

others; counting out everyone under the age of 18 when it 

comes to the building of our constituencies and the way that 

that is calculated and the way that that takes us backwards, not 

forwards; and finally, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this was 

brought forward literally days after an election when we went to 

the people and said, you know, here’s our platform. Here’s what 

we have to say about your hopes and dreams and aspirations. 

What do you think, and will you give us a mandate to govern? 

They did not campaign on this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

They did not campaign on these ideas. And I dare say that if 

they had, that they would have received a different reception 

from the public in terms of what the content of Bill No. 36 is. 

 

So on so many grounds we think it’s not just worthy of being 

opposed, but it should be pulled by those members opposite. As 

such, I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 6 — The 

Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 

great pleasure I rise to speak to Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous 

Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011. This is another 

scintillating Bill in this legislative agenda, and it deals with 

some changes to The Business Corporations Act of 

Saskatchewan to allow for better rationalization of information 

and technology with the various Prairie provinces and British 

Columbia, particularly Alberta and British Columbia in this 

case. 

 

In the minister’s comments to introduce the Bill, he spoke to the 

need for this as a result of the New West Partnership. And I 

think I would beg to differ that this is something that was 

inevitable at any rate. And we certainly didn’t need the New 

West Partnership to make these kinds of changes to the 

regulatory scheme for businesses and business corporations. 

This is just really something, I’m sure, that the civil servants in 

the minister’s ministries and in Information Services 

Corporation saw the obvious need for this some time ago. And 

it’s just about rationalizing technology and making sure that it’s 

easier for businesses to deal with information technology and 

certainly to deal with it across the provinces. 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

So it’s interesting that Information Services Corporation, which 

is a fine corporation . . . And I’ve done a lot of work with them 

in the past. In fact I was able to be seconded to Information 

Services Corporation in 2003 as a result of some of the work 

that needed to be done with Crown land and the Crown land 

registry, and found the group that’s there to be innovative and 

hard-working and certainly with their eye on the ball when it 

comes to information technology. And the system that was 

introduced was lauded across Canada and in fact in the world as 

a very innovative registry that used electronic records and tying 

them to the GIS [geographic information system] in a way that 

very few, if any, had done anywhere else in the world. So it was 

really a vanguard of its own in the days when the Bill was 

introduced and when Information Services Corporation was 

established by the previous government. 

 

So this kind of thing is something that was a logical extension 

of the original purposes of Information Services Corporation. 

Of course they started with the land registry and Crown land . . . 

well the Crown land abstract registry which is a different beast 

than the land registry itself. And they were able to develop 

computing programs that allowed, and with extensive 

consultation, I might add, with appraisers and landowners — 

unfortunately not as much with Crown land agencies — but in 

the first instance, with banking institutions and landowners and 

the oil and gas industry and the various users of the land titles 

system. 

 

So this innovative approach has led to other changes in 

information technology and information sharing. Certainly the 

land registry was way ahead of what BC and Alberta had at the 

time. I’m not as familiar now with what any innovations that 

they may have done since the implementation of the electronic 

land registry, but at the time it was something that was certainly 

regarded highly throughout the information technology world. 

 

Since then, of course, they’ve taken on the personal property 

security registry and vital statistics and, more recently, the 

corporations branch registry. And this is the Bill that is, this is 

the area that will be affected is mostly about registration of 

corporations branch. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this isn’t something that I think really 

can be tied to the New West Partnership although the minister 

indicated that there were, that it’s part of the New West 

Partnership Trade Agreement. But I don’t know how it would 

be other than it’s just an administrative, cost-saving, efficient 

way for us to do business. 

 

You know, and unfortunately I don’t see that across the board 

in this government. And I think there’s a lot more innovation 

that’s required in other areas where information technology 

could make life a lot easier. When I worked with the federal 

public service in the last few years, a lot of the forms and 

procedures that were required, for example, for travel 

requirements or meal allowances, all the forms that are used 

were all online and electronic. And it certainly saved a lot of 

time for the users. 

 

And unfortunately I think what we see through some of the 

systems that we even find in this building, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is that their paper processes that seem to be somewhat outdated. 

And I certainly hope that the Board of Internal Economy will be 

looking at those in the future because there’s considerable 

streamlining that could be done, and certainly online forms. 

And that’s the type of innovation that’s being shown in this Bill 

No. 6, which is to provide for extraprovincial matters and 

common business identifiers. 

 

But I don’t see why these kinds of efficiencies in information 

technology couldn’t be spread out further across the 

government. Indeed on the weekend, I had cause to, with an 

agency I’m working with, fill out a raffle licence and help them 

fill out a raffle licence. And that online form, although it was 

online, was probably the most unusable online form I’ve 

encountered in many, many years. So I’m hoping that that’s 

something the Minister for Liquor and Gaming can take a look 

at because it’s pretty much painful. And I think if the minister 

was to talk to community groups who do raffles and sell tickets 

on various things, and if they want to comply with the process, 

it’s a very difficult form to use and it’s very awkward. 

 

So I think that this type of innovation that we find here in Bill 

No. 6, the Act to amend business statutes to provide for 

extraprovincial matters and common business identifiers, could 

certainly be used in other areas of the civil service, particularly 

in just some of the basic forms that we have to fill out here as 

members of the Legislative Assembly, and with raffle licences. 

Those are my two experiences recently and I know I recently 

was talking with someone else about their problems with forms 

too. So I think across the board this is something that the 

government could and should be looking at. 

 

At any rate, what this Bill attempts to do, as I said, is to allow 

streamlining for registration of businesses. So the way the Bill 

is set up is there’s a new division added, and it’s division III.1, 

which is special rules respecting extraprovincial matters. So this 

is a new section entirely. 

 

The first substantive clause that is identified in the Bill is an 

interpretation of the division. So there’s a couple of definitions 

that are provided there, and one is an “extra-provincial matter,” 

and the other is an “extra-provincial registrar.” So in that case, 

it’s kind of self-explanatory, but the extraprovincial matter is a 

matter pertaining to extraprovincial corporations. And similarly, 

for the registrars it just recognizes that someone else who 

performs a function similar to our registrar in a business 

corporations world is recognized in this Bill and defined as an 

extraprovincial registrar. 

 

So the next provision that is substantive is section 298.2. And 

you know, just the indication that we’re already up in the 298th 

clause, it shows what a fairly substantial Bill or statute that The 

Business Corporations Act is. So this is something that’s being 

inserted into a very substantive and complicated piece of 

legislation. But this part here describes how a minister can enter 

into agreements with other registrars to collect and exchange 

the information relating to extraprovincial matters. Again not 

rocket science but I think it’s one that the civil servants have 

recognized the need for for a long time, and I’m sure they have 

encouraged the minister to incorporate these kinds of changes 

— New West Partnership or not. 

 

So in this case the clause 298.2(1) allows the minister to enter 

into an agreement with an extraprovincial registrar to address 

several matters, one being the collection by that extraprovincial 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

registrar of applications, information, forms, notices, and other 

things for the director, and any matter related to the collection 

of those things and how they are delivered to the director, and 

the director here being the director of corporations branch for 

our province. 

 

And then the flip side of that section is how the director here 

will, under these agreements, collect the similar type of 

information and provide it to an extraprovincial registrar. So it’s 

a reciprocal type of clause where the minister is directed or 

allowed to enter into agreements with other provinces to allow 

for the collection and transmission of information and 

applications and forms relating to the registration of businesses 

in various provinces. 

 

There’s also an extra clause in there that just gives the minister 

further authority to provide for powers and duties of the 

directors. So the agreement itself can give the minister . . . or 

can include clauses relating to the powers and duties of the 

director and the extraprovincial registrar with respect to the 

matters in the agreement. 

 

The next new clause is 298.3. And this is one again you’ve 

heard me speak about this before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 

the authority of a regulation-making authority. And it’s a fairly 

long clause again, which is something of concern I think, in this 

day and age, although from a civil servant’s perspective, I know 

it’s way easier to manage regulatory change than statutory 

change. It’s just the reality of the legislative system that we 

have because of course the Lieutenant Governor in Council can 

make regulations without scrutiny by this House and by the 

opposition. So in terms of administrative efficiency, it makes a 

whole lot of sense. And I think from a public service 

perspective, it certainly allows for efficient, more efficient 

procedures by the public service. But we must always keep in 

mind that the regulation-making authority is one that is not 

scrutinized closely or at all by the public, unless those that are 

most directly affected by it, and certainly without any 

opportunity for comment by the official opposition, which is I 

think something to be wary of. 

 

At any rate, this particular clause allows the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to make regulations, to classify or 

designate those registrars to which a regulation is made, or 

otherwise designate a corporation to which a regulation is 

made. So we can actually, the Lieutenant Government in 

Council through the advice of cabinet can pass regulations that 

will affect those extraprovincial registrars and the 

extraprovincial corporations. 

 

And there’s another clause (c) which talks about the collection 

by the director of all those forms that we were talking about 

earlier. So there’s an ability to make regulations on how those 

forms are collected. 

 

And then there’s a further clause (d), which is quite lengthy, 

affecting the registration of and other matters pertaining to 

extraprovincial corporations including their application for 

registration; their annual returns and other returns of 

extraprovincial corporations; reinstatement of registrations of 

extraprovincial corporations if that is so chosen by cabinet; 

changes in names, head office, etc. — again something that is 

now within the purview of cabinet — and amalgamations of 

extraprovincial corporations. 

 

Sometimes it’s hard to follow the ball. I did a lot of work in the 

oil and gas sector as it relates to First Nations Indian reserves 

and with leasing on surface rights in particular but also 

peripherally with some subsurface leasing. And it was always 

difficult from our perspective, when we were working with 

First Nations, to keep track of which oil company was which. 

Because as you know, it’s an active field and there’s a lot of 

turnover and acquisitions, amalgamations, and subsidiaries. So 

it was something that, I think it’s really difficult to follow 

unless you’re working in that area exclusively. 

 

So amalgamations is something that would be of interest to the 

oil and gas industry for sure, and tracking it from a public 

perspective is not easily done. So that’s something that is now 

being directed by cabinet for the Lieutenant Governor to make 

regulations on. Furthermore, it allows for regulations regarding 

the liquidation of extraprovincial corporations and, finally, the 

cancellation of registrations of extraprovincial corporations. So 

those are things that the cabinet will now be making decisions 

on, based on advice from the public service. So we will see and 

try and keep track of those regulations as they come along just 

to make sure there’s at least some scrutiny on those. 

 

There’s other abilities to make regulations respecting forms, 

that’s in clause (e), that may be required for the purposes of 

regulations, also respecting documentation to be issued by the 

director, fees for the provision of services under the regulations 

made — and regulations for the payment and collection of those 

fees made under the regulations become very circular, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — also respecting how applications and forms 

are provided to the director. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Another one that’s of interest is regulations exempting an 

extraprovincial corporation from the operations of this Act. 

Now that’s a fairly great power that I think should have some 

public scrutiny, but in this case it will be done under 

regulations. So I’m not sure why the minister feels it’s 

important to exempt extraprovincial corporations from the 

operation of this part of the Act from the regulatory section and 

would be interested in getting further comment from the 

minister on that. But it seems a bit strange to allow that in this 

particular area. 

 

There’s three more regulation-making abilities under section 

298.3(d). And that is providing that they can make regulations 

providing that a provision of the Act does not apply with 

respect to extraprovincial corporations. Again curious, and it’s 

not clear from the minister’s comments why this particular 

section is there. And then there’s, finally, respecting retention 

of documents by applicants and defining, enlarging, or 

restricting the meaning of any word or expression in this part. 

And that’s a fairly boilerplate type of regulatory ability that you 

see often in legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The next clause that’s provided in this Bill is clause 298.4 — 

and this is one that gives me cause, and it shows up three or 

four times in this Bill — and that’s if there’s a conflict or 

inconsistency between the regulation and another provision of 

the Act, or a regulation made under another section of the Act, 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

the regulation under 298.3 prevails. So again you have 

regulation prevailing over the substance of the Act itself. And 

that’s something that I think, you know, I haven’t seen a lot in 

legislation. But it’s something I think that should be of concern 

to the people because again, the scrutiny of the Act itself is 

much more public, and in this case we have a regulation 

prevailing over an Act introduced in this House and debated 

appropriately. There’s no debate for regulations. There’s no 

scrutiny by the opposition. 

 

So it seems . . . I’m somewhat uncomfortable with the notion of 

having regulations prevail over actual statutes. And I think 

that’s something I’m seeing more and more as we go along 

here. So the public, anybody’s who’s interested in examining 

regulations, may want to pay note to that. But it is of concern 

and I think should have democratic scrutiny at some point. 

 

So then we’re moving along now to the next clause, is an 

addition to clause 304(e.3). And this is talking about common 

business identifiers for corporation. So this is something that 

makes total sense. And I think in this day and age when 

information technology is as sophisticated and available as it is, 

it makes sense that we can have common business identifiers. 

Corporations are corporations are corporations, and they all 

have common features, I would imagine, across the country. 

And I would expect that the minister’s staff have looked 

carefully at that to ensure that these common business 

identifiers are ones that are prevailing pretty much across the 

board. 

 

So there’s different ways that these common business 

identifiers are going to be respected. First of all, the establish or 

adoption of a system of common business identifiers for 

corporations. And I’m assuming again, if the minister’s people 

are doing their work, they’re working with other provinces to 

ensure that. And indeed in his comments when he introduced 

the Bill, he indicated that the ISC [Information Services 

Corporation] is focused on ways to streamline processes and 

that they’re working closely with Alberta and British Columbia 

to ensure compatible policies and regulations with common 

data exchange processes. And he indicated a target date of July 

1st. 

 

And I’m also hoping that the minister is looking at this across 

the board in Canada because it’s not just Alberta and Manitoba 

who have corporations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are several 

other provinces that also have corporations that would like to do 

business in Saskatchewan and vice versa. I know that we have 

some of our folks who are doing business in other provinces 

other than Alberta and Saskatchewan. This is a technological 

sort of straightforward type of common sense. So I’m expecting 

we will see more of this as these good people at Information 

Services Corporation continue to expand their mandate and 

provide the efficiencies that we need. 

 

So the section 304(e.3) is now followed by (e.4), and the first 

thing I indicated was the system of common business 

identifiers. The second part of the clause establishes the manner 

in which they are assigned, so how are these identifiers 

assigned. And then the third is requiring that corporations use 

them, and fourthly allowing: 

 

. . . the minister to enter agreements with the Government 

of Canada [so here we see the expanded opportunity], the 

government of any other province or territory of Canada or 

the government of any municipality to integrate or 

synchronize the system of common business identifiers . . . 

 

Not clear to me exactly what common business identifiers are. 

But I would think having shareholders, having directors, boards 

of directors, and certainly the manner in which they file annual 

returns, how their annual reports are prepared and the 

accounting principles that are used in those types of businesses. 

 

It also has the authority for the minister to give to the 

Government of Canada or any other province any information 

that is related to those agreements that he enters into and that he 

considers appropriate. So that’s an ancillary clause that supports 

the solidity of those agreements and providing that the 

regulations under this clause — so this is again a regulatory 

power — prevail in case of any inconsistency or conflict with 

any other Act. 

 

So here again for the second time, we see an ability for 

regulations to prevail over the Act. I’m highlighting that. It 

concerns me. And I think we all have to be watchful that here in 

the House we’re responsible for legislation, and to devolve it to 

cabinet and the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make 

regulations is something that we are losing . . . it causes us to 

lose scrutiny. 

 

So the next part that we look at is a new part again after part 3, 

part 3.1, and these are “Special Rules respecting Extraprovincial 

Matters.” So there’s a new name, and then there’s a new 

section. Section 21.5 in part 3.1 gives the definitions that I 

spoke to earlier. Extraprovincial matters is matters relating to 

extraprovincial limited partnerships. So in this section we are 

dealing specifically with limited partnerships and not business 

corporations. 

 

So that’s a whole new can of worms when you get to limited 

partnerships. But again, they’re a common feature of business 

organization in Canada and probably throughout the world. I 

know it’s one that I dealt with very extensively. It’s something 

that First Nations use to their advantage when setting up 

businesses on First Nation reserves. So that’s a useful tool for, I 

think, tax purposes and other arrangements. And in this case, 

this part of the Bill, the new part 3.1 deals with the ability to 

deal extraprovincially with limited partnerships. 

 

So in the second part there’s a definition of what an 

extraprovincial limited partnership is. And that’s defined 

previously in The Business Corporations Act, so it incorporates 

that. And finally an extraprovincial registrar, again there’s 

another definition there. I’m not sure why this definition isn’t 

incorporated into the main definitions clause, but obviously the 

drafters preferred to have it in the division itself and rather than 

in the long list of definitions you would find at the beginning of 

this long Bill or long statute. 

 

Section 21.6 again allows the minister to enter into agreements 

and, in this case, in relation to collection of fees, forms, and 

notices and the exchange and collection on our part with those 

extraprovincial registrars in relation to limited partnerships. So 

it’s much the same as the previous section that I was discussing, 

but in this case it’s simply respecting limited partnerships. 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

The next section is the regulations section. Again a long, long 

regulatory clause that gives the Lieutenant Governor authority 

to make regulations, and again that’s cabinet that would instruct 

the Lieutenant Governor. It’s not the House here, not the 

legislature, but the cabinet. And so again the ability of the 

Lieutenant Governor to make regulations in several ways, first 

of all classifying or designating those registrars to which this 

section applies, I think the minister’s comments is initially. And 

I assume by July 1st he’s looking to have Alberta and British 

Columbia added, but I suspect that it will extend across the 

country as it makes sense to have these kinds of common 

identifiers and commonalities with all business corporations. 

 

Secondly, the Lieutenant Governor in Council could make 

regulations classifying those partnerships, limited partnerships 

that the regulations will apply to. He can — he or she, and it 

will be she soon — will make regulations regarding the 

collection of applications and forms in relation to those 

extraprovincial matters: the registration of those limited 

partnerships here, types of applications, the periods and reports, 

how they’re supposed to report, changes to documents relating 

to the registration of extraprovincial limited partnerships and 

the cancellation of registrations of extraprovincial limited 

partnerships. So again it just gives the bureaucrats and the 

public service people and the registrars abilities to streamline 

those extraprovincial relationships as they apply to limited 

partnerships. 

 

The next Lieutenant Governor, she will be able to make 

regulations regarding the forms required. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is probably a useful use of regulations because forms 

are standard forms and that’s a common place to find them is in 

the regulations. So that’s one that I can easily understand. 

 

Providing for fees. Again that’s a regulatory type of provision. 

And then, respecting furnishing or the provision of applications 

and forms etc. to the registrar. Again we have the exemption 

clause. In this case, they can make, she can make regulations to 

exempt an extraprovincial limited partnership from the 

application of part III or this part, and providing a provision of 

the Act does not apply with respect to extraprovincial limited 

partnerships. So in (i) and (j) of clause 21.7, there’s that 

exemption again in relation to extraprovincial limited 

partnerships. Again the minister has given no indication in his 

comments why that was seen as necessary. Often there’s a very 

logical reason for that, but we just don’t have any indication of 

why it’s there. 

 

Clause (k), sub (k) in this case, is regulations regarding service 

of these limited partnership notices. 

 

And finally, the boilerplate clause in (l) which allows 

regulations regarding the meaning of words and defining of 

words that are used in the part but not defined. So that’s often 

. . . A useful use of regulations is when there’s an insufficiency 

in definition in a statute. If the cabinet, Lieutenant Governor 

can provide clarity to that definition through the regulatory 

sphere, it’s a simpler way than actually having to amend the 

Act. So that one makes total sense. 

 

The next provision is the one I’ve raised earlier in the context of 

the corporations, business corporations. And this is in relation 

to limited partnerships and it indicates that if there’s a conflict 

or inconsistency between the regulations I just referred to for 

limited partnerships, then if there’s an inconsistency between 

those regulations and the Act, then the regulations prevail. 

You’ve heard my . . . Well actually the Deputy Speaker heard 

my concerns about this but now you get a chance to hear it as 

well, Mr. Speaker. And the concern is that this Act has received 

scrutiny over the years. The Business Corporations Act has 

been in the House many, many times. It’s been amended many, 

many times. So those amendments and the substance of the Act 

has been scrutinized closely by the official opposition, whoever 

it may be, and properly reviewed. And in this case, it’s 

regulations that are referred to the Lieutenant Governor by 

cabinet, unscrutinized by and large until after they’re passed. 

And I’m not sure what kind of consultation that will be made 

with the business community and with those affected by the 

business community when there is a conflict in the provisions. 

And so it’s something that concerns me and I think should be of 

concern to many. 

 

The next clause that’s added is a new clause, is in clause 24 of 

The Business Corporations Act, and that’s clause 24(g), a new 

clause. And it’s again a regulatory power to apply these 

common business identifiers with respect to limited 

partnerships and also, in this case, sole proprietorships. So it’s a 

similar clause that we saw in the previous division, and it just 

allows regulations providing for common business identifiers 

for sole proprietorships, limited partnerships, or classes of sole 

proprietorships and limited partnerships, including establishing 

a system of common business identifiers, prescribing the 

manner and how they will be used and applied, and then 

requiring the use of these common business identifiers by those 

sole proprietorships, limited partnerships, or classes of sole 

proprietorships and limited partnerships. And then further, it 

authorizes the minister to enter into agreements again with the 

Government of Canada, the government of any other province 

or territory or municipality to synchronize. 

 

So as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, this is not just about the New 

West Partnership. It’s just about opening up common IT or 

information technology identifiers to help streamline business 

activity throughout Canada. We’re in 2012 and the information 

age is upon us. So these are just really practical considerations 

that I think the people at Information Services Corporation have 

clearly identified and recognized and certainly the people at 

corporations branch who have been dealing with this for many, 

many years. It just makes sense, and it’s moving us into the 

electronic age. 

 

So the minister will be able to make these agreements under the 

. . . Or there will be regulations authorizing the minister to make 

these agreements, and also the final boilerplate clause that 

allows the regulations to prevail over any other Act or 

regulations made pursuant to another Act. Again the third time 

we see that in this — or fourth, I think — in this new Bill, so 

just pointing it out. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The next part I’m going to deal with is part XXI, so I guess 

that’s twenty-one point one, and this is special rules now. This 

new part XXI.1 is special rules respecting extraprovincial 

matters. So this section just gives a new part for special rules. 

And again there’s the definitions that we referred to before and 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

in this case it’s applying to extraprovincial co-operatives. So 

this is a different kind of beast. It’s not a corporation; it’s 

co-operatives, and it provides the two definitions, 

“extra-provincial matters” as was referenced earlier, and 

“extra-provincial registrar.” So that establishes the definitions. 

 

And then in this case the next clause, section 315.2(1) 

authorizes the minister to enter into agreements with an 

extraprovincial registrar to address the collection of all the 

forms and documents and fees as well as other extraprovincial 

registrars to do the same with Saskatchewan. So it’s a reciprocal 

clause again and in this case it’s in relation to co-operatives. 

 

Once again, in this new part we see a regulations section with 

the same types of authority and powers that we saw in the 

previous two sections. That’s section 315.3. And I think at this 

point, I will spare you the explanation of that entire section as 

it’s very similar to the other two previous divisions that we saw 

for business corporations and for limited partnerships and sole 

proprietorships. 

 

But the concern remains that these types of regulatory 

authorities are going to divert scrutiny by the official 

opposition. Certainly regardless of who is in government, the 

official opposition won’t get an opportunity to comment on 

these changes. And it’s under the supervision of cabinet so it’s 

not clear exactly what scrutiny or consultation will be made 

when these regulations are passed. Again a lot of them are 

administrative in this particular section so it’s not something 

that’s earth-shattering by any stretch of the imagination. But it 

is of concern and it is a diversion from the work of the 

legislature as a whole. 

 

There’s once again, for the fifth time, I think, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a clause 315.4 that allows the regulations to prevail over 

the Act, so in this third division, the similar provision. And then 

we have finally, not finally but near the end here, there’s a 

clause 350(g). There’s a new one added about the common 

business identifiers for co-operatives, so that 350(g.1) purports 

to provide for the common business identifiers for 

co-operatives. That is something, I think, might be a little more 

interesting because I’m not sure that co-operatives have evolved 

in the same way, not systematically, but similarly across 

provinces than they would have with business corporations or 

limited partnerships. And it’s not something I have a lot of 

information on, Mr. Speaker, but I suspect that co-operatives 

are pretty varied across the country. So it could be a more 

difficult section for the director and extraprovincial registrars to 

incorporate but we certainly have the ability to make 

regulations regarding them. 

 

So again the regulations identify the ability to establish or adopt 

a system of common business identifiers for co-operatives or a 

class of co-operatives, the manner in which those identifiers are 

assigned to the co-operatives, and then requiring of course, 

requiring the co-operatives or the classes of co-operatives to use 

them, and closing off with the ability of the minister to enter 

into agreements and authorizing the minister to disclose to other 

people we may sign agreements with — either the Government 

of Canada or any other province or territory or municipalities 

— regarding the information that they’re looking for in relation 

to the collection of information that our province has. And I 

think the sixth time now we see that the regulations here prevail 

over any inconsistency with the Act or other regulations made 

pursuant to another Act. 

 

Finally we’re getting into The Partnership Act, and this is a 

different Act now. We’re out of the corporations Act into The 

Partnership Act. There’s a new section being added there to 

provide this streamlining process that the minister has told us is 

the goal of this Bill, and it’s under The Partnership Act. It’s the 

new section 110(e.1), and it now allows the establishment of 

common business identifiers for limited liability partnerships or 

classes of limited liability partnerships. So similar to the limited 

corporations but in this case limited liability partnerships. 

 

So that’s clause 110(e.1). There’s several sections to that. Again 

we see that the goal is to establish a system of common 

business identifiers for these limited liability partnerships, how 

they’re going to be assigned, requiring limited liability 

partnerships to use those common business identifiers, 

authorizing the minister to enter into agreements with the 

Government of Canada or any other government in Canada, and 

to disclose to those parties in those agreements any information 

that is received by our registrar in relation to those agreements. 

And I think the seventh time now we have a clause that says 

these regulations will prevail over the Act or any regulations 

made pursuant to another Act. 

 

And then the final section that’s being added is part IV.1, and 

this is special rules respecting extraprovincial matters. And this 

is in relation to the limited liability partnerships. So we have the 

definitions again in this part IV.1. We have a definition for 

extraprovincial limited liability partnerships as well as 

extraprovincial matters, following the same pattern that we see 

in the four previous sections. 

 

Again this is The Partnership Act now and not The Business 

Corporations Act, so we’re also having a couple of extra 

definitions in this section. And one is “extra-provincial limited 

liability partnership” itself, and it refers to the definition found 

previously in The Partnership Act. The two ones that we’ve 

seen before — “extraprovincial matters,” “extraprovincial 

registrar. And then there’s a new addition here. It’s the 

“registrar,” in this case which means the director of 

corporations. So that had to be added to The Partnership Act in 

order to properly bring it up to speed and be in sync with the 

changes to The Business Corporations Act. 

 

In this case, in The Partnership Act there’s a new subsection 

110.2(1) which allows the minister to enter agreements 

regarding fees, documents, notices, and the collection of those 

types of information in relation to a limited liability partnership 

which is a common business tool that’s used in many instances, 

and so it’s appropriate that the changes be applied here as well. 

 

There’s a new section 110.3 which is the regulatory section, 

again identifying almost exactly the same types of regulations 

that we’re finding in the three changes to The Business 

Corporations Act for business corporations, limited . . . I want 

to find the word so I make sure I have it right. Limited 

partnerships, that’s right. Corporations, limited partnerships, 

and co-operatives. And now we’re talking about limited liability 

partnerships which are found in the partnerships Act, a different 

beast than the other Acts. So the regulatory ability that we’re 

giving to our new Lieutenant Governor in Council, once she’s 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

sworn in, are similar to the ones I’ve described previously. 

 

And of course there’s the catch-all at the end which . . . The 

catch-all at the end is just to allow them to amend definitions 

when needed. As I talked about earlier, that’s something that 

makes sense from an administrative perspective. 

 

And then the clause 110.4 is the last clause that is proposed in 

this Bill, and that would be again if there is an inconsistency 

between a regulation — so I think we’re up to eight now in 

terms of how many times this clause has shown up — conflict 

or inconsistency between a regulation made pursuant to the 

previous section and another section of the Act, the regulation 

prevails. So once again regulation prevails and I think you’re 

becoming very familiar with my views on that, Mr. Speaker, but 

it’s something I think we need to keep an eye on. 

 

So as far as the import of Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous 

Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011, again I think it’s 

something that makes sense. It’s certainly obvious that our 

public servants at Information Services Corporation and the 

people in the minister’s office understand that this is just an 

ongoing, common sense approach to deal with information 

technology. It’s not limited to the New West Partnership Trade 

Agreement. And certainly it would apply across Canada, and 

the drafting indicates that. It’s just something that makes sense 

in this day and age. 

 

And I’m hoping that our friends in the Board of Internal 

Economy will make similar recommendations for this type of 

information technology for all the forms that we’re required to 

fill out every month, Mr. Speaker. Because certainly I know 

when I worked with the federal Crown, they were all online and 

the travel forms were all online and the ability to do them in a 

quick, efficient manner without filling out your name every 

time and where you live. And all those informations could be 

done in a template online. And it would certainly save all of the 

members time when it comes to keeping track and being 

accountable to the legislature and to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, the same thing goes for the other various forms and 

IT services that are available for anyone interacting with 

government. I know that’s been a goal of Information Services 

Corporation since it was formed by the previous government, is 

to bring us into this age. And I think the Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming Authority needs to look at some of their forms as 

well and bringing them up to speed. Because if anybody’s ever 

tried to fill out a raffle application for a medium raffle, it’s not 

very user-friendly. 

 

So with those comments, Mr. Speaker, at this point, I think 

that’s the extent of the comments that are going to be made on 

this Bill, and I would like to move it to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation that Bill No. 

6, The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that this Bill be 

referred to the Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 7 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 7 — The 

Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la 

Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is an 

honour to enter into the debate on Bill No. 7, An Act to amend 

The Co-operatives Act, 1996. It looks like a relatively 

straightforward piece, but it does have some major implications 

as the minister . . . And I’ll take a minute to review his remarks. 

 

This follows much in line with what my colleague from 

Saskatoon was talking about in terms of the miscellaneous 

business statutes Act. But this supports the idea of how we 

move co-operatives and make them part of the New West 

Partnership trade agreement. And again, it was one of those 

things, if I remember correctly, that this government hadn’t 

campaigned on way back when in that election of 2007 and then 

promptly proceeded to move into this. And it is unfortunate 

when we have that kind of thing. 

 

But I do want to talk a minute, if I may, about the good work 

that co-ops do. You know, this is the International Year of 

Co-operatives. It’s a big year for them, and it’s one that we 

know right around the world play a major role in our economy 

but also in our social fabric of so many of our communities. 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I did talk about this earlier this spring 

on March 6th in terms of a member’s statement. And I just want 

to read, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon 

quoted, when he was talking about the international year, he 

goes, “Co-operatives are a reminder that it’s possible to pursue 

both economic viability and social responsibility.” 

 

And I think that’s what’s really, truly wonderful about the 

co-ops. And so many of us have members in co-ops. Many of 

us have two or three or four members. And in fact in 

Saskatchewan, over a million people, there are over a million 

memberships in co-ops. That means many of us have more than 

two. And I think, I know I do. And of course the basic one is 

Saskatoon Co-op that provides so much good service to the 

people of Saskatoon but also a small farming co-op and 

different things. 

 

[16:30] 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

It’s so important that co-ops have come to mean so much to the 

people of Saskatchewan, the people of Canada, in fact the 

people of the world. I mean it’s their basic philosophy of owner 

control — one member, one vote. And that’s so, so key that we 

do that. 

 

But co-ops do evolve, and we’ve asked for feedback on this 

Bill. It seems relatively straightforward, our feedback has. It’s 

pretty straightforward. It does talk about the New West 

Partnership. And as the minister, when he introduced this 

second reading, did talk about how this is part of supporting 

streamlined business registrations and reporting across 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia as part of the 

New West Partnership Trade Agreement. So they’re allowing 

them to do that. And it will be interesting to see how the co-ops 

can work like that because obviously they must have a business 

plan for it, and hopefully they called for it.  

 

Now I know when the New West Partnership actually started, 

many of the people were not consulted as much as they might 

have been, so maybe the co-ops or some of the co-ops are 

wondering what this will be because you usually have a local 

component in the ownership. And that’s part of what makes 

co-ops so strong, is the strong local connection. If there’s not a 

local connection, then this is not like a usual business. 

 

But we know co-ops are evolving, and some of them are getting 

larger. We think of the Federated Co-ops, for example, what 

they do. They work right across Western Canada, so this may 

help them. This is one example where I know my colleague 

talked about the business registration and what they do. And I’ll 

quote the minister. What he had said was that when they go to 

register in their province, I’ll quote: 

 

By choosing extraprovincial as an option when they 

register in their home province, co-operatives will 

automatically be registered in the other two westernmost 

provinces, and registration fees for the other provinces will 

also be waived. It also allows co-operatives to file one 

annual return in their home province instead of three 

separate returns. 

 

So that’s straightforward, and that sounds like a good thing. 

And I guess it’s up to the co-op themselves whether they have 

memberships in the other two provinces or it’s the nature of 

their business to be expanding into Alberta and British 

Columbia, and as well from British Columbia, co-ops that are 

providing services coming into Alberta and Saskatchewan. And 

so we’ll be interested to see who takes advantage of this 

because, as I say, most co-ops have a local ownership 

component because that’s what makes them so unique. 

 

Now I want to just talk about another thing that the minister had 

raised, and I’ll quote him again so I get it completely right: 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another aspect of this legislation that 

is not related to the New West Partnership that will also 

support streamlined services to the Saskatchewan business 

community through ISC’s business portal initiative. The 

first phase . . . is up and running now. [And at their 

website, the] Business Registrations Saskatchewan 

website provides one easy-to-use online process to 

complete the steps required to register a business in the 

corporate registry. 

 

And it also allows employers to register for workers’ 

compensation and also provincial sales tax with the ministry. So 

that’s not part of the New West, but it seems to be streamlining 

the business aspect. 

 

And then also it continues on to say, and this was something my 

colleague from Nutana was alluding to, the fact that it will 

allow ISC, that’s Information Services Corp., with the ability to 

add Canada Revenue Agency business number as an identifier 

to facilitate the sharing of information between the three levels 

of government — municipal, provincial, and federal. So that 

seems to be relatively straightforward in that there seems to be 

five provinces online with this or in agreement with this. This is 

very good. So it makes the business number a common 

identifier and so this is very, very important. Now apparently 

this is connected back to the New West Partnership and the 

Canadian Revenue Agency business number. So it’s another 

way of as government providing more convenient cost-effective 

means to deliver government services. 

 

So it’s in order to be more competitive that they are doing this. 

And that sounds good and how can you . . . I think, that sounds 

like a reasonable thing to do. We don’t want to be 

non-competitive. I think, in the spirit of this Act, it should be 

that they want to be co-operative, they want to be collaborative 

because this is The Co-operatives Act. Why not be co-operative 

in this moment of time, especially this year? So yes, I think the 

better word would’ve been it’s time to be more co-operative. 

 

But you know, I do want to raise a couple of concerns here, and 

this sort of the flow of how these pieces of legislation come 

forward. I believe, and me and my colleagues will remember 

this, that the New West Partnership wasn’t part of the election 

platform in 2007, that in fact it happened after the fact. And 

now I may be wrong, and if I’m wrong I’d sure like to be 

corrected, but I remember that discussion about how that was. 

And so here we have yet another piece four years later of the 

fallout of that. And it’s a reality; it’s a business reality. But we 

have concerns about what this really means and what the 

implications are. 

 

And as well I think of my own riding. I think about the 

challenges that arise for my own constituents. And I know 

we’re talking about economic development and it’s very 

important. So I salute this. I think anything we can do to make it 

easier when it comes to identifiers, but gee, every time I read 

that and I think of that, up comes the issue of identification for 

many of my folks. Because while we really focus on how we 

can streamline and makes things easier and cost-effective for 

businesses, we don’t seem to have the same commitment for 

ordinary people. 

 

You know, why aren’t we trying to take the same initiative, the 

same sort of imagination, innovation and say, what can we do 

for ordinary people? Why can’t we do that? Why can’t we 

develop a piece of identification that’s really easy for 

low-income people to have? And why do they always have to 

use SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance]? Why can’t 

they use Information Services Corporation? And why is it 

always tied to issues around fines and those kind of things? 

 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

And so I think that I’d like to encourage this government to 

look outside the box and say, well ISC is doing this kind of 

work, that’s great, but they also do work for ordinary people in 

terms of health registration and identification. And it would be 

just really easy for them to turn their energy, like they’ve turned 

their energy to this, to help ordinary people. 

 

And you know, and some people say, well that’s not economic 

development. Well I would argue that it is, actually, because 

these are the kind of things that throw up barriers to people in 

terms of bank accounts, any kind of financial transactions. It 

forces them into places that may not have the best reputation or 

will be a little bit more flexible because they’re pushing the law 

and the person just doesn’t have identification. Why don’t we 

do more of that? Even trying to get a job is a big deal if you 

don’t have identification, and those first few steps of trying to 

get your social insurance number, your birth certificate, all of 

that becomes a bit of an issue. 

 

And so I think this is really something if we could turn our 

mind to and say, listen, we’re doing this kind of good work for 

businesses, why can’t we do good work like that for ordinary 

men and women, young people, and engage them in their 

communities and say, listen, this is a priority that everybody 

participates in our economy? I think this would go a long way. 

 

And while some may say that I’m off topic here, actually I think 

every opportunity we can raise to say, listen, I see ISC is a part 

of the discussion; I see identifiers are part of the discussion; 

why can’t we do more? It’s never far from the minds of many 

of my constituents about what are they going to do about their 

ID [identification]. It’s either lost, they never had it, or it’s not 

the right one. Why don’t we do something like that? 

 

And I actually see, and there are other provinces have been very 

innovative with this, Alberta, for example. And if we’re taking 

lessons from our new West partners, take a look what they’re 

doing in Alberta around identification for their working men 

and women and those who would like to be engaged in society. 

They’ve come a long way in recognizing that identification is a 

really important part of being part of the new West. And if they 

have, we can do that. 

 

I think this would be a great thing for this government to take 

on as a goal. Not just businesses, but everybody needs to be 

able to have those regulations, those rules that stop us from 

participating in the economy . . . If that can be a priority, that 

would be good. Not just for businesses, not just for co-ops, not 

just to the big three, the three Western provinces, but say, listen, 

we want everybody to engage, everybody to engage in the 

economy, in economic activity. It’s a basic human need. And I 

think that’s hugely important. 

 

And you know, this gets me right back to what we’re really 

talking about here, the co-operatives, The Co-operatives Act. 

And why did co-ops come about? It was because people just 

getting together and saying, we’re being excluded. We don’t 

have the resources, the economic . . . the money to go buy 

groceries or to go buy a house or build a house. And so what are 

we going to do? Or to buy the gas. Well we’re going to create 

our own co-ops and we’re going to pool our resources and make 

this work. And that’s why, as I said, you know, earlier in my 

member’s statement a couple of weeks ago, that over a third of 

Saskatchewan’s top 100 businesses are co-ops. And it’s not just 

by an accident, but people have come together and say, these 

are our basic needs. We need to get together, and if we stick 

together we can make this work. And you know, it really has 

worked, and it’s worked well for many people here in 

Saskatchewan, Alberta. 

 

And I think about the Calgary co-op. It’s actually a huge co-op. 

In fact I think they’re the leader in terms of retail sales, 

groceries. In fact I understand their beer is even pretty good. I 

don’t know; that’s what I hear. I don’t know if I’ll go exploring 

that, but I know St. Patrick’s Day just happened and we are 

usually thinking about Irish beer, but not co-op beer. But I stray 

here, Mr. Speaker. But I think that it’s important to know that, 

you know, in Western Canada, co-ops are a huge issue. And so 

this will be an interesting thing as we move forward and see 

how the co-ops survive. 

 

I mean whereas we speak today, and I don’t know what the 

latest is this afternoon for Viterra, but here was probably the 

best example of a co-op working well in Saskatchewan, the 

Wheat Pool and the phenomenal work they did in stabilizing 

our agricultural economy, and was a major, major player in the 

world in terms of marketing wheat for farmers. And now we see 

what’s happening, and it’s a prize for any business to take over 

to buy out because it is such a well-run corporation and means 

so much to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we’ll see how the co-ops make out with this. It seems to be 

relatively straightforward; it’s only two or three parts to it. One 

is allowing them to register as an extraprovincial co-op and that 

means that they register here. And yes, in Alberta, if they 

register in Alberta they’re registered here in Saskatchewan and 

BC. And they only have to file one return, and it works for 

everyone. It seems like something that would make some sense, 

but as I said, how do they then . . . It’ll be interesting what the 

nature of their business is because, as I said, what really makes 

co-ops work so well is that there’s a local component, a local 

connection, a local hook, and that’s why people support them. 

And it’s because when that happens, it’s a great thing. So we’ll 

see how it goes. The other two pieces about the ISC, the 

business identifier using the Canada Revenue Agency as their 

business number, as their main identifier, that seems to make a 

lot of sense. I’m sure there’ll be a lot of hoopla around that, 

though. I mean they’re not going to be marketing as a numbered 

company. Of course they’ll have, you know, I assume that the 

Federated Co-op’s supposed to be known as Federated Co-ops 

and not as a numbered corporation. But it all makes a lot of 

sense. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m just winding up my comments here and I 

think that we see that we’ll have more questions in the days 

ahead but, you know, there’s no reason to continue to talk much 

longer about this. I think that it’s really straightforward and we 

have questions about that. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move that we move this to committee at this point. Thank you 

very much. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation that Bill No. 7, The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

2011 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Why is the 

Government House Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly to move a motion regarding the designation of 

Bill No. 6. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

a leave to move a motion regarding the designation of Bill No. 

6. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Bill No. 6 to Committee 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly I move: 

 

That the order of referral of Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous 

Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice made 

under rule 81 be rescinded and that the said Bill be 

committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That by leave of this Assembly that the order of referral of 

Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous Business Statutes 

Amendment Act, 2011 be referred to the Standing 

Committee . . . [I’m trying to get the sense here of this] . . . 

that the order of referral of Bill No. 6, The Miscellaneous 

Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice, made under rule 81, be rescinded and that the said 

Bill be remitted to the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

[The Assembly resumed debate on the proposed motion of the 

Hon. Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 

great pleasure that I rise to speak to the amendment to The Land 

Titles Act, 2000. It’s a great historical part of our province for 

sure and certainly for Western Canada, The land titles regime 

that we have established here is one that is regarded throughout 

the world again, much as the innovations in 2000 for a new Act 

and a new electronic system. 

 

But the actual land titles system itself has a venerable history 

here in Saskatchewan, indeed even in the architecture itself. I 

was noticing on Victoria street, the other day, the Land Titles 

Building just off Scarth, I think, a beautiful . . . The land titles 

buildings throughout the province are beautiful, historical 

heritage properties that showed the importance of the land titles 

settlement in the settlement of this province. Again the Torrens 

system itself established a quarter section system and the 

township system, and it allowed for a very orderly development 

of our settlement once, of course, the numbered treaties were 

signed in the 1870s. 

 

So not only do we have a situation here in Saskatchewan where 

we had a treaty relationship that was established early in the 

settlement process, and First Nations had signed treaties by and 

large with the dominion government which allowed for the 

establishment of the reserve system. We also had the pieces of 

legislation dealing with the Hudson’s Bay lands and the railway 

lands. And then you put the Dominion Lands Act in the mix and 

we had a very efficient, orderly way to deal with the influx of 

settlers coming at the turn of the 20th century, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that system has been regarded throughout . . . I worked, as 

I mentioned earlier, with the federal public service with land 

titles systems from across Canada and indeed was often 

consulted with by my colleagues across the country about some 

of the vagaries of the different systems. And certainly in the 

eastern provinces and in Ontario, there were many envious 

comments made about the quality of our land titles system. Of 

course, things change and when the information age came upon 

us, we had the foresight as a government to introduce a new 

electronic registry, and I spoke to that on another Bill just 

previously. And the arrival of Information Services Corporation 

and the new electronic registry has really revolutionized the 



March 19, 2012 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

way land titles are used. And certainly with the geographic 

information systems that we can now tie to the actual electronic 

register of the ownership of the title, it presented a whole new 

layer of possibilities for efficient land registry use. 

 

And I think some of the agencies that have had the most 

opportunity is in the development of oil and gas. And I think 

some of the efficiencies and perhaps the uncovering of certain 

issues in the mineral layer in Saskatchewan once the layers 

were separated — which is a unique feature to Saskatchewan as 

well where we have surface titles and mineral titles now as 

separate entities — it’s made it much easier for oil and gas 

companies to be efficient when they’re searching titles, finding 

out who the owners are. And as another issue that has arisen, 

maybe we dug under the carpet a little bit and we found out that 

not all mineral titles had been dealt with very well. 

 

And indeed the first 50 years of the land titles system, there was 

a lot of inconsistencies from land title office to land title office, 

and different registrars applied rules differently. And I’ve had 

the opportunity to do a lot of historical research on those types 

of titles, and I have to say I think the new system has allowed us 

to find those inconsistencies. There’s often 200 per cent 

ownership or orphan titles. And there’s probably still work to be 

done, but at a minimum The Land Titles Act, 2000 allowed for 

searching in the registry in ways that weren’t possible before. 

 

On many occasions, in terms of data collection, you can pull 

down all kinds of things from the registry in a database form 

which could never, ever, ever have been accomplished in the 

paper registry. And tying those parcels to the GIS information 

allows you to locate them on a map just with a click of a button, 

which is quite remarkable. I mean there were things that were 

lost with the system, but I think the improvements have 

certainly been well worth it, and this Bill is another Bill that 

moves the system along a little further. 

 

I was part of a client focus group a few years ago which were 

looking for efficiencies in the way things are registered, Mr. 

Speaker, and one of the things that was identified, particularly 

by the financial institutions, was the difficulty of registering a 

standard mortgage over and over and over. Every time that they 

were registering a mortgage, they were required to register a 

very large electronic document, often in PDF [portable 

document format] form, sometimes several hundred pages long, 

that was the same document with just some tombstone 

information at the front that related to their particular client. So 

the financial institutions in particular, when we did the focus 

group on improving the system, were very concerned about 

having an opportunity to have some form of document registry 

that would allow them to just refer to that document in a library 

and not have to submit it each time. And these were back in the 

days when we had to submit everything through PDFs. That 

was before the online registration system which highly 

“efficeized,” which made things much more efficient, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So this Bill, really all it purports to do is to create this document 

storage library. And the minister’s comments when he 

introduced this Bill is basically to create the document storage 

library that will reduce the number of duplicate documents that 

are required to be filed with the registry. 

 

I don’t know if there will be an ability, with the changes that 

will be made to the information system that exists, to get rid of 

all the ones that are there already. That’s not indicated by the 

minister. It may be a go forward type of enhancement because 

I’m not sure the system would be able to sift through and find 

these documents again. They’re already there; they’re already 

taking up electronic space. So it’s not clear to me that that’s 

something that the new Bill will allow Information Services 

Corporation to implement. But as the minister indicated, it is 

the direct result of consultation with representatives from the 

legal and financial sectors who will use this document library 

the most, and it’s being designed specifically to meet their 

needs. 

 

Again Information Services Corporation has been very 

responsive to client needs, although I recall when it first came 

in, Mr. Speaker, that it was somewhat difficult for me to 

consider myself a client because there was nowhere else to 

shop. And so this was the only place to go in town and there 

were some arbitrary decisions made initially to get the system 

up and running that severely impacted the way Crown land 

business was being done. However to their credit, the folks at 

Information Services Corporation spent a lot of time engaging 

“clients” — I’ll put that in quotation marks — and took it 

seriously that the needs of the users were paramount and that 

they would endeavour as best they could to ensure that the 

service was as streamlined and efficient and user-friendly as 

they could be. 

 

So as I said, this idea of having a document storage library is 

one that I think has been in the backs of the minds of the folks 

at Information Services Corporation for some time. Obviously 

there are computing issues related to this and it’s not something 

easily done whenever you make changes to a system. But 

they’ve done several fixes over the years and this is one that 

I’m sure they will handle with their usual sophistication and 

competence. 

 

There’s always one other fix, while I have the opportunity to 

mention it, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to see of the system, 

and that is the ability to use drop-down search boxes for the 

grant search as well. So I’m just throwing that in there as 

something that I’d be interested in seeing. When you search 

historical documents like grants, you have to go through several 

clicks before you can actually get to it. That was fixed when 

you’re doing title searches but it wasn’t done with the grant 

searches. So it’s just a particular bugaboo that I’ve had about 

the system and it’s one similar to the document storage library. 

It’s something that can be fixed. There’s not a lot of people that 

spend time researching grants but we are out there and it would 

be helpful for time saving. It’s just a time-saving device to help 

do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the main part of the changes are found in a 

new addition to the Act and it’s 74.1. So it’s a new part to the 

Act, part IX or IX.1 and that’s entitled the document storage 

library and then the section itself is section 74.1 which talks 

about filing and then 74.2 is the establishment of the library 

itself. It talks about why it’s established, and the rules 

governing it are under this particular part of the Act, the part 

IX.1. It’s not clear under subsection (7) of the new section, it 

says the registrar can manage and organize the document 

storage library in any manner that the registrar considers 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2012 

appropriate. So again the registrar is able to manage this and it’s 

not clear whether these documents will be searchable in and of 

themselves or how you will be able to locate them when you go 

searching. But again I guess it’s for the financial institutions to 

determine and be consulted with, and I have every confidence 

that they have been appropriately consulted with. It’s clear that 

this Bill does serve the needs of the financial community, so the 

changes go on. 

 

We have section 74.2, which is the establishment, and then 

following that is section 74.3, and that’s the process that’s used 

for filing standard interest terms and authorizations. So 

everything in the system is appropriately described. The 

application has to be in the right form and with the right content 

and then the registrar, once they receive an application to file 

the standard interest, they shall . . . The registrar must file it in 

the storage library and assign a document number. So that will 

be the document number, Mr. Speaker, that the users of 

financial institutions and anyone else using standardized 

lengthy documents will then have a nine-digit number — 

typically it’s a nine-digit number — that they can refer to from 

there on in. So it will greatly facilitate the work of banking 

institutions and be of real administrative assistance to those 

organizations. 

 

Of course filing that document in the library doesn’t relieve 

anyone from their obligations under the law, and that’s 74.3(3). 

And then the standard interest terms, they can’t be amended or 

modified under (5). 

 

So basically as I said earlier — I spoke to this Bill another time 

as well — and I think this is something that’s just doing 

business for the ISC, and I think this is something that at this 

point I think we’ve had enough comment on it. And I would 

like to move that this Bill go to committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation that Bill No. 8, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 

2011 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 8, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011, be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Now being after the hour of 5 o’clock, this House stands 

recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 595 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 595 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 595 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 

  Nilson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 596, 606 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 596 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 596 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 596 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 597 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 597 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Community-Building Event 

  Jurgens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 597 

 Support for Hockeyville Finalists 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 597 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 598 

 Social Work Week 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 598 

 2012 Z99 Radiothon 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 598 

 Celebrate Success Business Awards 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 599 

 Business Builders Awards 

  Tochor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 599 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Child Care 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 599 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 599 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 600 

 Arrangements for Long-Term Care Facility 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 601 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 601 

 Water Supply and Plans for the Potash Industry 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 602 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 602 

 Provincial Finances and Policing Costs 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 603 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 603 

 Reporting Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 603 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 603 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 604 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 604 

 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 605 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 605 

 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 606 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 606 

 



 

 Bill No. 4 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 606 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 607 

 Bill No. 5 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

  Nilson ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 608 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 608 

 Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 608 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 610 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 610 

 Bill No. 6 — The Miscellaneous Business Statutes Amendment Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 615 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 621 

 Bill No. 7 — The Co-operatives Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1996 sur les coopératives 

  Forbes .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 621 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 624 

 Bill No. 8 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2011 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 624 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 626 

MOTIONS 

 Referral of Bill No. 6 to Committee 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 624 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


